FT944-11106

FT  08 NOV 94 / Gummer backs two-tier councils


   By JOHN AUTHERS and ALISON MAITLAND


Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary, yesterday firmly signalled that
he would allow two-tier local government to remain in much of England.
He told the annual conference of the Labour-controlled Association of County
Councils that he wanted England to have a 'variable' local government
structure.
The Local Government Commission, chaired by Sir John Banham, has recommended
that the two-tier system should remain in the bulk of the counties for which
it has so far made proposals. Mr Gummer has the power to reject them.
Last November Mr Gummer told the commission he wanted the two-tier system to
survive only in 'exceptional' circumstances.
Mr Gummer promised yesterday, however, that he would ensure that surviving
county councils would devolve more powers to district and local councils. He
also attacked the campaigns which some counties had waged against reform.
He said his own county of Suffolk had been 'pretty bad', while Cleveland
county council 'should be ashamed of themselves'. Members of both councils
described his comments as 'scandalous'.
Mr David Rendel, the Liberal Democrats' local government spokesman, said the
review was a 'shambles', and predicted Mr Gummer would even reject some more
of the proposals where Sir John had recommended abolition of two-tier
counties.
Separately, Mr Gummer said he would be working with Mr William Waldegrave,
the agriculture secretary, on a new white paper on rural issues. He said
this would cover mainly planning and environmental topics. and ensure the
'voice of the countryside' was heard in national policymaking.
Urban dwellers in Nottinghamshire and Cleveland are to have new forests on
their doorsteps, the government announced yesterday, Alison Maitland writes.
It approved the Greenwood Community Forest north of Nottingham and the
Cleveland Community Forest around Middlesbrough.
The two forests are part of the government's 40-year programme to establish
12 forests covering 4,500 sq km to act as 'green lungs' for urban areas.
Grants will be available to encourage landowners to participate and the two
commissions will also purchase some of the forest land.
Forests are already under way east of London, in south Staffordshire, and in
Tyne and Wear and north-east Durham. Seven more await government approval.
They would be in or near Merseyside, Greater Manchester, south Yorkshire,
Bedfordshire, north London, Swindon and Bristol.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941108

