FT943-827

FT  27 SEP 94 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Lush
leaves belie disappointing sugar crop - Recent rain in the UK has encouraged
foliage growth at the expense of the beets


   By DAVID RICHARDSON


An old farming neighbour used to say he enjoyed growing root crops like
potatoes and sugar-beet because of the element of surprise. The value, he
would explain - the tubers and the beets - was hidden in the soil and the
farmer never quite knew what was there to harvest until the roots were
lifted.
Implied in his tongue-in-cheek comment was that it was difficult to assess
the yield of a root crop by looking at the leaves and foliage above ground
level. The old man died many years ago but his words are as true today as
they ever were and the 1994 sugar-beet crop seems likely to prove the point.
Recent heavy rain (we have had close to 8 inches over our Norfolk farm
within the last month in an area which has a long term average rainfall of
23 inches a year) has encouraged lush growth of sugar-beet leaves and a
cursory inspection might suggest excellent crops. But dig some of the roots
out of the land and it soon becomes evident that they are significantly
smaller and lighter than usual.
The problem began back in the spring. Much of the land on which sugar-beet
was to be grown remained wet and cold far longer than normal. Planting was
inevitably delayed for a few weeks beyond the optimum date and even when the
seeds were in the ground growth was retarded by low temperatures. That meant
that, in many cases, full leaf cover was not achieved by the critical date
of the end of June. Then followed the July heatwave, which dehydrated the
plants to the extent, in worst cases, that leaves fell flat on to the baking
soil and literally cooked in the sun. But not all the leaves were
irreparably damaged. August rains perked them up and September downpours
encouraged the plants to grow new green leaves.
Unfortunately some of the energy stored in the roots was needed to grow
these leaves. So, instead of gaining weight and sugar from the radiated
energy of autumn sunshine, as they usually do, they were obeying their
natural imperative to survive and produce seed. Sunshine has been pretty
sparse this autumn in any case and as regular samples taken by the monopoly
processor, British Sugar, have confirmed, this has resulted in an unexciting
prospect for this year's crop.
The official figures show that average root weight on the September 20 was
just 590g compared with 713g at the same time last year and a five-year
average of 661g. Sugar content was equally disappointing. This year it was
16.6 per cent compared with 17.46 per cent last year and a five-year average
of 17.92 per cent. The critical measurement of the weight of sugar per root
showed that this year's level on September 20 was 97.9g, against 124.5g last
year and a five-year average of 118.5g.
It is possible for these weights and sugar percentages to improve,
especially if the weather for the rest of the autumn improves to be more
like the seasonal normal. But the reality is that in spite of British
Sugar's decision to delay the start of processing by almost two weeks in the
hope that the roots will mature, this crop can now yield no better than
average and it may well produce below that.
So, as most of Britain's sugar processing factories begin the harvesting
'campaign' later this week, the farmers who supply them already know that
returns will be down. For unlike potatoes, sugar beet are priced according
to a formula agreed by the European Union and there is no boost to the
market value if there is a shortfall in production. That, anyway, is the
case with those roots produced within so-called 'A' and 'B' quota tonnage
limits - the proportion of the crop grown on each farm that enjoys a
guaranteed price.
If a UK farmer grows more than his A and B entitlement the excess is called
'C' sugar and this has to be disposed of on world markets for whatever it
will fetch. This year, according to some sugar pundits who see further
tightening of world stocks, C sugar is likely to be worth about Pounds 20 a
tonne delivered to factories. That compares with Pounds 35 for A and B quota
beet, but, given that most production costs are covered by the A and B
element, it can still provide a worthwhile additional profit to the grower.
But, short of a weather miracle over the next few months, there will be
little C sugar this year. That is bad news for growers and for British
Sugar, as the EU quota regulations restrict the UK sugar beet industry to
producing less than half of domestic demand. This means that the rest of the
sugar consumed in Britain has to be imported - mostly from African,
Caribbean and Pacific sugar cane-producing countries under the terms of an
agreement entered into when Britain joined the European Community in 1973.
But increasing amounts are now coming in from other EU member states which
have beet production quotas massively higher than their own domestic demand.
Needless to say this has annoyed British sugar beet growers and processors
for many years. That annoyance seems set to intensify over coming weeks as
EU sugar quotas are renegotiated in Brussels for the next five years. For
while they recognise that the EU sugar surplus of some 30 per cent in years
of optimum production must be reduced, they resent the suggestion that
Britain's already inadequate quota should be reduced at all. Indeed in any
reallocation there is a strong case for the UK quota to be increased.
Moreover, campaigns have been launched by beet growers, the National
Farmers' Union, British Sugar and a farming magazine to try to ensure that
the new minister of agriculture, Mr William Waldegrave, defends and
prosecutes the British case in Brussels.
In spite of poor prospects for my own and other farmers' crops this year,
sugar beet remains of vital economic, rotational and environmental
importance on many UK farms. I very much hope the campaigns are successful.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940927

