FT944-2876

FT  15 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Australia resigned to shrunken
cotton crop - As the end of the planting season approaches drought losses
are already being counted


   By NIKKI TAIT


Estate agents' hype has acquired new twist in Moree, the New South Wales
country town that serves as one of the main regional centres for Australia's
cotton industry. 'Abundant underground water' shouts one shop-front notice,
advertising a ADollars 1.3m (Pounds 645,000) farm. 'This property has
received winter rains,' claims another, bearing a picture of lush, green
crops.
Australia's drought, which has devasted much of the rural sector on the
nation's eastern seaboard, is having a curiously progressive effect. First
to be hit were the grain growers, who failed to plant a significant winter
crop, in some cases for the fourth successive year. Next, the livestock
producers were confronted by feed shortages. Now it is the turn of
cotton-producers.
This sequential impact largely reflects different planting seasons.
Australian cotton is sown between October and December and harvested from
February to May. This a plus for the industry in international terms as it
allows growers to export when supplies from big northern hemisphere
producers, like the US, are at low ebb.
In theory, then, a tiny planting window remains in the 1994-95 season. But
with no sustained rain since March, and none forecast until perhaps the same
time next year, many growers have abandonned hope.
'This year's over for irrigated cotton,' says Alice Scott, who farms in the
Gwydir region around Moree, 'and there'd be quite a lot of rain needed
before you'd get much dryland cotton.' (In a normal year, about 90 per cent
of Australian cotton production comes from irrigated land).
This week, the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics, the
governments forecasting agency, said the area planted to cotton was likely
be 194,000 hectares, 71,000 less than was harvested in 1993-94. This, it
warned, could lead to the smallest cotton harvest since 1986-87. Abare
suggested that production could be 1.17m bales; the Australian Cotton
Foundation, representing the industry, has estimated 800,000-1m bales.
Even the higher figure would be about half the 2.1m bales produced in
1991-92, the record year. They would also represent the third year of
falling output as the intensifying water shortage in key growing areas has
sapped stored supplies.
Inevitably, given vagaries of rainfall and differing access to underground
water, the impact of the drought varies within the nation's cotton-growing
area, which runs from northern New South Wales into south-western
Queensland.
Areas to the north, like Emerald, and the Macquarie region to the south, may
fare relatively well. Unfortunately, despite some belated November rain
around the states' borders, it will be the central and most productive zone,
including the Gwydir Valley and the Macintrye, which is worst hit. Peter
Saunders, regional manager of Namoi Cotton Co-operative, the country's
biggest processor/marketer, estimates that the Gwydir region 'will be lucky
to do around 50,000 bales this year', compared with around 600,000 in
1991-92.
It is not just growers who are hurting. Decisions must soon be made about
processing facilities. Namoi says it may run only seven or eight of its 11
gins. Other processors confirm that similar cutbacks are likely. At the
broader social level, people are drifting away from the region, and towns
like Moree are beginning to see service businesses fold and shops fall
vacant.
To date, according to the ACF, no growers have actually gone bankrupt,
although Maree McCaskill, executive director, acknowledges that 'if there's
another year of this, people will start to go to the wall'. But already many
are living off the equity invested in their farms.
A further, less visable, problem may be the extent to which the industry has
sold forward. Unlike many sectors of Australian agriculture, cotton is an
integrated business, with a fairly short chain between growers and
end-buyers. There is, for example, no industry marketing board, and growers
choose for themselves whether they sell for cash, sell forward or sell into
pools.
At this stage, no one seems keen to predict the overall impact of forward
selling, or the number of contracts that will not be met. 'It will be a
problem but it's very hard to quantify,' says Peter Saunders. 'What you'll
see is what's happened in the past - growers approaching buyers and
negotiations for a roll-over,' says David Montgomery, managing director of
Dunavent Enterprises, part of the large Memphis-based cotton company.
Perhaps the most realistic hope at present is that the rains come as
predicted in March, and allow a non-cotton winter crop to go in. This, in
turn, could provide income to sustain growers into the 1994-95 season.
But even then, some observers worry that cotton's relatively high up-front
cost means that existing Australian growers will be hard-pressed to
capitalise even if the drought has broken by this stage next year. As Alice
Scott points out, it will be early-1996 before growers see any significant
cash flow. 'That's a long way off,' she says.
Perhaps the biggest question is what this severe hiatus will do to
Australia's reputation as a cotton-growing nation. The country is a
relatively new player; it only began to develop a substantial industry 30
years ago when strains of cotton more suited to the Australian climate were
discovered and irrigation infrastructure installed. Because of the
dependence on irrigation, the country boasts consistent, good quality
cotton, and most of its production goes for export. The Japanese, in
particular, have been substituting Australian supplies for Californian.
Most in the industry seem to be holding their breath and hoping that the
impetus - which has made cotton Australia's fifth largest rural export in
just three decades - will not be lost. 'It may take a year or two to get
back some customers,' says Mr Montgomery, 'but price tends to be the key. I
don't think it'll have a long-term impact'.
Even in the depths of this gloom, however, there are some encouraging
developments. Growers concede that the drought has prompted experimentation
with different growing strategies - varying the thickness of planting and so
on. Some also suggest that the water shortage will accelerate the drive to
develop new strains of cotton that can adapt to cooler conditions further
south, or the more tropical conditions to the north. The bigger the growing
region, runs the argument, the more opportunity growers have to diversify
their weather-related risk.
But others think Australia's politicians could do more to help. Mr
Montgomery suggests that more attention should be paid to the potential for
expanding production from the existing region, where climatic conditions are
ideal in non-drought years.
'The one thing stopping this industry from doubling in size is available
irrigated water,' he says. 'The problem is that most political parties are
not interested in building dams.'

The Financial Times


London Page 40

941215

