FT944-14564

FT  22 OCT 94 / Blair to pledge overhaul of pensions and benefits system


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Mr Tony Blair will next week launch a determined attempt to shake off
Labour's image as the party of high welfare spending by embracing plans for
a radical overhaul of the state pension system and significant changes in
social security benefits.
A proposed shake-up of state pensions would allow the Labour leader to drop
previous spending pledges while sticking to its commitment to raise
substantially the income of the poorest pensioners.
Mr Blair plans to endorse the main principles of a report prepared by the
independent Commission on Social Justice which calls for a new drive to tilt
the benefit system towards work incentives and for the integration of the
tax and benefit systems for pensioners.
The report, commissioned by the late John Smith, will be published on Monday
after two years of study by a group led by Sir Gordon Borrie.
It will coincide with the publication by the government of its plans to
channel more people back into the jobs market through the replacement of
Unemployment Benefit with a Job Seekers' Allowance. The new benefit will be
paid for only six months rather than 12 months and will carry a much tougher
obligation on the claimant to seek work.
At a conference to launch the report Mr Blair will indicate that the details
must be subject to a wide-ranging debate within the party. But he will
embrace the central conclusion that a Labour government should concentrate
resources on moving people from welfare dependency into work.
The planned pensions change, involving the establishment of a 'minimum
retirement income' for those entirely reliant on the state, would allow the
party to drop its past commitment to re-establish a link between state
pensions and earnings. That pledge - made at the last three elections -
would involve several billions in additional public spending.
By focusing on providing a 'top-up' for the poorest 2m pensioners through
the guaranteed minimum income, Mr Blair could justify downgrading the role
of the state pension in meeting the party's social ambitions. The proposed
switch, however, will attract Conservative claims that all pensioners will
be means-tested because everyone would be obliged to complete a tax/benefit
form on retirement.
The commission's recommendations on promoting work rather than welfare focus
on changes to the unemployment, income support, and family-credit benefits
to smooth out the poverty traps which at present discourage claimants from
re-entering the employment market.
Among the specific proposals is a scheme under which benefit payments would
include a 'guaranteed' element which the unemployed would be allowed to keep
when they took part-time or low-paid jobs. Another suggestion would be to
allow the jobless to keep all of their unemployment benefits for a limited
period after returning to the labour market.
The report is expected to recommend that a future Labour government retain
the principle of universality for the state pension and child benefit. But
it leaves open the option of extending the tax net to cover the latter.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

