FT942-14382

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (1): The better seats start to get
bigger - Airlines are bowing to pressure from business travellers - usually
their most lucrative customers - to make flying more comfortable


   By DANIEL GREEN


Airlines are at last beginning to give passengers what they want: space. For
years, survey after survey has shown that business travellers most
appreciate room in which to relax or work. Instead, airlines have plied them
with multi-channel television, gourmet meals, vintage wines and little bags
with glass jars of moisturisers and eyelid balms.
Now carriers appear to be bowing to the pressure from their customers. In
both long and short haul, they are installing wider seats with greater
legroom.
To a certain extent, the change is the result of technical changes. Newer
aircraft such as the Airbus A320, A340 and Boeing 777 are wider than their
older rivals, the Boeings 737, 747 and 767.
But the principal driving force is commercial. The latest round of surveys
reinforces the message. The Official Airlines Guide Business Traveller
survey shows that sleeping and working, both on long and short-haul flights,
rate far higher as 'preferred activities' than in-flight entertainment and
eating. The annual survey from the International Air Transport Association,
(Iata), published this week, shows that in all travel classes, more than
three-quarters of business travellers think that seat size is the most
important part of being in business class
The reason is simple. Space on long-haul means sleep and the chance to work
effectively on arrival. On short-haul, it means being able to make the best
use of valuable time away from the telephone in which to catch up on
paperwork.
It has taken several years for the airlines to get the message, but now just
about every airline is considering the move to bigger seats for premium fare
payers. Many have in recent months begun to take concrete steps towards
giving the business traveller something in which to sleep rather than slump.
The others may not be far behind.
The origins of the movement were humble. Although Scandinavian Airline
System was the first major carrier to drop a luxury first class service, in
1982, the idea was really born in 1984 when Virgin Atlantic introduced its
Upper Class. This not only eliminated the traditional three classes of
travel in favour of two, but gave passengers in the Upper Class first-class
sized seats for the price of a business class ticket.
It took eight years for the idea to spread. At the end of 1992, Continental
of the US introduced its Business First product for long-haul flight,
practically the same idea as Virgin's.
Other airlines held back for another year, arguing that Virgin and
Continental were desperate to attract passengers. Then, last year, Belgian
carrier Sabena, tried giving business class ticket holders first class seats
on its Brussels-New York flights only. And Eva Air, a new Taiwanese carrier,
introduced a four-class Boeing 747 which included a similar size of large
seat for business class passengers (and incidentally currently holds what is
probably the record legroom - called seat pitch in the industry - with its
first class seat rows 75 inches apart).
The breakthrough has come in 1994. Last month KLM, the Dutch carrier, and
its US partner, Northwest, announced they were co-ordinating the
refurbishment of their aircraft with business class seat pitch of 47 inches,
compared with the industry standard of 40 inches.
It is not as spectacular a leap as those of Continental and Virgin to 55
inches, but the KLM/Northwest product should make anyone on a long-haul
flight anywhere in the northern hemisphere think about switching from the
top US, European or Asian airlines.
Perhaps stimulated by KLM/Northwest, the pace of change is quickening. All
Nippon Airlines is increasing the business class seat pitch from 40 to 50
inches, saying that 90 per cent of business travellers cite space and
comfort near the top of their lists of expectations, second only to safety
and reliability. Japan Air Lines quickly countered the move, saying last
month that it would introduce similar 'super executive seats' on routes
between Tokyo and London, Paris and New York.
And in two weeks' time, Air Canada introduces business class seating that
owes a lot to Continental's Business First, perhaps stimulated by the fact
that it is a shareholder in Continental.
These changes come at some cost to the airlines concerned. With
KLM/Northwest there are eight fewer seats on the aircraft, while there has
been a loss of more than one fifth of the upper deck seats on some Boeing
747s.
But the trend will continue, according to Mr Richard Lovell, vice president
for northern Europe and Asia for Wagons-lits Travel, the French-owned
international travel agency. 'My prediction for the rest of the 1990s is
that the traditional cabin classes will be transformed, so that a superior
business class - at business class prices, a full fare economy and a basic
economy will replace the current first, business and economy class cabins.'
The airlines may be unwilling to give up crowded business class cabins
willingly, but they are hard pressed to disagree with the analysis that is
leading them in that direction.
American Airlines, on some measures the biggest in the world, has been
experimenting with putting business class ticket holders into the first
class cabin and moving economy class passengers with full-price tickets into
business. The idea is that the carrier can test the idea without first
refurbishing its aircraft.
Mr Hans Mirka, vice-president of international routes at American Airlines,
says that the experiment is working 'exceedingly well. We are going to go
through the summer and in fall when business travel really picks up, and if
it's a success, you may see more of it.'
When the world's biggest airlines get interested, it is a sure sign that an
idea's time has come. And airline industry research shows why the stakes are
rising.
The air travel recession of the early 1990s, the worst since the second
world war, seems to be ending. The latest Iata business travel survey shows
that although corporate travellers once again have smaller budgets than the
previous year, yet again the decline has slowed.
If the measure is travel rather than budget, the floor has been reached
already. Some 21 per cent of respondents to Iata's survey said that they
were travelling more than they were a year earlier. In 1993, the figure was
18 per cent and in 1992 14 per cent. The proportion reporting a decrease in
travel, on the other hand, has remained steady at 22 per cent or 23 per cent
over the three years.
Increased travelling on smaller budgets suggests that two things are
happening: business travellers are taking advantage of cut price deals in
the class they are travelling, or they are shifting down a class.
Larger companies have continued to bear down the hardest on budgets and
travel, the Iata survey finds. More than one third of the largest companies
 -those with more than 1,000 employees - reported a fall in air travel. Of
companies with fewer than 25 employees, 20 per cent had cut travel budgets,
but 17 per cent had increased them, according to the survey.
Differences around the world point both to regional economic vigour and the
flexibility of the buyer to find a cut-price deal.
North American companies appear more likely to cut both budgets and travel.
It is relatively easy for them to trim travel budgets because domestic US
airlines are falling over each other to cut fares and pare down service to
the kind of 'no-frill' operation run by SouthWest Airlines, one of the most
successful in the US in recent years.
Business air travel in the Asia-Pacific region, on the other hand, is more
buoyant. This is not only a factor of the strength of local economies, but
of the fact that the kind of cut price wars that have ravaged services in
North America are harder to find in Asia. This perhaps helps explain why few
carriers there show any inclination to offer super-sized business-class
seats.
European business air traffic is characterised by big prices and small
seats. Although it is the case that running costs such as air traffic
control and airport charges are relatively high, that may be about to
change.
Swissair is the last of the European majors to treat its business class
passengers well. The seats are 25 inches wide, bigger than many airlines
have in first class long-haul flights, making it easy to use a laptop
computer without banging elbows with your neighbour.
Swissair may be about to be joined by British Airways. The UK carrier is
considering abandoning the standard European short-haul business class
service of 'economy seat plus a hot meal' in favour of offering more space.
BA is such a powerful force in European business air travel than what it
does could be followed quickly by other carriers. The airline could make its
move within months, and then, perhaps, business travellers on short trips
will finally be able to buy the room to sleep or work that they have been
asking for.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940420

