FT942-15521

FT  14 APR 94 / Markets Report: Dollar loses ground


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The unexpected decision by UK officials to release the minutes of the
monthly monetary policy meeting between the Bank of England and the Treasury
provided some late afternoon excitement yesterday, writes Philip Gawith.
Sterling fell by half a pfennig when confirmation emerged that the
chancellor, Mr Kenneth Clarke, and the governor of the Bank, Mr Eddie
George, had differed in their approach to the controversial UK rate cut on
February 8. The pound closed in London at DM2.5275, down from a high for the
day of DM2.5382.
Earlier the dollar had fallen after the release of weaker than expected
March retail sales figures - up only 0.4 per cent compared to market
expectations of a 1.2 per cent increase - dampened expectations of a
near-term rate rise. March consumer prices rose by 0.3 per cent compared to
the 0.2 per cent gain expected.
The US currency finished half a pfennig lower at DM1.7135 from DM1.7188 on
Tuesday. It had lost ground in the morning when the Bundesbank cut its repo
rate by only three basis points - at the low end of market expectations.
Trade was fairly quiet ahead of today's Bundesbank council meeting, the
first for four weeks.
Analysts yesterday cautiously welcomed the trend towards greater openness in
the conduct of UK monetary policy. Concern was expressed that sterling would
be vulnerable if serious differences between the Bank and Treasury were to
emerge. The weakness of sterling, after the release of minutes showing
disagreement, lent support to this view.
Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ International, commented: 'I think
it (the openness) is a little baffling to the market and therefore on
balance there will be modest downward pressure (on sterling).'
He said it was not immediately clear what the Chancellor stood to gain from
openness. Also, it was 'unhelpful' to have public confirmation of a
difference of opinion.
Earlier, sterling's recent recovery had continued. It held its ground
against the stronger D-Mark, and appreciated against the dollar after the
release of fairly subdued US sales and inflation data.
Mr Peter Luxton, economist at Barclays, said the risk was that the currency
could be derailed by a combination of continuing political uncertainty and
unfavourable economic data. January trade data will be released today and
evidence of a poor external position could weaken sterling.
There was little response in the futures market to the announcement. The
June short sterling contract continued its recovery from recent lows to
finish slightly firmer at 94.61 from 94.57.
This view of a rise in short-term rates is not supported by most analysts. A
survey of traders at 24 institutions published by IDEA, the financial
markets advisory service, found that a large majority believed the next move
in rates would be down, would be 25 basis points, and that it would happen
in early May.
UK money markets reverted to type yesterday with the Bank of England
declaring a Pounds 750m shortage after Tuesday's surprise Pounds 400m
surplus. The Bank provided late assistance of Pounds 375m after earlier
putting Pounds 76m liquidity into the system. Overnight rates moved between
4 1/8 per cent and 6 1/2 per cent.
Mr Luxton said the dollar had been sold down on disappointment, particularly
with the retail sales figure.
An earlier setback had come in the form of the fairly small Bundesbank repo
cut. The Barclays analyst said the dollar had been undermined by 'unwinding
of early-week expectations of an official rate cut in Germany.'
Mr Robert Thomas, currency strategist at Natwest Markets, said he still
believed US rates would go up before the end of May, and that DM1.80 per
dollar was more likely than DM1.60 on a 3-6 month view. Mr Thomas said the
dollar's weakness against the yen had spilled over into weakness against the
D-Mark too.
With the cut in the German repo rate at the bottom end of expectations,
expectation of a lowering in official rates at today's council meeting
receded. There is still some speculation about a cut in the Lombard rate
from 6.75 per cent, but little anticipation of a cut in the discount rate
from 5.25 per cent.
Ample liquidity in the banking system helped German call money rates ease to
5.65/5.75 per cent from 5.75/5.80 per cent. This trend towards lower rates
is endorsed in the futures markets. The June euromark future finished at
94.60 from 94.59, discounting a fall in short term interest rates to 5.40
per cent by mid-year.
Elsewhere in Europe the D-Mark performance was mixed. It was unchanged
against the French franc at FFr3.419.
The most noticeable move came from the Swedish krona which retreated from a
recent high of SKr4.598 against the D-Mark to SKr4.624. Analysts said
investors were taking profits as they have done in recent days with the
Italian lira.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940414

