FT944-6022

FT  01 DEC 94 / NBC seeking ruling over Fox ownership


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


The rivalry between the established US television networks and Mr Rupert
Murdoch's nine-year-old Fox network intensified yesterday when NBC filed a
petition with federal regulators challenging Fox's claim that it is
American-owned.
Under US broadcasting industry regulations, foreign interests are prohibited
from owning more than 25 per cent of a US network. When Fox was established
in 1985 the Australian-born Mr Murdoch satisfied this requirement by
adopting American citizenship and putting 76 per cent of Fox in the control
of a company owned by himself and Mr Barry Diller, the entertainment
industry executive who was chief executive of Fox at the time.
NBC, however, argues that Fox's ownership has changed since 1985, and claims
that only 1 per cent of the network's equity is now owned by Mr Murdoch,
with the remainder controlled by News Corporation, Mr Murdoch's Australian
media group.
In its petition to the Federal Communications Commission, NBC asks the
regulatory agency to review Fox's ownership structure. Mr Richard Cotton,
NBC's general counsel, said the FCC must force Fox to abide by the laws
restricting foreign ownership, or allow the other US networks to seek
foreign investment. 'We are saying to the FCC: either enforce the law or
change it.'
Fox responded by describing NBC's petition as an attempt to abuse FCC
processes to delay and impede competition. Mr Preston Padden, head of
network distribution at Fox, said NBC's real complaint was that competition
from Fox was costing NBC money.
Although by law the FCC has to respond to NBC's filing, the agency is
already conducting a review of Fox's ownership. This was launched earlier
this year at Fox's request after a complaint to the FCC by the National
Association for the Advancement of Coloured People, the civil rights group.
The association has long argued that foreign ownership of television
stations denies minorities the opportunity to own a stake in the domestic
broadcasting business.
The first review is due to be published soon, and while analysts do not
expect the FCC to revoke Fox's broadcasting licence, it could fine the
network and/or force Mr Murdoch to change the financial structure of his US
broadcasting interests.
There was no comment from Mr Murdoch yesterday but he has said that this
could be done relatively simply if required.
NBC and the other established networks, ABC and CBS, have been increasingly
frustrated by Fox's aggressive expansion and what NBC claims is preferential
treatment of the network by the regulators.
In the past year Fox has embarked on an ambitious growth programme, luring
affiliate local television stations away from other networks and outbidding
its rivals for the rights to broadcast American football and other sports.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941201

