FT942-15377

FT  15 APR 94 / Leading Article: Ukraine adrift after elections


The results of the Ukrainian elections could be worse, but not much. There
has appeared no Ukrainian Zhirinovsky who would lead the country in a quest
for national purity and inevitable war with Russia. The communists and their
allies are not likely to be a majority in the parliament after a third round
of voting. Conflicts over the Black Sea Fleet and the Crimean peninsula are
so far localised and are being managed, albeit with many alarms.
But the results have shown a country divided and confused over several
central issues. Where the previous parliament and presidency were unable to
agree on anything and reluctant to confront each other, the new assembly
threatens to make matters significantly worse. The country lacks a modern
constitution, relying on a patched-up Soviet document which leaves moot the
vital matter of division of powers. President Leonid Kravchuk, who over the
past three years has at least provided some stability and continuity - at
the cost of an insupportable inertia on economic or any other reform - has
dithered fatally over his future intentions. He is now demanding a strong
presidency as his condition for standing for re-election, a condition
unlikely to be granted him by the new Rada.
Complete collapse
Ukraine's disputes with Russia - over the Black Sea Fleet, the status of
Crimea, the supply of Russian gas and the payment of Ukraine's vast debt to
Russia - are coming to a head at the same time as the parliamentary results
are coming in. All demand very tough decisions from a power structure now
even less capable of making them. The dominant view in the parliament
probably favours closer ties with Russia and an attempt to revive the old
command economy. But the west of the country has returned a number of
deputies who are intransigently hostile to such a strategy and who could
become not just a fierce opposition but a prey to extreme, even violent
strategies.
Economics overshadows everything. In Ukraine the official figures show
complete collapse. Even correcting these with the unreported and apparently
quite large 'black' sector, the economy is in a crisis so deep that any
effort to reform it will not produce a significant improvement in miserable
general living standards for some years to come - an approach which has no
political champion.
Greater priority
Is there anything the west can do about all this? Only at the edges. The
trilateral agreement between Russia, Ukraine and the US on the dispatch to
Russia of nuclear weapons stationed in Ukraine in return for enriched
Russian uranium has so far worked well, and might provide a model for the
solution of other conflicts. The newly evident concern by western countries,
particularly the US, to give Ukraine greater priority in assistance,
diluting the former policy of 'Russia first', should be continued. The
international financial institutions, which have been engaged in largely
fruitless dialogues with the Ukrainian authorities for more than two years,
are clearly anxious to lend if they can find a glimmer of hope for continued
reforms like that which the International Monetary Fund found in Russia. But
with these important if limited exceptions, foreigners can only sit and
watch.
The most important outside determinant of Ukraine's future will be Russia.
So far, it has been relatively restrained - always willing to strike an
agreement and avert a showdown. Even this week, with tensions running high
over the Black Sea fleet, the response has been to send a senior delegation
for talks in Kiev.
Russia would be wise to continue to show restraint. However inflamed local
tensions become, Moscow has a strong interest in preventing them from
spreading and in making an accommodation with its much weaker neighbour.
This means finding mechanisms to deal with the debt and a workable
compromise on the Black Sea fleet. Above all, it means not giving
encouragement to those on the Crimean peninsula who agitate for union with
Russia. It may be a tall order for a harassed nation, but unless it is
filled, the danger of outright conflict, with incalculable consequences for
Europe, can only grow.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940415

