FT943-13327

FT  20 JUL 94 / Too late to kiss it better: Major has squandered the
government's credit in Europe


   By IAN DAVIDSON


In Brussels this week, the British government launched a new
kiss-and-make-up campaign. Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, told
other European ministers that Britain pledged stronger support for the
European Union, notably in the field of foreign policy; and officials gave
his words a strong interpretive shove.
One may hesitate to take this story too seriously. The government has twice
this year clashed with all its European partners: over majority voting and
the next president of the European Commission. Both these crusades were
obviously in craven submission to the Euro-sceptics on its right wing; but
the government claimed they were matters of the highest political principle.
If so, Mr Hurd's peace overture may not mean anything very much, even if it
does reflect his personal luke-warm pro-European proclivity. And yet if the
government were rational, it would see at least two overriding reasons of
realpolitik for a fundamental re-examination of its attitude - you can't
call it a strategy - of ill-tempered obstructionism in Europe.
First, the logic of a new phase in building a larger and more integrated
Europe is gathering momentum on the continent, and is being irresistibly led
by Germany. Second, and almost as important, this week's election of Tony
Blair will, for the first time, give the British Labour party a leader who
is openly as well as genuinely pro-European.
Separately, each of these factors will be threatening for the government's
chosen posture in Europe; in combination, they must be lethal.
Britain was not able to prevent the negotiation of the Maastricht treaty,
and it will not be able to block the continental coalition now building for
the next phase in the construction of Europe. But over Maastricht the
government could fall back on the atavistic rhetoric of xenophobic
nationalism at home, because the Labour party was almost as divided on
Europe as the Conservatives. The late John Smith may have been a genuine
pro-European, but he was not prepared to take on his own Euro-sceptics. So
when Maastricht was on the table, he side-stepped the central issues of
principle, and succumbed to the cheap pretext of sulking over the treaty,
just because it did not contain the social chapter.
In other words, where the Conservatives had taken an opt-out from the social
chapter, the Labour party took a general opt-out from a straight-forward
European policy. This made life difficult for the prime minister; but
delightfully easy for the anti-Europeans on both sides of the House of
Commons.
Mr Blair's campaign speeches suggest he will take a much bolder pro-European
line than Mr Smith. He has avoided getting trapped into dogmatic one-word
commitments on specific issues, such as monetary union, the social chapter
or majority voting. But he strikes a new note of rational pro-European
serenity, free of the defensive hang-ups of his predecessors. He assumes
that integration in Europe should in general be in Britain's interests, and
will continue. Naturally, it will raise difficult issues; but they will be
difficult for everybody, not just for Britain; and since integration is a
co-operative, not an adversarial process, we must all talk about it.
If the Labour party follows this line it will pose a serious threat to the
government. For unless John Major can manoeuvre away from the rhetoric of
nationalism, he could find himself imprisoned between a pro-European Labour
party, opposite him, and the Euro-sceptic faction behind him.
As Mr Blair has said: 'In British national politics, it is not inconceivable
that Europe will become one of the most powerful political questions of our
time.'
What he means, of course, is that the dialectic between the pro-Europeans
and the nationalists is replacing the left-right divide as one of the main
fault lines in politics; that there is no future in the nationalist option;
and that therefore the Labour party must avoid the danger facing the
Conservatives, of being irreparably split over the issue.
Just how serious that danger is will depend on the scale of the agenda for
the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference. This was originally scheduled for a
modest revision of the Maastricht treaty; but it may turn out to be a much
bigger affair, extending perhaps to the redesign of a substantially expanded
Union including eastern Europe.
Mr Blair for one expects that 1996 will lead to the negotiation of a new
treaty. But this will mainly depend on the Germans - they are in the lead on
the question of eastern enlargement and they currently hold the EU
presidency at the critical moment when the 1996 agenda is starting to be
hammered out.
It is not yet clear whether the Germans are going to press for a maximalist
agenda right away, with far-reaching reinforcement of the institutions of
the EU; whether they will downplay the big and difficult constitutional
issues until after their general election in October; or even wait until
after the French presidential election next spring. But one way or another,
it seems inevitable that they will force a far-reaching integrationist
agenda on to the table in 1996.
If that is the probability, it is incomprehensible that the British
government should have squandered what little credit it once had in Europe,
by single-handedly precipitating a gratuitous and futile crisis over the
appointment of the next president of the European Commission. Has Mr Major
not noticed that the next phase in Europe will be decided, not by the
Commission, but by the member states, and mainly by the German government?

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940720

