FT942-15715

FT  14 APR 94 / Regulator in deep water: Ofwat's chief faces tough scrutiny


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


'I didn't come into this job to have an easy time', Mr Ian Byatt, Ofwat
director-general, told the Commons environment committee yesterday.
The next four months will see more scrutiny of Mr Byatt's performance than
at any time since the industry's privatisation in 1989.
Staff at Ofwat's Birmingham offices are now sifting through stacks of paper
from the 33 water companies of England and Wales which set out their
investment plans for the next 20 years. The real test of Mr Byatt's success
as a regulator will come in the next four months when he will tell water
companies how quickly he will let them raise prices between 1995 and 2005.
The deadlines for this review are tight: he must tell them of his decision
by May 20, then hear any considerations which they feel he has omitted, and
announce his final decision by the end of July. That timetable is intended
to leave time for the companies to challenge his decision through the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission and for a judgment to be reached by the
start of next year.
However, the politics of his task are increasingly labyrinthine. On one
side, like other utility regulators, he has faced criticism from consumer
groups and backbench and opposition MPs for failing to protect the consumer
enough and letting prices rise too fast.
That was the thrust behind this week's allegations in the Yorkshire Post
newspaper and from Labour MPs that he had appointed friends and business
contacts to the Ofwat customer service committees.
On the other side, leading City investment houses have called on the water
companies to challenge his decisions through the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. Investors are concerned that the review will be severe. Their
fears are based on his remarks that the industry's rate of return on capital
is too high.
The companies themselves appear ambivalent about the prospect of going to
the commission. Some chief executives, who have become uncharacteristically
coy ahead of Mr Byatt's announcements, fear this will play into his hands.
One director of a large water and sewerage company, who asked not to be
named, said: 'Referrals to the MMC are just what Mr Byatt needs to cover
himself in glory as a tough regulator and I'm not sure I feel like
obliging.'
Mr Peter Ainsworth, a member of the environment committee, and Tory MP for
Surrey East, also suggested yesterday that provoking several companies to
'rush off to the MMC' made the regulator look tough, instead of provoking
outrage if he is 'not tough enough'.
Mr Byatt also faces a tough battle with other environmental regulators in
the UK and Brussels over the issue of how tight environmental standards
should be.
The cost of compliance with environmental regulations - which industry
estimates suggest could reach Pounds 40bn this decade - is one of the main
reasons why water bills are rising much faster than inflation. Mr Byatt told
the environment committee that this debate left him 'betwixt the devil and
the deep blue sea' as companies are obliged to comply with environmental
standards.
The debate had also led to 'robust exchanges' with Lord Crickhowell,
chairman of the National Rivers Authority, the water quality watchdog, he
said.
Mr Byatt added however, that he would not escape criticism whatever his
rulings. 'Sometimes people think I have powers I don't. Regulation is an
imperfect tool.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940414

