FT941-13131

FT  27 JAN 94 / CBI in call for cost clamp on pension reforms


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


The Confederation of British Industry yesterday called for crucial elements
of proposals for reforms to pension law to be modified to reduce costs for
industry.
In particular the CBI expressed concerns about proposals for minimum
solvency standards for pension schemes, which formed part of proposals by
the Pensions Law Review Committee chaired by Professor Roy Goode.
The Goode proposals would require employers to add reserves to schemes if
their assets fall below 90 per cent of what is needed to pay all pension
liabilities if the scheme were wound up immediately.
Wind-up at short notice could occur under certain circumstances,
particularly if an employer became insolvent. In recent years a number of
employers' schemes - most notably those of the late Robert Maxwell - have
been wound up with too few assets to meet pension liabilities.
The actuarial profession, which calculates the assets and liabilities of
pension schemes, is deeply divided over whether the proposed minimum
solvency standards would pose a great burden for employers or force a change
in investment patterns.
The National Association of Pension Funds, the industry trade association
which includes many members of the CBI, has also called for an easing of the
proposed minimum solvency rules.
The CBI suggested that participation in an industry-funded compensation
scheme should be optional. Those schemes which could buy appropriate
private-sector insurance against a shortfall caused by fraud or
misappropriation should be allowed to do so, the CBI said.
An official conceded that while it was likely this would lead to a
compensation fund financed only by poorly run schemes, 'the good schemes
should not be made to subsidise the bad'.
The CBI also said that the reforms to pension law need not include a
requirement for member-appointed trustees to schemes.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940127

