FT944-6003

FT  01 DEC 94 / Wider Revenue powers planned


   By JIM KELLY, Accountancy Correspondent


The government yesterday published a report which recommends giving the
Inland Revenue new limited powers of access to accountants' files to gather
evidence of tax evasion.
Earlier plans to give Revenue officials sweeping powers to demand access to
accountants' papers were dropped from legislation in March after fierce
opposition.
As a result, a report was commissioned by the government from Mr Philip Ely,
a former Law Society president, on the Revenue's powers to call for
accountants' papers.
Yesterday Sir George Young, the financial secretary to the Treasury, said in
answer to a parliamentary question that the Inland Revenue had been told 'to
consult with the main representative bodies to seek the best way of
implementing the report's recommendations with a view to further
legislation'.
A statement from the Inland Revenue said: 'The inquiry found that there are
limitations in the Inland Revenue's powers which prevent them from gaining
access to the evidence of accountant involvement in tax evasion which falls
short of serious fraud, even where they have a reasonable belief that such
evidence exists.
'Mr Ely recommended new limited powers to give the Inland Revenue access to
the evidence in such cases.'
The original legislation, which would have allowed seizure on suspicion, was
designed to counter the problem of rogue accountants and tax practitioners.
But it was broadly opposed for its sweeping powers and the suggestion that
once the tax official had gained entry to the system all of a firm's files
might be vulnerable to scrutiny.
The accountancy profession was also unhappy with what it saw as the bias of
the original recommendation against accountants while it did not mention the
legal profession.
At the time Mr Peter Wyman, tax partner at Coopers & Lybrand, said: 'If the
Revenue needs additional powers they should have them, but there must be a
way to provide adequate safeguards.'
Mr John Whiting, a tax partner with Price Waterhouse, said he welcomed the
fact that the new powers were limited but said they would have to be studied
carefully.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941201

