FT941-5424

FT  07 MAR 94 / Heseltine restarts talks with senior industrialists


   By PETER MARSH


Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, is restarting
efforts to gather ideas from senior business executives with informal
discussions on competitiveness and the pace of recovery.
Invited to two unpublicised dinners will be industrialists from a network of
about 20 companies which Mr Heseltine established last year.
The initiative underlines how Mr Heseltine - who in recent weeks has emerged
as a candidate for leadership of the Conservatives in the event of a move to
depose Mr John Major - is seeking advice from executives including those not
regarded as Tory supporters.
The dinners are at Lancaster House, a government mansion in London normally
used for top-level discussions with other countries. They indicate that Mr
Heseltine is pressing on with moves, interrupted by his heart attack last
summer, to establish a new dialogue with industry.
Industrialists asked to the dinners, to be held on May 23 and November 14,
include Mr Christopher Haskins, the left-leaning chairman of Northern Foods
who advises Labour, and Mr David Sainsbury, chairman of J. Sainsbury and a
former paymaster of the now defunct Social Democrats.
Others invited include Lord Alexander, chairman of National Westminster
Bank, Mr Brian Moffat, British Steel chairman, Sir Christopher Lewinton,
chairman of the TI engineering group, Mr Ross Buckland, chief executive of
the Unigate foods group, Mr Ken Coates, chairman of engineering group
Meggitt, and Mr Mike Harris, chief executive of Mercury Communications.
All these people, or others representing their companies, came to a lunch
for about 20 senior industrialists hosted by Mr Heseltine shortly before his
illness.
Subjects to be discussed are expected to include the merits of a further cut
in interest rates, state help for exporters and the role of the banks in
assisting industry, especially small businesses. Also under discussion could
be the degree to which the DTI should target financial help or advice to
specific industries or technologies.
Mr Heseltine's efforts to canvass ideas on economic policy have caused
raised eyebrows at the Treasury, the main economic policymaking department.
To ensure that the Treasury and the DTI views are consistent, a Treasury
representative is likely to be asked to both dinners.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940307

