FT944-14375

FT  24 OCT 94 / Tough test of stamina for Macedonia's president: Re-elected
leader must maintain momentum of reform


   By KERIN HOPE


President Kiro Gligorov, 77, re-elected last week by a wide margin in
Macedonia's first direct presidential vote, made a point of campaigning as
energetically as politicians half his age.
He will need both stamina and flexibility to persuade Greece to lift its
eight-month trade blockade against Macedonia, and to push through
free-market and social reforms at a faster rate.
Mr Gligorov, an economist with an up-and-down career in the former Yugoslav
communist party, came out of retirement to advise the reform-minded Markovic
government at the end of the 1980s. He was therefore well-placed to rally
Macedonia's inexperienced young politicians as the transition started to
independence and a market economy.
His first achievement as president, elected by a parliament dominated by the
hardline nationalist Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Movement (VMRO), was
to negotiate the withdrawal of ex-Yugoslav forces based in Macedonia early
in 1992, taking with them aircraft and heavy weapons.
Then came the task of persuading the international community that Macedonia,
the poorest and least-developed republic in the former Yugoslavia, could
become viable.
While Macedonia's chances of survival now seem brighter, Mr Gligorov will
still have to make some concessions to transform its uncertain international
status under the temporary name of Fyrom (former Yugoslav republic of
Macedonia) into permanent recognition.
However, his election triumph, capturing about 77 per cent of votes cast,
should give some room for manoeuvre in re-opening UN-sponsored talks with
Greece, which asserts that Macedonia's name amounts to a claim on its own
province of Macedonia.
Despite confused and incomplete first-round returns in last week's
parliamentary vote - held simultaneously with the presidential poll - it is
clear that support for VMRO has dropped sharply.
The Alliance for Macedonia, a coalition led by ex-communists and backed by
Mr Gligorov, will almost certainly emerge from the October 30 run-off poll
as the largest party in parliament.
The mood in Athens is now more conciliatory, with Greek officials again
talking of North, or New, Macedonia as a possible compromise on the name
issue. Mr Gligorov, until now reluctant to accept any change in the name,
will come under pressure to accept.
Mr Gligorov's other priority will be to speed up the transition to a
free-market economy by promoting privatisation and banking reform more
effectively.
Macedonia's state-owned banks are technically insolvent, burdened with huge
debts accumulated by large industrial concerns and by more than Dollars 1bn
in foreign currency liabilities.
A stabilisation plan launched in agreement with the International Monetary
Fund is starting to produce results, with annual inflation projected to drop
to 55 per cent this year, against 250 per cent in 1993. But if recovery is
to follow, President Gligorov must encourage the new government to launch
structural reforms without delay.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941024

