FT941-3556

FT  16 MAR 94 / Merchant bankers brave disdain of Athens: The Greek
socialists know they must pay the price as telecom sell-off brings back the
fee seekers


   By KERIN HOPE


Undeterred by Greece's failure last year to carry out a planned partial
flotation of the state telecommunications company, OTE, western investment
bankers are pushing back into Athens for another try.
With the socialist government committed to relaunching its conservative
predecessor's privatisation programme, to help cover a rapidly widening
budget deficit, the sale of 25 per cent of OTE is being set provisionally
for October.
However, plans for the flotation are still vague, not least because the
socialists, after their election victory last year, sacked the previous
government's two leading advisers on privatisation, N M Rothschild and
Credit Suisse First Boston, without appointing a replacement.
Moreover, in the absence of Mr Giorgos Gennimatas, the economy minister, who
is undergoing treatment for cancer, the prime minister, Mr Andreas
Papandreou, has not indicated who will be responsible for awarding the
mandate for the OTE sale.
It will be a delicate political decision, given the opposition to the sale
voiced by OTE's powerful trade union, and a prevailing mood of hostility
towards foreign investment bankers within the ruling Panhellenic Socialist
Movement (Pasok).
A senior socialist official said: 'We're naive perhaps, but we were shocked
at the size of the fees the conservatives were prepared to pay to foreign
consultants.'
Both Rothschilds and CSFB were advising the previous government on its plan
to sell a 35 per cent strategic stake in OTE to an international operator.
In addition, CSFB and J Henry Schroder Wagg were appointed global
co-ordinators for the flotation of another 14 per cent of the company on the
Athens stock exchange, expected to raise about Dr100bn (Pounds 274m).
Rothschilds, together with Morgan Stanley and Paribas, were originally
appointed joint lead managers of the offering's international tranche. But
both the sale and flotation were cancelled when the conservatives lost power
in the general election last year.
The socialists' disdain for international advisers extended to firing Arthur
Andersen, the accountants, who were preparing OTE's first audit up to
international standards.
They are to be replaced by auditors from SOL, a quasi-government body of
Greek-sworn accountants.
Nevertheless, economy ministry officials now accept the need to appoint an
international bank as co-ordinator to ensure the success of what will be the
largest local offering to date.
However, the ministry is already admitting that political criteria will
affect the final choice. 'Obviously, we can't reappoint the old team, even
though a few players may be asked to participate again,' a government
adviser said.
Almost all the banks previously involved have submitted fresh proposals.
However, confidence is strong among newcomers, among them Bear Stearns,
Lehman Brothers, Barings and Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
The government hopes to realise Dr250bn from the OTE sale, with up to 60 per
cent of the issue being placed abroad.
'They appear to be counting on the current appetite for telecoms issues
among international investors to offset delays in restructuring
old-fashioned management and a lack of transparency in the accounts,' said
one analyst.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940316

