FT943-12994

FT  21 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Junk food odds on to console the betting
person


   By DAVID WIGHTON


'A tenner each way and a double cheeseburger,' could be the order of the day
at Britain's betting shops following the government's decision to ease
restrictions which have governed the industry for 33 years.
All the main chains welcomed the announcement by Mr Michael Howard, the home
secretary, which will allow clear glass shopfronts, larger television
screens and a wider range of food.
Ladbrokes, which has 1,900 betting shops, said it would 'significantly
increase' investment in refurbishment to Pounds 75m over the next three
years to take advantage of the changes.
William Hill, the 1,800-strong chain owned by Brent Walker, said it would
continue to invest about Pounds 8m a year.
Mr Chris Bell, deputy managing director of Ladbrokes, said: 'It is ludicrous
that the public have not been able to see that the interior of a betting
shop is far removed from the traditional image, or buy a snack other than
crisps or confectionery when inside.'
The rules, which date back to 1961 when off-course betting was legalised,
were designed to limit the attraction of betting shops to the young and
impressionable. The industry has lobbied hard for their removal,
particularly in the face of competition from the National Lottery.
Coral, the 700-shop chain owned by Bass, said the most important change was
to allow ordinary shopfronts. 'It will demystify betting shops and help
attract people who have not been in one before.'
Bookmakers have known changes were likely for over a year and have ensured
that shops refurbished recently could be adapted quickly. 'We will be
putting in new shopfronts as soon as the law is changed early next year,'
said Coral.
Ladbrokes has already designed a new format for its shops and fitted one out
as a pilot.
Betting shops will be allowed to display race and betting information in
their windows and provide larger television screens, currently restricted to
30 inches. They will be able to offer 'hand-held' food, such as burgers and
chips, but the ban on alcohol will remain. Mr Howard has made clear that the
changes should not result in betting shops becoming 'general entertainment
centres'.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940721

