FT943-12915

FT  22 JUL 94 / Labour's tragedy turns to triumph


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Labour's leaders - or most of them - were smiling broadly yesterday, and not
just because Mr Tony Blair won the contest to succeed John Smith by a
convincing margin.
The leadership election could have been a disaster. John Smith's death in
May forced the party to embark on an unplanned contest using an untried
system.
In the end the party survived six weeks of campaigning without an outbreak
of factional fighting and managed to present a civilised and modern image in
the process.
One senior party figure said yesterday: 'Who would have thought 10 weeks ago
that we would handle it like this. I was really afraid it would all go
wrong.'
It was not a great democratic exercise. The distorted electoral system, in
which an MP's vote was worth more than a dozen times a trade union
supporter's vote, made that impossible.
But even political opponents concede in private that it was the biggest
consultative exercise ever undertaken by a British political party.
There were 952,109 votes cast in the three-part electoral college - 327 by
MPs and MEPs, 172,356 by party members in the constituencies and 779,426 by
supporters in affiliated trade unions and socialist societies.
The aggregate total was impressive. As Mr Blair was quick to point out at
yesterday's meeting, Mr John Major was elected leader of the Conservative
party by 154 MPs.
But a more detailed breakdown of the voting by sectors suggests a disturbing
disparity between the three sectors of the electoral college.
Of the 333 MPs and MEPs only four failed to vote, discounting the Speaker,
who traditionally abstains from party matters.
There was a 69.1 per cent turnout of constituency members, but only 19.5 per
cent of union members participated, cutting the overall turnout to 21.1 per
cent of the 4.5m eligible voters.
The low turnout among affiliated organisations suggests that union members
have little collective interest in the leadership of the political wing of
the Labour movement.
It also underlines the question mark over the political influence of trade
union leaders that appeared when Mr Smith ended the block vote at last
year's Labour conference.
Further change to the electoral system is unlikely in the short term. Labour
leaders say party members are sick of organisational change.
Meanwhile, perhaps the best news for the party was that Mr Blair won a
majority in all three sections of the college - 60 per cent among MPs and
MEPs, 58 per cent among constituency members, and 52 per cent among union
voters.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, the interim leader, polled poorly in all three,
beating Mr John Prescott, the shadow employment secretary, by 19.9 per cent
to 19.6 per cent in the MP sections, but losing by 24 per cent to 17 per
cent among party members and 28 per cent to 19 per cent among union
supporters.
In the deputy leadership race Mrs Beckett polled between 40 per cent and 46
per cent in the college, giving Mr Prescott a healthy margin in all three
sections, and an overall lead of 56.5 per cent to 43.5 per cent.
Mrs Beckett behaved with quiet dignity in defeat at the leadership
convention yesterday, but few delegates appeared surprised by her lacklustre
performance.
She started the race with the advantage of holding the interim leadership.
But her decision to contest both leadership posts was a strategic blunder
which left her campaign divided between two objectives.
There was little policy focus either in a campaign which started with a
clarion call to the left, and ended with a call for unity and the inclusion
of all wings of the party.
Mr Prescott, by contrast, focused on the single idea of full employment, and
campaigned mainly for the deputy leader's job. His campaign managers say he
started behind Mrs Beckett, but gradually overtook her during the campaign.
At least a dozen MPs switched sides during the campaign.
Mrs Beckett, who lost her positions on the shadow cabinet and Labour's
national executive committee when the result was announced, will stand for
both at the next round of elections in the autumn, and is certain to
succeed.
Mr Blair has ruled out a shadow-cabinet reshuffle until after the elections,
but Mrs Beckett is regarded as a strong candidate for a high-profile job
such as home affairs, which Mr Blair will vacate.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940722

