FT942-12794

FT  28 APR 94 / Japanese PM searches for a political lifeline: Hata's
minority government faces difficult future


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Tsutomu Hata, Japan's new prime minister, last night met the remaining
partners in his depleted coalition to prepare the weakest minority cabinet
in post-war history.
The cabinet, to be announced today according to a coalition official, has
scant chance of surviving for more than a few months, since it is 56 seats
short of a majority.
It is assured of opposition support for the current year's long overdue
budget, agreement on which could be reached by early June. After that, it
could fall to a vote of no confidence at any moment, unless Mr Hata decided
to resign first.
Mr Hata lost his majority when the Social Democratic party, formerly the
coalition's largest member, left the coalition on Tuesday. It split over the
centre-right alliance members' secretive formation of a new grouping,
Kaishin (Innovation). The Hata administration's chances of long-term
survival grew even poorer yesterday when the SDP and opposition Liberal
Democratic party agreed in principle to co-operate in parliament.
On the surface, the SDP-LDP link-up looks strange in that they are supposed
to be arch-rivals. The socialists were the main opposition party to 38 years
of conservative LDP government until the SDP joined the new ruling coalition
last year.
Yet the LDP and socialists did in practice co-operate on legislation in
parliamentary committees during the LDP's reign.
'They have been in bed with each other since 1955,' said Mr Dan Harada, a
political lobbyist. Officials from the two parties will meet this morning to
discuss details of their co-operation.
Mr Tomiichi Murayama, SDP chairman, hinted yesterday that his party might
submit a no-confidence motion against the new government, depending on
'future developments'. The SDP would, however, support the government on the
budget, he said.
The SDP has no plans to rejoin the government coalition, even if Kaishin
disbanded itself, said Mr Murayama. Mr Hata has asked him to a meeting this
morning, in a belatedly courteous gesture, before announcing the planned new
cabinet line-up.
Mr Hata needs to fill eight seats in the 21-seat cabinet, including the six
vacated by the SDP by its decision to leave the coalition, the foreign
ministership which he used to hold and the post of chief cabinet secretary,
or government spokesman.
That post was previously held by Mr Masayoshi Takemura, the leader of the
New Harbinger party, which left the coalition in protest against the growing
influence of the centre-right.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940428

