FT941-16926

FT  07 JAN 94 / PM dismisses Yeo blow to family values


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mr John Major, the prime minister, insisted yesterday that the government's
campaign for a return to traditional family values would continue, in spite
of Mr Tim Yeo's resignation over his fathering of an illegitimate child in
an extra-marital affair.
Other leading Tories rushed to deny charges of government hypocrisy as
members of Mr Yeo's Suffolk South constituency began moves to force the
former environment minister to quit the Commons.
Mr Major said: 'Back to basics isn't a crusade about personal morality and
it was never presented as such.
'It has been about policy issues of concern to everyone in the country -
issues like fighting crime and making punishment more effective.'
'What in essence we are seeking to do is to push to one side many of these
fashionable theories that have taken root over recent years that we believe
are a denial of commonsense. We can do without these fashionable theories.'
He added: 'I think . . . what underpins most human behaviour are the basic
instincts of commonsense.'
Mr Major's view was supported by a raft of senior Conservatives, including
Mr David Hunt, employment secretary, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health
secretary, and Sir Marcus Fox, the influential chairman of the backbench
1922 committee.
There were signs, however, that ministers may have underestimated the
appetite of grassroots party members for fundamental moral values.
Mrs Aldine Horrigan, vice-chairman of the Suffolk South constituency
association's Haverhill branch and a key member of the group which forced Mr
Yeo's resignation, said he should also quit as an MP.
The branch said that it would not support Mr Yeo in any future re-selection.
The growing inclination of local activists to flex their political muscles
was dismissed as 'a one-off' by senior ministers. However, it was seen as a
worrying development by backbenchers. 'I think that is a very unsettling
precedent,' said one senior back bencher.
It also emerged yesterday that Mr Yeo's attempts to avoid resignation were
given strong private support by senior ministers, including Mr Major, Mr
Richard Ryder, the chief whip, and Mr John Gummer, environment secretary.
Party officials said public support for Mr Yeo from Sir Norman Fowler, party
chairman, and Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, 'reflected government
policy'. This contrasts with earlier suggestions that Downing Street had
remained aloof from the affair.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940107

