FT944-6055

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Company News: Merck decides to reverse course
 -Richard Waters looks at how the US drugs group is running Medco


   By RICHARD WATERS


Just months after beginning to merge parts of its operations with those of
Medco Containment Services, the pharmacy benefit management group for which
it paid Dollars 6.6bn last year, Merck has reversed course.
The change in approach is the clearest sign yet that, in spite of the image
of stability it projects on the surface, the biggest US drugs maker is going
through something of an upheaval. It signals what Mr Raymond Gilmartin,
Merck's new chairman and chief executive, calls his 'number one priority':
to make the Medco acquisition pay.
In the spring of this year, Merck said it would integrate parts of Medco
with its own businesses. This echoed the logic advanced by the company for
mounting the acquisition in the first instance. Managed care buyers were set
to become an ever-more significant force in the US drugs market, forcing
Merck to combine with a sales channel as powerful as Medco to retain and, if
possible, boost its market share.
That strategy was the brainchild of two men: Mr Roy Vagelos, Merck's
charismatic chairman, who retired at the beginning of November, and Mr
Martin Wygod, the entrepreneur who created Medco and, until his abrupt
departure earlier this year, a man seen as a possible successor to Mr
Vagelos. Mr Gilmartin - who until this summer was chairman of a medical
supplies company, Beckton Dickinson - has now inherited the job of making
the vision work.
The first step has been to run Merck and Medco operations entirely
separately. 'One of the risks in vertical integration is that you can lose
sight of where you make money in the (production and distribution) chain,'
he said. 'We unbundled a little bit as well,' he adds, referring to the
initial steps at merging operations which have now been reversed.
The change in approach became clear earlier this week, as Mr Gilmartin made
his first presentation to analysts since taking over as chairman at the
start of November.
Perhaps not coincidentally, this is an approach that is likely to appeal to
US regulators, who have begun a review of both Merck and SmithKline Beecham,
the Anglo-US drugs group which has also acquired a pharmacy benefit manager.
In its first action in this area, the Federal Trade Commission recently
required Eli Lilly, the third company to buy a PBM, to establish some
operating barriers between its drug-making and PBM businesses. Mr Gilmartin
says, though, that the new direction at Merck precedes the FTC's interest,
and that anyway the company already satisfies the sort of concerns expressed
by the regulators during their review of Lilly.
The decision to run Medco separately will help to highlight in future how
successful the acquisition proves. So far, little evidence has emerged.
Merck said this week that the number of people in Medco pharmacy plans has
risen to 40m, from 33m when the deal was announced. Also, it said Merck's
drugs now make up 12 per cent of Medco's sales, up from 10 per cent before
the acquisition.
To make the Medco deal pay, Mr Gilmartin hopes to demonstrate that he can
boost the earnings of both Merck and the PBM. This represents a subtle
change of emphasis from the logic expressed by Mr Vagelos at the time of the
deal. The former chairman outlined a plan to grow market share at a time
when price pressures were depressing growth for drugmakers generally. Mr
Gilmartin, though, says that Merck will defend its profit margins and
reassert itself as a growth company.
Much will depend on how well Merck and Medco can work together. In Mr
Gilmartin's version of the future, Medco will help Merck to penetrate
markets far more effectively than it has in the past. As an example, he
takes Vacotec, a treatment for hypertension: in the past three years, this
drug has achieved a penetration of only around 25 per cent of its potential
market, he said. Broader-ranging clinical studies which establish the
efficacy of drugs will lift these levels.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

941201

