FT943-1011

FT  27 SEP 94 / Russian budget under fire from military


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


The Russian budget, its income cut almost in half because of a huge
shortfall in tax revenues, came under attack yesterday from two of the
strongest lobbies in Russia: the military and the Energy Ministry.
According to one senior official, lack of money is causing Russia to default
on its commitments to disarm - a subject now being discussed between
Presidents Boris Yeltsin and Bill Clinton in Washington.
The ferocity of the attack, coming as the political season opens once again
with the convening later this week of the two houses of parliament, signals
what will be a sustained effort to break the will of the Finance Ministry
and the prime minister to hold the line on relatively low inflation and a
limited budget deficit.
The attack also coincides with serious discussions with the International
Monetary Fund on further assistance for Russian reforms, in which ministers
will make a strong pitch for assistance based on their performance in
bringing down inflation to 4 per cent a month.
The Ministry of Defence, already smarting from receiving a little over half
of what it said was essential for minimum performance, yesterday said even
that had not been delivered and the Finance Ministry was 'discrediting
itself' in holding down spending.
Colonel General Alexander Kuznetsov, first deputy head of the department of
the budget and finance in the Defence Ministry, told the defence committee
of the State Duma (lower house) yesterday that in the first nine months of
this year, the ministry had received only Rbs14,600bn, or 53 per cent of the
Rbs27,200bn it should have received.
Mr Vyacheslav Mozgalev, a senior official in the Economic Ministry, told the
defence committee the situation in defence industries was 'catastrophic' as
'95 per cent of defence plants have stopped working, no new weapons research
work is being financed and the Defence Ministry will not receive a newly
developed piece of equipment until 2000.'
He also claimed that 'because of the lack of funds, Russia is not fulfilling
one of its international agreements to reduce its armaments'. He said only
22 per cent of the planned budget for disarmament had been received.
At the same time, the Ministry of Energy and Heating has claimed that
supplies of heating fuel for winter are in an 'extraordinarily bad'
situation. On September 1 only 5.4m tonnes of coal and 2m tonnes of heating
oil were stored - compared to 33.5m tonnes and 7.2m tonnes last year.
According to the RIA news agency, ministry officials are particularly
concerned about supplies, especially of coal, to the far east and extreme
north of the country. Nuclear power stations are also in crisis.
The Energy Ministry with the Ministry of the Economy is preparing a
government announcement on supplying the economy with fuel for the autumn
and winter period 1994-95, a decision which seems to mean further pressure
on the Finance Ministry to open the coffers or consign millions of Russians
to a cold winter.
Bear's new clothes, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940927

