FT942-16083

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Commerzbank operating profits up
25% to record


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


Germany's Commerzbank yesterday announced an increase of 'around a quarter'
in 1993 operating profits, and unveiled plans for a DM400m (Dollars 233m)
capital increase as well as the issue of up to DM2bn-worth of convertible
bonds and profit-sharing certificates.
The bank, the last of the big three to report, also confirmed a
previously-promised DM2 a share dividend increase to DM12. The higher payout
signalled the bank's confidence for the current financial year, it said in a
statement, adding that only half the increase was attributable to a
reduction in corporate taxation rates.
No figures were given for operating profits after provisions for bad risks.
A 'sizeable amount' of operating income was used to bolster risk provisions,
which are not liable for tax, against domestic loans, the statement added.
Group net earnings were down sharply at DM586.4m compared with DM837.8m. A
spokesman said 1992 earnings at this level had been inflated by the
extraordinary gains from the consolidation of the group's Berlin business,
following the ending of the concessionary tax regime for businesses in the
city.
Statutory requirements meant all the Berliner Commerzbank's reserves had
been counted as profit.
The capital-raising moves, which were foreshadowed last year, followed a
DM500m equity rights issue and a DM800m issue of profit-sharing certificates
last year. Both measures would be valid until April 30 1999, the bank said
yesterday.
Mr Martin Kohlhaussen, chairman, said last November that the money was
necessary to raise core capital, the basis for future lending growth, to 5
per cent of total assets from 4.6 per cent.
Full details of 1993's record results and the bank's performance so far in
the current year are due at a press conference on Friday.
As in the case of Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, which have already
reported operating profits up 16 per cent and 24 per cent respectively,
Commerzbank's own-account trading is expected to have returned markedly
improved earnings. After 10 months, profits from securities trading had more
than trebled.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940412

