FT942-15815

FT  13 APR 94 / International Company News: Bonds volatility hits Bear
Stearns


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


Bear Stearns, the Wall Street securities house, has revealed trading losses
in recent weeks because of extreme volatility in financial markets.
The announcement of the losses, described as 'moderate', did not surprise
industry analysts. Heavy declines in bond prices over the past few weeks
were expected to have hit earnings of Wall Street firms which own and trade
large portfolios of government securities.
Mr James Cayne, Bear Stearns' chief executive, said: 'This is not the first
time we have suffered losses, and it will not be the last.' Big trading
houses are always vulnerable to losses if securities prices change rapidly.
However, those losses can just as quickly be recouped if market conditions
turn back in their favour.
The recent unpredictability of global financial markets, however, coupled
with the rise in US interest rates and declines in domestic stock and bond
prices since February, should mark a turning point in Wall Street's earnings
cycle. After three years of steadily escalating profitability, income growth
is expected to slow in 1994.
Bear Stearns' third-quarter earnings, also released this week, indicated
that the peak in the securities industry's cycle has probably passed. The
firm reported third-quarter profits of Dollars 115.5m, slightly higher than
a year earlier but well down on the previous quarter, when profits reached a
record Dollars 134.8m.
Separately, Bear Stearns announced that Mr Wayne Angell, who recently
stepped down after eight years as a member of the Federal Reserve Board,
will be joining the firm as chief economist and senior managing director.
The hiring of Mr Angell is a coup. His experience and knowledge of the Fed
will prove beneficial to Bear Stearns, which is one of the most active
traders in the US market for fixed-income securities.
During his high-profile tenure at the Fed, Mr Angell developed a reputation
as an inflation 'hawk', who believed the central bank's overriding priority
as the guardian of US monetary policy was to defeat inflation.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940413

