FT943-13261

FT  20 JUL 94 / Exide bids for Banesto's Tudor stake


   By TOM BURNS and ANDREW BAXTER


   MADRID, LONDON


Exide Corporation, the largest US producer of car batteries, yesterday moved
to establish a hold in the European market by launching a Pta31.5bn (Dollars
248m) bid for Tudor, the Spanish automotive and industrial battery company.
The Michigan-based company, which went public last autumn, has reached a
memorandum of understanding with Corporacion Banesto to negotiate the
purchase of its 57 per cent stake in Tudor as part of a public tender offer
for the whole of the battery company.
The bid comes only four months after Exide paid more than Pounds 20m
(Dollars 30.4m) for Big Batteries, the Welsh company which is the UK's
largest privately-owned maker of automotive batteries.
The Spanish deal will give Exide a larger presence in Europe and one of the
continent's best-known battery brand names.
Tudor is ranked third overall in the European battery market behind
Germany's Varta and Fiat of Italy's Ceac-Marelli group.
The Spanish company has 19 per cent of the European automotive (starter)
battery market and 15 per cent of Europe's industrial battery sector.
Just over half Tudor's production is concentrated in Spain but it also
manufactures in Portugal and Germany. In Scandinavia it owns the local
battery producers Hagen and Neste.
Last year the company made 77 per cent of its sales outside Spain.
The proposed takeover marks the first large disposal by the Corporacion
Banesto, after its parent, Banco Espanol de Credito (Banesto) was bought by
Banco Santander in a Dollars 2bn acquisition three months ago .
Although Banesto officials stressed yesterday that there would be no 'fire
sales' of the bank's industrial assets, analysts considered Exide's bid of
Pta1,145 per Tudor share for outright ownership of Tudor to be cheap.
The US company's bid was below the Pta1,245 price at which Tudor shares
closed on Monday, before details of the takeover were disclosed, and well
down on the battery producer's Pta1,375 year high trading price in April.
At the beginning of this year Iberagentes Bolsa, the Spanish broking arm of
Credit Lyonnais, valued Tudor shares at Pta1,500.
Tudor posted pre-tax losses of Pta4.2bn last year, compared with a 1992
deficit of Pta1.7bn. The increase in losses was due to a strong fall in
extraordinary income when expected land sales fell through, and to
continuing restructuring costs. The workforce was cut by 1,500 to 4,500 last
year and will fall to 3,500 by 1995.
Exide said last night it expected 'a brisk conclusion' to the talks with
Corporacion Banesto. The proposed takeover is part of a plan to boost sales
growth and is timed to take advantage of recovery in European markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940720

