FT941-12805

FT  28 JAN 94 / Management: New logic is here to stay - Edward Lawler
condemns the latest theories as passing fads


   By EDWARD LAWLER


Management has always been beset by fads and fashions, gurus and demagogues.
But never before has there been such a sheer volume of new approaches.
This has led many managers to reach one of two incorrect conclusions: that
the new approaches are all hype with no substance, or that a particular
programme is the answer.
The reality is more complex and challenging: that the traditional logic
about what makes for high-performing organisations is no longer valid, and
that a new logic is emerging piecemeal in its place. Some early implementers
of it are already gaining a competitive advantage.
What is the new logic? It has a number of elements and is not fully
articulated by any single approach - certainly not by the very popular
re-engineering movement, as James Champy acknowledged in this column on
January 14.
Value Added: Top to Bottom. Fundamental to the new logic is the belief that
value can be added at all levels of an organisation. In the conventional
logic, the assumption is that organisations, if structured properly, add
value primarily at the top.
The new logic suggests allowing individuals throughout the organisation to
co-ordinate and control their own work, and so reduce the need for layers of
management and bureaucracy. This cannot mean the elimination of
co-ordination, because without it an organisation is unlikely to add value
above and beyond what an individual can add. Thus it is critical to put
individuals in structures that allow them to exercise lateral co-ordination
and self-control so they can add the value that, in the old logic, is added
at the top
As Champy pointed out, a self-control environment needs managers who act as
leaders and direction setters. His attack on 'empowerment as traditionally
advocated' for being tantamount to abdication, is largely a straw man
argument, because few proponents of empowerment have argued that managers
should just get out of the way. Managers need to provide employees with
information, training and power, and hold them accountable for their
performance. This cuts costs, as well as creating a workforce that is more
responsive to customers and has a greater focus on quality.
Pyramids to business unit structures. The old logic stresses that control
requires hierarchy. However, as the experiences of Xerox and Motorola have
shown, true empowerment often requires a major organisational restructuring
which destroys the traditional pyramidal structure.
It is not enough just to create problem-solving teams, as total quality
management programmes do, or organise around processes, as re-engineering
advocates. The new logic requires the flattening of an organisation, and the
creation of one which, instead of being structured into functions, is
organised around small groups or mini-businesses. With this architecture,
numerous free-standing businesses can be created which have their own
accountability and their own customers.
Individuals to teams. In order for lateral processes to work, individuals
need to be grouped into multi-functional teams. Thus, while the old logic
suggests that individual accountability and responsibility are of supreme
importance, the new logic assumes that individuals can do little in complex,
inter-dependent situations. As a result, it is best to hold teams
accountable, and to organise around teams and their structures. So managers
need to be conscious of how their behaviour affects team performance, and
what they can do to make teams more effective.
Reward systems also need to be changed. Instead of individuals being
rewarded for how well they do their jobs (this has not even been effective
in traditional organisations), they need to be measured and rewarded for the
success of their team and their business unit. Finally, instead of paying
employees for the size of their jobs and their altitude in the hierarchy,
individuals need to be paid for their value-adding competencies.
I am often asked what is beyond the new logic of organising. What is the
next wave? At this point, I think this is the wrong question. It incorrectly
assumes that the principles which I have called the new logic represent a
transitory phase. The new logic is still a work in process, and is likely to
be the dominant logic for many decades. It is the logic of globally
competitive information technology-based organisations which look for
competitive advantage through their organisational competencies. As such, it
is likely to continue to evolve, and to be in place for decades until a new
world order and/or new technologies emerge.
The implications of this for managers are clear. The old organisational life
which may be comfortable and predictable is disappearing rapidly. The new
logic outlined here is not like the fads and fashions that have gripped
management over the decades. Instead it represents fundamental change in the
way organisations will operate. People who develop the skills to be
effective in organisations which follow the new logic will thrive. Those who
do not will be just as obsolete as poorly skilled production workers in a
high-technology manufacturing facility.
The author is professor of management and organisation at the University of
Southern California School of Business Administration and director of the
Centre for Effective Organisations.
Christopher Lorenz's column will resume on February 11.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940128

