FT944-2450

FT  16 DEC 94 / Showroom staff face bleak new year: The reasons for cuts in
pay and conditions planned by British Gas


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


British Gas's remaining showroom staff face an uncertain future as the
company pursues its aim of turning a loss-making retail business into a
'lean and mean' organisation capable of survival in the increasingly
competitive high street market.
Its business plan has involved the closure of 160 showrooms this year with
26 of the remaining 266 'under review'. Staffing is being cut from 4,000 at
the beginning of this year to a target of 1,300. About 1,000 have already
gone without the need for compulsory redundancies.
But this will not be enough for British Gas to make a profit on its showroom
activities within five years. The showrooms are believed to be losing about
Pounds 100m a year at present, hence the reason for trying to cut labour
costs.
From January 1 the showrooms will be turned into a separate retail business
unit which will be expected to become viable on its own. British Gas has
told trade unions that this will mean a drastic upheaval for staff if the
showrooms hope to survive.
Company negotiators have told the unions that they want to maintain British
Gas's reputation as a 'good employer'. In its proposals set out in October
the company sought to reassure showroom staff it would not impose immediate
radical cuts in their living standards as part of the business plan.
There is no intention to make any changes in pay levels or employment terms
of the existing 3,000 staff until at least June 30, the unions have been
told.
What happens after that will depend on the business performance of the
remaining showrooms during the first six months of next year, although
British Gas has already told unions no pay rise can be expected for staff
next year.
The company plans to introduce new terms and conditions of employment for
new staff. This will mean market-related pay with no automatic salary
progression, and performance-based incentives covering all grades. New
entrants will be paid between Pounds 9,000 and Pounds 9,700 a year.
There is also to be increased flexibility in working hours with reduced
overtime payments, provisions for Sunday working and an end to premiums for
working on a Saturday. Holidays will be cut from a maximum of 33 days a year
to 27 days and there will be bank holiday working.
Sick pay will be reduced for short-service employees and a longer qualifying
period imposed for others.
All staff will be affected by the company's proposal to achieve what it
calls a new balance between basic salaries paid to showroom staff and their
commission. The new system will come into force on January 1, replacing the
current regionally based commission pay schemes.
British Gas wants to make up to 30 per cent of staff earnings dependent on
commission. At present commission accounts for about 15 per cent and is not
linked to business performance.
Under the new scheme every sales worker will be given a weekly net sales
target which will be calculated from how much income each has to generate to
cover their own costs as well as their share of their shop's fixed costs. No
commission will be paid until a minimum group performance level has been
achieved which equates to the particular gas showroom breaking even.
Unions have been told the principle behind the new commission scheme is to
reward real achievement and not mere attendance. Commission payments will be
triggered at various levels of sale above a management-set performance
target. There is to be no ceiling on potential commission earnings.
British Gas says the changes will bring pay rates into line with its main
competitors, where staff earn between Pounds 7,000 and Pounds 9,000 a year
compared with British Gas levels of between Pounds 10,000 and Pounds 13,000.
The company can also point out that it is behaving in the same way as the
privatised electricity companies which have over the past two years
recruited new showroom staff at lower wage rates and on inferior terms.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941216

