FT942-16046

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (6): Exports pick up - Trade


   By PATRICK BLUM


Exports declined by 9 per cent from Dollars 6.68bn in 1992 to Dollars 6.08bn
last year, writes Patrick Blum. Imports were almost 5 per cent higher,
rising from Dollars 6.14bn to Dollars 6.48bn last year, causing a Dollars
400m trade deficit.
Mr Vojka Ravbar, state secretary for foreign economic relations, says
exports were about 6 per cent higher than the dollar value suggests because
of exchange rate fluctuations. Officials hope they will pick up again this
year. Germany was Slovenia's largest trading partner, accounting for 29.5
per cent of exports, followed by Italy, Croatia, France and Austria.
There has been a big shift in exports to the west from eastern Europe and
the former Yugoslavia, with the European Union now accounting for more than
half of Slovenian trade. The war in Bosnia and United Nations sanctions have
caused a halt in trade with the rump Yugoslavia, except for medicines and
some foods. Trade with Bosnia has become insignificant. Trade with Croatia
and Macedonia has declined considerably.
The sudden loss of more than a third of its export markets caused thousands
of jobs in Slovenia to disappear, particularly among the large traditional
industries based in the eastern parts of the country and around the capital.
Many of these companies had a captive market of almost 24m people; they
await an end to the fighting in Bosnia with the hope that they might at
least win back some of their former markets in Serbia and Montenegro, as
well as in the rest of the former Yugoslavia.
Slovenia has also lost ground to western competitors in traditional markets
in central and eastern Europe. The former system of guaranteed markets
through government agreements has ended with communism, and producers must
find their own customers amid rising competition both from low cost eastern
European producers and aggressive western companies.
Slovenia sees its future closely tied to that of the EU. A co-operation
agreement was signed last year, giving tariff-free access to the EU for
about 90 per cent of Slovenian industrial products, and Ljubljana hopes to
conclude an association agreement with the EU this year. The government also
hopes to sign a free trade agreement with Efta this year. It hopes that this
will allow Slovenian exporters free access to Efta's markets before fully
opening up Slovenia's own market.
Free trade agreements have also been signed with the Czech Republic,
Slovakia and Hungary, opening up a market of more than 50m people. There are
discussions with Poland for a similar agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940412

