FT941-17085

FT  06 JAN 94 / Arts: An Absolute Turkey - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


Sir Peter Hall's production of a new English version of Georges Feydeau's Le
Dindon has a wonderful cast and some fine performances. It is always
interesting, partly because it entices you to believe that the best lines
and situations must be just around the corner. That illusion is maintained
to the end. By then you realise what you may have suspected at the start: An
Absolute Turkey is more a sentimental comedy than a French farce.
Here is a rather gentle tale of French life where really serious
misdemeanours never quite take place, there is no cruelty, hardly anyone
loses their trousers and all ends happily. In short, Le Dindon has become
very English, more PG Wodehouse than Feydeau.
Once you have accepted the change of genre, the piece flows along very
nicely. Felicity Kendal plays Lucienne, the faithful wife who will betray
her husband only if she has evidence of his own infidelity, and then for
revenge - not desire. No production graced by Ms Kendal's presence can be
without pleasure.
The same can be said of Griff Rhys Jones who plays Redillon, the promiscuous
lover with a score card of one in three out of the women he approaches. When
Lucienne becomes available, he is too tired to take advantage. Rhys Jones,
too, is a joy to watch: for all his philandering he seems a nice man at
heart.
The nicest man of the lot - and this may have taken the sting out of the
play - is Geoffrey Hutchings as Vatelin, husband of Lucienne. A charming
Paris lawyer who collects paintings by the relatives of the French
Impressionists on the grounds that they are so cheap they must be a good
investment, he has been unfaithful only once - with a woman called Mitzi
when he had to spend to spend a month working in Zurich. There is never much
chance that he will be seriously embarrassed even when Mitzi (Rosie Timpson)
turns up in Paris. Vatelin nearly always does the decent thing, which is why
Lucienne sticks to him.
There are also some splendid minor performances, notably by Richard Henders
as a hotel page boy suffering from puberty, which is taken as some kind of
disease. Linda Spurrier is an outstanding Madame Pinchard, the near totally
deaf wife of a French general. She has that irritating habit of near deaf
people of being sharp of hearing just when you least expect it. Lip-readers
will appreciate her line: 'Why do you always talk with your back to me? I
can't see a word you're saying.'
There are far too many characters in the play: 22 altogether, played by a
cast of 18. Some of the best are never allowed to develop - like Mitzi's
husband who looks about as provincially Swiss as you are likely to get, but
turns out to have been born in Marseilles. The multiplicity of characters
slows down the pace. This is a criticism of Feydeau not of Hall: in a good
farce you do not want new faces constantly bursting through doors - they
distract from the framework.
It is also a mistake, despite the need to change the sets, to have two
intervals. That again slows down the action. Still, the designs by Gerald
Scarfe are very pretty: quite in line with the comedy that the play has
become.
Globe Theatre (071) 494 5065

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940106

