FT942-12271

FT  30 APR 94 / Last round-up for landfill cowboys: Taxpayers may foot the
bill for higher waste disposal standards


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


At midnight tonight tough new rules aimed at driving 'cowboys' out of the
waste management industry come into force.
The effect, according to waste companies, will be to treble or quadruple the
cost of rubbish disposal by the end of the decade. While large waste
companies have welcomed the rules they warn that the costs will eventually
be passed on to industry and consumers.
According to Mr Steve Charles of Redland, the building materials group that
runs more than 20 of the UK's landfill rubbish dumps, 'the new regulations
certainly will impose more monitoring requirements and more costs, but we
have been following many of these (practices) for some time'.
Friends of the Earth, the environmental pressure group, has argued that
taxpayers could be left with the bill for cleaning up landfills whose
operators have rushed to hand in their licences before the new rules apply.
The new rules, whose introduction has been delayed for a year while
contradictions with European directives were sorted out, will require
holders of landfill licences to:
Demonstrate that they are 'fit and proper' to run the site.
Monitor landfill-sites after they are closed, possibly for 50 years, and
clean up any pollution.
Demonstrate that they have the financial resources to meet these long-term
liabilities.
The rules aim to curb the problem of ill-designed and poorly managed
landfills leaking poisons into the soil and water tables, and emitting
polluting gases such as methane.
About 5,000 UK licences were in issue in 1990. Many were held by farmers or
small quarry owners, who gained extra revenue by allowing rubbish to be
tipped on their land.
About 90 per cent of UK waste goes to landfill, a small amount to recycling
and the rest to incineration. The cost of landfill has remained low in
Britain compared with continental Europe because the UK has a large number
of unfilled quarries from the excavation of building materials.
Although environmentalists fear that 'cowboy' operators, anxious to avoid
the new liabilities, will have rushed to hand back licences to local
authorities before tomorrow's deadline, there are no national figures on how
many licences have been surrendered in the past two years since the form of
the new rules became clear.
However Mr Steve Webb, policy director of the National Association of Waste
Disposal Contractors, which represents most of the waste industry, said: 'My
impression is that it has been more dribs and drabs than a rush. If the
pay-off for getting dodgy operators out of the industry is that they
surrender their licences, so be it. If they were unable to meet their
liabilities, the cost would come back to the taxpayer anyway.'
The Department of the Environment has estimated that the new rules could
increase the cost of waste disposal through landfill by 80p per tonne.
Typical charges range from Pounds 3 to Pounds 16 a tonne.
However, the association estimates that there could be a 140 per cent rise
in prices in the near future, although present overcapacity, caused partly
by the recession, may delay this for some months.
Mr Chris Murphy of the Institute of Wastes Management, a professional
association for waste engineers and managers, estimates that prices could
rise by three or four times by 2000 as the cost of opening new sites rises.
But waste companies say the new rules create new problems. No commercial
operator is now likely to take over a half-filled landfill from another
private company or local authority because of the unknown pollution risk.
The companies say it has also become nearly impossible to get long-term
insurance to cover pollution risks.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940430

