FT943-968

FT  27 SEP 94 / Plea for milk review refused


   By ALISON MAITLAND


The Dairy Trade Federation is considering further action after being refused
leave by the High Court yesterday to seek a judicial review of the
government's handling of milk market deregulation.
Mr Justice Dyson ruled that the federation had an 'arguable case' but had
failed to bring its action promptly enough after government approval of the
new arrangements in June.
The milk market in England and Wales is due to be liberalised on November 1,
when the Milk Marketing Board will be replaced by Milk Marque, a voluntary
farmers' co-operative which already controls at least 65 per cent of
supplies.
Dairy processors say that Milk Marque's system for selling milk to dairy
companies will push prices up sharply and encourage a flood of imports.
The judge ruled that it was arguable that the market reorganisation scheme,
in particular the pricing system, 'was such as to amount to an abuse by Milk
Marque of a dominant position' under the Treaty of Rome.
It was therefore arguable that the government had broken European law by
approving the scheme and failing to remedy the abuse.
However, he said hard evidence of the scale of likely price increases was
available in late June. 'It was vital that a challenge of this kind, having
such potentially far-reaching consequences, should be mounted with great
expedition, and it was not,' he said.
Mr Justice Dyson said the federation had adequate alternative remedies. 'The
reality here is that the complaint is against the system being used by Milk
Marque,' he said. 'The issues raised are ones which the European Commission
and/or the Monopolies and Mergers Commission are well-qualified to
determine.'
Mr John Price, the federation's director-general, said any further action
would be decided later this week after consultation with dairy companies.
Other possible remedies were to sue Milk Marque in the High Court for
damages for abuse of a dominant position, or to appeal against the judge's
ruling to the Court of Appeal.
He said: 'The problem is still there. The judge seems to be giving a fair
hint that it was the right action but the wrong court.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940927

