FT942-14732

FT  19 APR 94 / BAT seeks bigger stake in Indian arm


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL and TONY JACKSON


   CALCUTTA, LONDON


BAT Industries, the tobacco and insurance group, is considering raising its
stake in ITC, its Indian affiliate, in a move which has raised protests at
ITC. BAT has also proposed focusing ITC's activities around BAT's own core
areas of tobacco and financial services.
The plans could provoke controversy in India, where multi-national groups
are often still viewed with suspicion. ITC, which is one of India's largest
companies with a market value of about Dollars 2.9bn (Pounds 1.98bn), has
interests in hotels, paper and edible oils as well as tobacco and financial
services.
Mr Seroze Vevaina, ITC's deputy chairman, said yesterday that discussions
between BAT and ITC were at a delicate stage. A senior ITC executive said:
'If our big shareholder came and said we want you to be a little tobacco
company now, that would deflate morale here.'
BAT, which has a 31.5 per cent stake in ITC and nominates two directors to
the 13-member board, exercised little control until the present Indian
government liberalised foreign investment rules in 1991. Companies which
have recently re-established control under the new regime include Cadbury of
the UK and Colgate Palmolive of the US.
Mr Vevaina said: 'BAT are interested in raising their stake. And they are
interested in tobacco and financial services. What we need is a modus
vivendi where we can help them grow their interests, and grow away from them
in areas where they have less interest.'
BAT said yesterday it was 'not dogmatic' about being restricted to tobacco
and financial services. 'We wouldn't want to be forced sellers of some very
fine businesses,' it said. 'But if we had a higher shareholding, the board
would take a lot of convincing that we should make further investments
outside those areas.' The companies are working on plans which would allow
BAT to take substantial stakes in ITC's tobacco and financial services
without having to invest in the hotels and other businesses. This could
involve splitting ITC.
The Indian government is not expected to object to such restructuring, but
will keep a close eye on the price at which BAT increases its stake. Several
foreign groups have bought shares in affiliates at discounts of up to 90 per
cent of stock market prices, prompting claims of unfair practices.
BAT refused to comment on whether it wanted to raise its stake. However, it
said: 'If we were to decide to raise our stake we would follow local
regulations and guidelines.' Noting that price-earnings ratios on the Indian
stock exchange were high, the company said: 'We would only increase our
stake if it could be done in the interests of our own shareholders.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940419

