FT944-10941

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (7): Scourge of the mighty / Profile of TN
Seshan, chief election commissioner


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


One man in India has repeatedly challenged Mr PV Narasimha Rao and got away
with it - Mr TN Seshan, the pugnacious chief election commissioner.
An upper-caste Brahmin with legendary faith in his own abilities, Mr Seshan
has transformed a sinecure into the most controversial post in public life.
As he says himself: 'I am the ninth CEC (since independence). My
predecessors saw themselves largely as a limb of the government. I do not.'
Mr Seshan has turned a little-known institution, concerned largely with the
minutiae of election practice, into a scourge of the country's politicians
by interpreting his mandate in the broadest possible way. Mr Manmohan Singh,
the finance minister, Mr Pranab Mukherjee, the commerce minister, and Mr
Dinesh Singh, the foreign minister, have all been targets for Mr Seshan's
wrath.
Mr Seshan sees his mission as cleansing public life of corruption and
political arrogance. To his supporters, he is a hero; to his many enemies, a
self-centred bully. As an aide once said of him: 'He's a bull who carries
his own china shop with him.'
Whatever his reputation in New Delhi, Mr Seshan has struck a chord with many
ordinary Indians angry at the spread of political corruption. His public
meetings attract large crowds and he has launched a national 'voter
awareness' campaign through non-government organisations.
Mr Seshan, who is 61, is a career civil servant who rose to be chief cabinet
secretary in the late Mr Rajiv Gandhi's government. Mr Chandra Shekhar, who
was briefly prime minister in 1990-91, appointed Mr Seshan as chief election
commissioner - a decision he later said was a mistake.
As Mr Seshan explains, with some relish, the chief commissioner is appointed
for six years and can only be removed prematurely by death, voluntary
resignation or impeachment. So, when Mr Narasimha Rao became prime minister
in 1991 he was stuck with Mr Seshan.
Attempts to clip his wings have so far failed. Last year, the government
appointed two senior bureaucrats to 'assist' Mr Seshan, turning the
commission into a three-man board. But Mr Seshan challenged the move in the
Supreme Court, winning an interim order upholding his sole authority. His
two colleagues sit in offices one floor above his in a government block in
Delhi; he knows them well from his civil service days but now he does not
speak to them nor they to him.
This year, Mr Narasimha Rao sanctioned an abortive effort to pass two
constitutional amendments through Parliament to turn the commission into a
multi-member body. The government withdrew the bills at the last moment when
it became clear it would not win the necessary two-thirds majority. Even
though dislike of Mr Seshan runs across party lines, the opposition parties
decided their interests were better served if he stayed in office to plague
Mr Rao.
Mr Seshan has not escaped scot-free from attack. This summer, the Supreme
Court criticised him for over-reacting to alleged electoral malpractice in
the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, where the chief minister had been
caught using an official aircraft during a local election campaign. Mr
Seshan's decision was to postpone the polls by four months. The Supreme
Court said this was far too long.
Mr Seshan's attack on Mr Manmohan Singh centred on the alleged abuse of
rules for residential qualifications for electoral candidates. Under Indian
law, members of both houses of Parliament are required to be resident in the
state they represent. Mr Singh, a former civil servant, was drafted into the
ruling Congress(I) party when he became finance minister and was given a
seat in the remote north-eastern state of Assam. He gave as his address the
Assam chief minister's house. Mr Seshan threatened to cancel the election
but his effort got bogged down in the courts and he seems to have lost
interest in pursuing the finance minister.
Mr Dinesh Singh survived a similar challenge by producing a ration card and
evidence of property ownership in the state which he represents, even though
he does not live in it. Mr Pranab Mukherjee was not so lucky. He was out of
Parliament when he was appointed commerce minister and intended to contest a
vacant seat. But when Mr Seshan objected to the choice of chief electoral
officer, Mr Mukherjee had to resign, though he later returned to the
government after winning an election elsewhere.
These individual attacks pale in comparison with the campaign Mr Seshan has
waged since early last year to have all India's voters issued with photo
identity cards. The government initially scoffed at such a breath-takingly
ambitious plan. But Mr Seshan has stuck to his guns. He insists that the
cards must be issued before a deadline of December 1994, or elections will
not be valid. Since six of the 10 state elections being held in the next few
months come after December, the issue is very urgent. Mr Seshan says: 'I
gave them plenty of time. They didn't believe me.'
Mr Seshan says electoral abuses are increasing, including bribing voters,
manipulating election expenses, stealing ballot boxes, intimidation and
violence. But he argues these practices are still a long way from
undermining Indian democracy. The Indian general election, with its 550m
voters, 4m officials, 1.5m police and 800,000 polling booths, remains 'one
of the wonders of the world'. That, he believes, is why it worth defending.

The Financial Times


London Page V

941108

