FT943-13333

FT  20 JUL 94 / Arts: A figurative aberration - The Turner Prize nominees
include a rarity


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


It is that time of year again when Nick Serota, director of the Tate
Gallery, must assume a weary, tight-lipped smile and defend the four artists
short-listed for the Turner Prize from the uncomprehending hostility of the
massed ranks of Philistines - that is the media and most art lovers.
This year there is a noticeable aberration among the artists in line for the
prize, which is sponsored by Channel 4 and announced on November 22 - a
figurative artist, Peter Doig.
Doig, 34, might live next door to a gas works in London but his art is
lyrical and nostalgic, often consisting of large landscapes of Canada, where
he spent his childhood.
They are a blend of photographic precision and almost
Whistlerish-abstraction. Doig is the first painter working in a style that
would be popularly accepted as art to be nominated for the Turner since
1989, when installationist Richard Long won the prize but Paula Rego and
Lucian Freud were insultingly commended.
The other three artists match most people's concept of a Turner contender.
Antony Gormley, 44, is a sculptor whose work focuses on the human body,
mainly his own. He takes moulds of his body, strengthens them with fibre
glass, and then covers them with beaten lead or iron.
He is best known for 'Field', a work consisting of up to 40,000 small clay
figures with upward staring eyes - a modern version of the buried Chinese
warriors. There have been four versions of 'Field' and the Tate hopes to
show one in its exhibition of the work of the four artists in November.
The video artist and photographer Willie Doherty and the Iranian-born
sculptor and installation artist Shirazeh Houshiary complete the list.
Derry-based Doherty, 34, is best known for his bleak, empty, urban landscape
photographs of his home city. His 'The only good one is a dead one', which
consists of two video tapes on adjacent screens, showing the build-up to an
assassination from the points of view of the victim and the murderer,
contributed greatly to his nomination.
Houshiary, 39, takes an oriental, Sufic, attitude to her most recent work,
returning to the abstraction of Islamic art and the geometry which underpins
it.
In her 1993 exhibition at Camden Arts Centre she produced cubes made from
precious metals with grid-like structures inside them. For Houshiary the
cube manifests the material world. 'Its inward activity can disclose the
'timeless present'. Its centre is inside our being . . . we should realise
that the world would be nothing without this essential centre.'
This is the true language of a Turner Prize winner but Gormley must start
favourite for the Pounds 20,000 prize.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940720

