FT942-15450

FT  15 APR 94 / World Trade News: US-Japan row tests EU patience - Sir Leon
Brittan talks to Guy de Jonquieres in Marrakesh


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


   MARRAKESH


Sir Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, warned yesterday that he
would not wait much longer for the US to show whether it was ready to pursue
his proposal to involve the EU in its talks with Tokyo on reducing the
Japanese trade surplus.
He said in an interview that he would decide in the next few weeks whether
the trilateral proposal had any future. That would depend partly on whether
the Clinton administration met EU requests to clarify the fundamental
objectives of its trade policy towards Japan.
He also said that Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, had assured him
this week for the first time that Washington accepted that the Uruguay Round
world trade deal would substantially reduce US scope to impose unilateral
sanctions on other countries under its Super-301 trade provisions.
Sir Leon called the assurance 'of very great significance'. However, he said
that US insistence that it could still legally use Super-301 in some
circumstances was 'objectionable and unfortunate'.
He was speaking ahead of a meeting between himself and Mr Tsutomu Hata,
Japan's foreign minister. At that meeting Mr Hata apparently expressed
reservations about the trilateral approach but assured Sir Leon that any
agreement with the US would be extended equally to the EU. Mr Hata was later
due to meet Mr Kantor and US Vice-President Al Gore.
Sir Leon, who first suggested a trilateral initiative to tackle Japan's
trade surplus earlier this year, said he wanted to resolve the matter
quickly because his personal credibility was at stake. 'I do not see that
there is any useful purpose served by keeping it up in the air,' he said.
He expressed impatience at the US failure to explain clearly what it wanted
from Japan. Mr Kantor had promised to give Brussels - but had not delivered
 -US papers prepared for the abortive meeting in February between President
Bill Clinton and Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, then Japan's prime minister. The EU
planned another effort to discover US intentions soon.
If the trilateral proposal proved unworkable, the EU would feel free to
criticise the US publicly on issues such as attempts to set targets for a
cut in Japan's bilateral surplus in specific sectors. Sir Leon said such
targets were 'very dangerous' and threatened EU interests.
Sir Leon also cast doubt on the prospects for an EU agreeing with the US to
free trade in telecommunications equipment. The two sides plan further talks
after failing to conclude a deal as part of a package of bilateral measures
to liberalise public procurement agreed on Wednesday.
He said he was 'not really focusing' on telecommunications markets, which
were mainly of interest to the US. 'I regarded the whole telecommunications
issue as an obstacle rather than an opportunity (in the public procurement
talks),' he said.
However, he said the procurement deal - which he had not previously thought
possible - showed that the two sides could settle bilateral disputes.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940415

