FT944-10883

FT  09 NOV 94 / Moscow claims Caspian energy deals veto


   By JOHN LLOYD


Moscow yesterday staked a public claim to participation in, or veto rights
over, all energy projects in all of the former Soviet republics apart from
the three Baltic States.
Mr Yuri Shafranik, the Russian energy minister, said Russia was 'obliged' to
take part in all energy projects undertaken by the members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States. His statement comes as the parliament of
Azerbaijan is preparing to ratify a treaty with a group of foreign oil
companies to exploit reserves in the Caspian Sea worth an estimated Dollars
7bn-Dollars 8bn.
His remarks appeared to support the argument made by the Russian foreign
ministry, among others, that the contract could not be approved in its
present form by Russia because of its effect on the ecology of the Caspian.
However, Mr Shafranik widened the objection by saying that there were three
reasons why the countries bordering the sea - the four former Soviet
republics of Russia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan, and Iran -
could not independently decide on the exploitation of their part of the
shelf.
In the first place, the sea's boundaries and navigation rights had not been
defined. Second, it constituted one ecosystem and required one international
organisation to take decisions on its exploitation. Third, all projects
developed by the former Soviet states relied upon an infrastructure and
experience built up, mainly by Russia, during the Soviet period.
Mr Shafranik said: 'The example of the Karachaganak field (the huge gas
deposit in Kazakhstan where the Russian Gasprom monopoly is insisting on a
15 per cent share in a deal being negotiated by British Gas and Agip) shows
that we come back to this point: we have to work jointly on this kind of
project . . . it's all connected to issues of pipelines and the use of
energy.'
The Russian oil company, Lukoil, has taken a 10 per cent share in the Azeri
project - though that has not prevented the Russian foreign ministry from
voicing loud objections to its continuation.
Russia can put strong pressure on Azerbaijan - through its control of
pipelines, its influence over Azerbaijan's foe, Armenia, and access to its
markets. But the foreign consortium, which is now investigating a range of
options for a pipeline to carry the oil out of the area, believes Russia
will come round to accepting the deal because of the benefits which will
flow to Lukoil.
Mr Shafranik said the domestic price of Russian oil, which has hovered
between Rbs72,000 and Rbs76,000 a tonne (about Dollars 26 on present
exchange rates) was 28 per cent of the world price - down from 40 per cent
last year. He said it would probably rise to Rbs80,000 in December.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941109

