FT943-12894

FT  22 JUL 94 / Management: A philosophical approach - A post-graduate
course with a difference


   By PETER ASPDEN


It is the glossy prospectus which first suggests that there is something
different going on here. Atmospheric photographs of droplets of water
disturbing a calm surface, shafts of sunlight defining a clearing in a cave,
hazy landscapes, verdant springs; it could be a campaign leaflet from the
Green party or the programme for a performance of Beethoven's Pastoral
Symphony, but surely not the outline for a new post-graduate management
course.
Yet Lancaster University's Master of Philosophy in Critical Management,
launched in April, has a few more surprises up its anything-but-pinstriped
sleeve. The 14 students on the present programme were greeted with a
two-week introductory course on epistemology and the problems of philosophy,
about as far as you can get from the vocational emphasis of most management
degrees.
Slowly, throughout the three-year, part-time course, they will be introduced
to a variety of ethical, cultural and even religious discussions which more
frequently lurk in the corners of university philosophy departments, often
destined to fade into abstraction and irrelevance.
For Jonathan Gosling, co-director of the programme, these issues are too
important to be left to such a fate. 'We were prompted by the conclusion
that at the very heart of management lie all kinds of philosophical and
ethical questions. And we are catering for a demand that is already there -
out of every MBA class of 25, for example, there are always two or three who
want to question what rationality is, and how reasonable it is to assume so
much about it.
It is the 'critical' in the programme's title that best defines its aims.
Julia Davies, the other co-director, says the course aims to go beyond the
'flavour of the month' feeling about much management education.
'A lot of management rhetoric uses an almost religious language to dress up
what is in effect materialistic. The 'market' often takes the place of God,
and by calling people 'customers', they not only feel 'empowered', but they
are made to think they are doing some kind of good. We aim to be critical of
such rhetoric, and determine to what extent it rests on illusions.'
Gosling denies suggestions that the course constitutes an ideological
critique of management - 'we are not out to destroy anything, we believe
good management is critically important to society' - but there is a
hostility in the department to the 'gurufication' which has continued to
dominate the subject's literature.
Robert Chia, a lecturer in the Management School, says fashionable concepts
such as Total Quality Management or zero-based budgeting emerged from
radical approaches to problem-solving. 'But people get hooked on the system
instead of the style of thinking behind it.' He thinks nothing of peppering
his lectures with philosophers such as Jacques Derrida or Roland Barthes,
balanced with anecdotal examples from the business world. 'It strikes a
chord - we manage to cut through the crap of academic pretentiousness. What
I try to show is that abstract ideas are actually not all that abstract.'
Gosling, in the meantime, is confident of the future of courses such as the
Lancaster M Phil. 'It attracts the kind of person who may already have an
MBA, but finds nothing to relate to in something like pure philosophy.'
Current students include the head of organisational development of the
German health insurance company, AOK; a brand manager for Philip Morris in
Japan; and the human resources director of Romania's economic development
agency.
Gosling also feels he and his colleagues have caught something of the
zeitgeist. 'There is less security and more vulnerability around now, which
the traditional MBA, with its assumption of ever-onward, ever-upward, does
little to cater for. We can provide a notion of mortality.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940722

