FT942-14527

FT  20 APR 94 / Recruitment: Two-way communication helps employee relations
 -Better news ahead for personnel managers and redundant executives


   By RICHARD DONKIN


Two weeks ago we ran a jobs column which questioned the validity of human
resource management, suggesting that the latest personnel techniques did
nothing to improve employee-management relations.
Perhaps the most controversial finding was that workplaces with personnel
specialists had worse employee-management relations than those without. Sue
Fernie and David Metcalf of the centre for economic performance, London
School of Economics, concluded that personnel specialists and directors on
the board did not improve employee-management relations and probably
detracted from it.
The findings caused some incredulity among HRM specialists and some doubt
about the interpretation of the research. Job evaluation, merit pay, profit
sharing and employee share ownership schemes were all surprisingly given the
thumbs down for their promotion of employee-management relations.
Metcalf admits that the way the findings were presented may have been
somewhat unfair to human resource people in that they concentrated on
industrial relations, but he defends the results that were produced using a
relatively new statistical technique called ordered probit.
A closer look at the figures shows that some of the newest HRM
communications methods aimed at better employee relations were indeed
welcomed by employees. Problem solving groups, meetings and suggestions
schemes were valued far more highly than, say, briefing groups and the use
of delegating chains.
Metcalf notes that those companies which place HRM at the core of their
business appear to achieve more effective results than those adopting it as
an add-on tool.
What prompted the report, he said, was an irritation with what he called the
self-serving way in which human resource management was presented in many
journals and newspapers. He and Fernie are now carrying out research into
the economic benefits of human resource mangement. Watch this space.
You are an executive and last year you lost your job. The chances are you
are a man, aged 44, had 10 years service with your last employer and earned
Pounds 43,300 a year before you got the boot.
This, according to Drake Beam Morin, the outplacement consultancy, is the
profile of the typical redundant European executive in 1993.
What is more, if you were a client of DBM, there was a good chance you
worked in marketing or sales for a company in computers and electronics,
food and beverage or chemicals and oil. Nearly half of the company's clients
came from shrinking operations in these sectors across Europe. Banking and
pharmaceuticals were also widely affected. General management and
engineering jobs were among those badly hit.
Just to add to your woes, if you recognise yourself and live in Portugal,
the UK, France, Germany or Norway, you might like to know that you probably
received less on leaving than you would have got the previous year.
Payments declined from 1992 to 1993 in six of the countries surveyed
(France, Germany, Portugal, Norway, US and UK). The highest payer with six
weeks for every year of service is Portugal, followed by Spain (5.6 weeks),
Sweden (4.9) and Belgium (4.8). The UK, with 3.3 weeks, just creeps into the
bottom half of the table under the Netherlands (4.2). The countries paying
the least to departing executives are Switzerland (2.4), Germany (2), France
(1.9) and the US (1.8).
Both the DBM survey and another by Coutts career consultants suggests that a
declining number of executives who lose their jobs are returning to full
employment and that more are moving into self employment.
What does all this mean for outplacement consultants? Predictably both DBM
and Coutts found that networking - the art of making personal contacts,
promoted by outplacement specialists - proved the best way of finding a new
job.
British Coal Enterprises, formed to help redundant miners find new jobs, has
spread its expertise, offering a full outplacement service that operates
under the title Grosvenor Career Services in competition with private
outplacement companies. Grosvenor has had contracts with a number of energy
sector companies.
The large private outplacement companies are complaining that the
competition is unfair because BCE receives a European Community grant. The
Association of Outplacement Consulting Firms International, a body that
represents the biggest outplacement firms, says it intends to complain to
someone in government, probably Michael Heseltine, the Trade and Industry
Secretary.
Grosvenor says that it sees none of the EU money itself and has to operate
as a profit-making organisation. Indeed it argues that the success of its
service lessens the burden on taxpayers to support BCE.
Philip Andrew, the chief executive of BCE, said that he expected the
outplacement service to be fully privatised within a year although he did
not yet have a schedule.
Finally, the graphs on the right supplied by the MSL recruitment consultancy
show that there is some heartening news for redundant executives. Advertised
demand for executive posts is picking up.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940420

