FT944-14455

FT  22 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: Bank allays Crest fears - No
pressure on private clients under new system


   By NORMA COHEN


For private clients becoming anxious before the introduction of the new
Crest system for paperless share settlement, the Bank of England has
reassuring words. It stresses that taking part in Crest is voluntary and
there is nothing to force them to settle their bargains more quickly.
Moreover, investors who want to retain their share certificates will be able
to do so. Even those whose shares are held electronically within Crest will
be able to remove all or part of their holdings from the system in paper
form.
Best of all, active private investors who wish to avail themselves of the
benefits of quick, cheap electronic settlement may join Crest for a fee of
Pounds 25 to Pounds 50 a year.
The extent to which private investors find life different under Crest -
which is due to start operating in the second half of 1996 - will reflect
the extent to which their brokers are prepared to accommodate individual
preferences at a suitable price.
But there are indications already that fierce competition between brokers
means that private clients who shop around are likely to find one willing to
meet their wishes.
Stockbroker Brewin Dolphin, for instance, has offered its nominee service to
clients free of charge since the advent of 10-day rolling settlement in
July, and will continue doing so. This means that those who are prepared to
accept a nominee for their shares, to speed the administration of
transactions, can do so at no extra charge.
Yet, even if a nominee service costs nothing, private investors may be
reluctant to use it because they will not be able to communicate directly
with the companies in which they invest.
'There are two issues about the use of nominees,' says a Crest spokesman.
'First, whether Crest might be able to help brokers communicate details of
beneficial owners to companies; and, two, who should pay for the additional
cost of that communication?'
The Bank of England, which is overseeing the design phase of Crest, points
out that there is no specific requirement for investors to become members of
nominees, and those wishing to retain paper will simply continue to conduct
their transactions with their broker as they have always done.
Active traders, however, may choose to become 'sponsored' members of Crest.
'Being a full member of Crest is a bit unrealistic for most private
clients,' the spokesman says. 'But we think sponsored membership is a viable
option for lots of private clients.'
Sponsorship will allow you to hold shares electronically within Crest in
your own name, and you will continue to appear on each company's share
register. But you will have to designate a full Crest member to act on your
instructions to buy or sell securities.
This choice also will require you to establish a relationship with a bank
through which you can make and receive Crest-related payments.
Private clients should know that the demand for a credit line could well
rise significantly under rolling settlement. Buying and selling two lots of
securities of equal value on the same day might not erase the need for
credit, since you could easily develop an 'intra-day' credit exposure. This
could happen if your order to buy shares settles in the morning, but your
sell order takes until late afternoon.
It is expected that brokers acting as sponsors will help each client arrange
a credit line and it will be possible, under Crest's legal structure, to
allow a lender a legal charge over securities held in Crest in the
investor's name. This should reduce the need for an outright extension of
credit.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941022

