FT943-743

FT  28 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Malaysia launches 'people's car' - The
'Mousedeer' will provide a small alternative to the Proton


   By KIERAN COOKE


Malaysia has launched its second national car a decade after it began
manufacturing the Proton. Now the small 660cc Kancil, manufactured 30km
north of Kuala Lumpur, is appearing in the country's showrooms.
The debut of the Kancil - named after the country's 'Mousedeer', a pygmy
deer which lives in the Malaysian jungle - is being hailed by Malaysia's
leaders as an important step in the country's ambitious plans to be fully
industrialised by the year 2020. They are confident that the Kancil will
follow Proton's example and capture a substantial slice of the domestic
market. Exports of the new car are already being discussed.
But the Kancil's success is by no means assured. Analysts forecast a rough
ride before the second car project becomes profitable. The Kancil is
manufactured by Perusahaan Otomobil Kedua, or Perodua, a consortium of local
companies with strong government interests, together with Daihatsu and
Mitsui of Japan. The four-seat sub-compact Kancil is modelled on the
Daihatsu Mira and the Japanese company has a 25 per cent stake in the
project.
Described as the 'people's car', the Kancil is aimed at the lower end of the
market and at those more affluent Malaysians who feel the need for a second
car. At present the cheapest car in Malaysia is the 1300cc Proton Saga,
which sells for around MDollars 32,000 (Dollars 12,500). The basic Kancil
model will sell for about MDollars 24,000, while a deluxe version will be
MDollars 26,000.
Mr Mohar Badiozaman, Perodua's chairman, says that response to the Kancil
has been very encouraging and the company plans to increase monthly
production from 2,000 to 3,000 units to meet demand. 'We are very optimistic
 -the car has only just been launched and already we have bookings for
12,000 units.' says Mr Mohar.
Annual production is expected to reach 45,000 within two years, though
Perodua has capacity to produce 60,000 units. The Kancil, like the Proton,
will benefit from high duties placed on rival, imported cars. A Proton costs
between MDollars 15,000 and MDollars 20,000 less than an equivalent imported
make. Proton has now captured more than 70 per cent of the domestic market.
But the Kancil faces several problems. At least 50 per cent of the content
of the car will initially be sourced from Daihatsu. Since the Kancil project
was given the official go-ahead early last year the yen has increased more
than 30 per cent against the Malaysian currency. Perodua says it compensated
for cost increases by cutting back on capital expenditure. It says the
manufacturing start-up costs have been reduced from MDollars 500m to
MDollars 330m.
The Proton is produced in partnership with Mitsubishi of Japan. Proton says
that after nearly 10 years' production, local content is more than 70 per
cent. But the higher cost items, such as transmission systems, are still
imported from Japan. Proton has not disguised its frustration at what it
perceives as Japanese delays in transferring technology and is looking at
alternative suppliers in France and the US.
Daihatsu has pledged to transfer technology as fast as possible. Perodua
says that the level of local content in the Kancil will rise to 75 per cent
within three years.
Perodua, like all producers of mass market cars, needs to achieve economies
of scale if it is to achieve profitability. This is a tough proposition.
Malaysia has a population of only 19m. While the market for a small car
might be buoyant in the short term, Perodua will have to export to stay
alive.
The Kancil will be hoping to follow the example set by Proton. Mr Nadzmi
Mohamed Salleh, the head of Proton, says that exports have been crucial to
maintaining profitability. 'The domestic market for our existing models is
at near saturation point. To achieve economies of scale we have had to
increase production - that means we have no alternative but to increase
exports.'
Last year Proton produced a record 116,611 cars. Of those more than 17,000
were exported, the bulk of them to Britain where it has been among the
fastest selling cars at the lower end of the market. But sales in Britain
appear to have peaked.
Industry analysts say Proton sales were affected by the recent Malaysian ban
on giving government contracts to British companies. Proton advertising in
Britain now emphasises Japanese technology rather than the Malaysian origin
of the car. Proton has benefited from its exemption from import duties under
the EC's generalised scheme of preferences and sells in Britain for less
than it does in Malaysia.
Proton is now seeking to diversify into other export markets. It is selling
2,000 cars to Indonesia next year under a complicated barter arrangement. It
is also introducing left-hand drive models for export to Latin America and
to the European continent.
But Proton's partner, Mitsubishi, is unhappy that the Malaysian car is
intruding into its own export markets. Daihatsu is likely to raise similar
objections if the Kancil starts eating into its export sales.
Though Malaysia's leaders view the formation of a national car industry as
one of the country's great achievements, it has been a costly exercise with
hundreds of millions of dollars of public funds poured into Proton. Despite
a 35 per cent increase in turnover last year Proton's pre-tax profits
dropped 9.3 per cent to MDollars 282m.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, was the driving force behind
the establishment of Proton. He has also played a leading role in bringing
the Kancil to life. Critics accuse Dr Mahathir of being overly keen on
prestige projects: a third national car project, in which Proton will be
teamed up with Peugeot-Citroen, is already in the pipeline. 'The Kancil will
sell well in the short term,' says a Kuala Lumpur based industry analyst.
'But I doubt that it will match the success of the Proton.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940928

