FT944-6064

FT  01 DEC 94 / Bank of Canada resists pull of higher US interest rates: The
Canadian dollar has fallen steadily


   By BERNARD SIMON


The Bank of Canada is fighting a quiet but intense battle to prove that
Ottawa is not a hostage to US economic policy.
Since the US Federal Reserve raised its Fed funds rate from 4.75 per cent to
5.5 per cent in mid-November, Canada's central bank has resisted a similar
tightening of monetary policy.
It has raised the key band for its overnight call rate by only one-quarter
of a percentage point to 5-5.5 per cent. This relatively modest rise has
helped Canadian banks maintain their prime lending rate for the time being
at 7 per cent, where it has been for the past 10 weeks.
The gap between US and Canadian interest rates, which is closely watched by
financial markets, has narrowed markedly. Yields on three-month Treasury
bills are currently only 0.12 percentage points higher in Canada, the
smallest spread in a decade, and down from more than 2 percentage points
last June.
The burden so far has fallen on the Canadian dollar, which has steadily
slipped from almost 74 US cents at the beginning of November to around 72.55
cents yesterday.
Although selling pressures have been relatively light, the Bank of Canada
has intervened in the past two weeks to slow the decline in the currency.
The central bank hopes to convince markets that economic trends in Canada
justify an accommodative monetary policy. 'The fundamentals in Canada are
significantly better than the US,' says Mr David Adamo, who heads the
fixed-income research department at ScotiaMcLeod, a Toronto securities firm.
Growth is strong north of the border. Statistics Canada said yesterday that
gross domestic product expanded at an annualised 6.7 per cent in the second
quarter and 4.7 per cent in the third. But inflation is non-existent.
Canada's consumer price index fell by 0.2 per cent in the year to October.
The central bank's policy is almost certainly supported by Mr Paul Martin,
finance minister. By raising debt-service payments, higher short-term
interest rates would complicate Mr Martin's efforts to bring down the budget
deficit to his target of 3 per cent of gross domestic product by early 1997.
Economists are divided on whether the bank will succeed in holding down
rates, and whether the dollar will continue to slide.
Mr Andrew Spence, economist at Citibank Canada, predicted that a rally in
commodity prices could help push the Canadian currency higher next year. But
Mr Daniel Kelly, vice-president for financial markets research at CIBC Wood
Gundy, said that nervousness could increase ahead of next February's budget.
Speculation has grown in recent days that commercial banks will soon lift
prime lending rates.
Foreign investors have signalled their concern by substantially lightening
their Canadian portfolios in recent months. Foreigners sold CDollars 9bn
(USDollars 6.5bn) of Canadian bonds in the first nine months of this year,
compared with a CDollars 7bn inflow in the same period of 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941201

