FT944-14477

FT  22 OCT 94 / Row brews after pioneer of Euro satellite TV is sacked


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


A row is expected over the future of the Astra satellite television system
after the abrupt dismissal yesterday of Dr Pierre Meyrat, one of the
pioneers of European satellite broadcasting.
The 48-channel system is used by important broadcasters including British
Sky Television.
Societe Europeenne des Satellites, the Luxembourg-based company that
operates it, announced that Mr Meyrat, SES director-general for the past
nine years, 'has been released from his duties'. It said that 'differing
views on the management of SES have led to the arrangement with Dr Meyrat'.
The news could prove a boost for Eutelsat, the rival satellite television
group owned by the main telecommunications operators of Europe. An attempt
in July to oust Dr Meyrat because, it was said, he did not consult widely
enough among the 24-member board was greeted with outrage by large SES
users. They argued stability was vital as the main satellite broadcasters
began to plan moves into digital satellite television, a development that
would cost hundreds of millions of pounds. Eutelsat has ambitious digital
television plans.
Mr Frank Barlow, managing director of Pearson, owners of the Financial
Times, and chairman of BSkyB, wrote to Mr Pierre Werner, chairman of SES
warning of 'a serious loss of confidence if Dr Meyrat goes'.
Mr Werner was urged to ensure Dr Meyrat remained director-general for 12 to
24 months and to use the time to find a successor that all parties could
have confidence in. A copy of the letter was sent to Luxembourg's prime
minister.
In reply to another letter of complaint, Mr Werner wrote at the end of July
that Dr Meyrat had the confidence of the board and would continue to chair
the management committee and be responsible for the management of the
company. As Dr Meyrat was approaching retirement age, however, steps needed
to be taken to identify a suitable successor in 'a measured time frame'.
Yesterday's statement said that although Dr Meyrat remained 'at the disposal
of the company' to help ensure 'a smooth transition', the management
committee would run SES on a daily basis.
Mr Celso Azevedo, SES technical director, has been appointed to be acting
chairman of the committee.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941022

