FT941-16971

FT  07 JAN 94 / French economy minister prefers to wait and see


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


The French government will decide by the end of the first quarter of the
year whether to implement measures to stimulate the economy, Mr Edmond
Alphandery, the economy minister, said yesterday.
Mr Alphandery, speaking at a business conference, said that it was necessary
to assess the current economic performance before deciding on expansionary
measures. But he added that the strong performance of exports was supporting
the economy and would help achieve the target of a 1.4 per cent rise in
gross domestic product this year.
The two principal uncertainties, according to Mr Alphandery, are the
prospects for consumer spending and the performance of the German economy,
France's principal trading partner. He noted, however, that it would take
only a small shift from savings to reach the government's target of a 0.7
per cent increase in consumer spending.
The economy minister said that an expected decline in interest rates should
also help economic recovery.
The government, which has surrendered control of monetary policy to the
newly independent bank of France, has based its economic projections for
this year on average three-month borrowing costs of 5.3 per cent, compared
with the current level of just over 6 per cent.
The economy minister said that the government's priorities this year
included a reduction of the public sector deficit and the fight against
unemployment. With respect to unemployment, he said that measures were
needed to increase the number of jobs in the service sector and to
facilitate youth employment.
Mr Alphandery's comments followed remarks from the socialist president, Mr
Francois Mitterrand, who called for stronger measures to curb the rise in
unemployment, currently more than 12 per cent of the workforce.
'We have to create jobs, millions of jobs. We have to turn the tide of
unemployment,' said Mr Mitterrand in a new year's address to unions and
employers. In a criticism of Mr Edouard Balladur's government, Mr Mitterrand
also questioned the transfer last year of FFr80bn to French industry which,
he said, had not affected unemployment.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940107

