FT942-14395

FT  20 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Lac withdraws from Chilean
copper mine bid


   By DAVID PILLING and KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


   SANTIAGO, LONDON


Codelco, the state-owned Chilean mining group, yesterday faced further
embarrassment over the sale El Abra, one of the world's biggest undeveloped
copper deposits, when Lac Minerals of Canada withdrew from the project.
Lac said it would transfer its interest in El Abra to its partner, Cyprus
Amax Minerals of the US, if the partners' bid for 51 per cent of El Abra was
successful.
Nevertheless, Mr Juan Villarzu, Codelco's new president, said his group
would continue to negotiate with Cyprus.
Cyprus-Lac last year offered Dollars 555m for the 51 per cent stake and
estimated it would require investment of Dollars 1bn for a mine to produce
225,000 tonnes of copper a year. But in February the partners delayed
signing the contract, saying test work showed ore grades at El Abra might be
significantly lower than originally estimated.
Mr Juan Villarzu said yesterday that Cyprus still had until May 15 to
continue testing, by which time the US group would have to make its position
clear. He did not rule out the possibility of Codelco accepting a lower bid.
'If they made an alternative offer, we would have to evaluate it at that
time. . . when the bid is on the table,' he said
Mr Villarzu backed away from earlier statements by Codelco, threatening to
sue Cyprus-Lac if they reneged on the original offer.
He stressed that 'no contracts have been signed by either side'.
However, Codelco will come under pressure from Magma Copper of the US and
Broken Hill Proprietary, Australia's biggest company, if the deal with
Cyprus is not concluded. Mr Burgess Winter, Magma's president, said recently
that, under the rules of the tender, failure to conclude a deal with the
highest bidder was to have resulted automatically in the start of
negotiations with the underbidder.
Magma-BHP bid Dollars 240m for the El Abra stake, Dollars 10m ahead of RTZ
of the UK. He said the gap between the two highest bids reflected the fact
that Magma-BHP's test work suggested that El Abra could support annual
output of 160,000 tonnes, against the 225,000 tonnes looked for by the
highest bidders.
Yesterday's withdrawal by Lac suggests the Canadian company has come to a
similar conclusion about El Abra's production potential. As a gold company
attempting to jump into base metals mining, it may well feel that El Abra no
longer looks big enough. Cyprus, meanwhile, already has copper, coal and
gold as core operations.
Mr Villarzu said that Codelco had not yet decided whether to begin
negotiations automatically with Magma-BHP or to start a new round of bidding
if the Cyprus offer proved unacceptable.
Controversy has dogged the El Abra sale, the first disposal of a big ore
body by the group and supposed to set a pattern for other privatisations. Mr
Villarzu admitted that there were shortcomings to Codelco's auction process,
in which consortia were publicly ranked, and negotiations started with the
top-placed bidder. 'The experience we have had. . . suggests that, if we had
to do it again, we would revise the procedure in some respects,' Mr Villarzu
said.
Lac said the financial cost of its withdrawal was 'not material'. It
suggested Cyprus would complete further technical studies by May 15, in time
for further negotiations with Codelco.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940420

