FT941-16981

FT  06 JAN 94 / International Company News: PacTel and Belgacom launch
Belgian mobile phone network


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


Belgacom, Belgium's state-owned telephone company, and Pacific Telesis
International of the US, yesterday launched a mobile phone network for
Belgium and promised even closer co-operation.
The network, which started operating on January 1, is the fruit of a
five-month alliance, the first between a public European telephone operator
and a private cellular phone company. The launch strengthens another link in
the growing network of strategic alliances between telecoms groups in Europe
and the US.
PacTel, part of Pacific Telesis - one of the seven regional US telecoms
companies - said yesterday it would go on to build a formal joint venture
with Belgacom. PacTel will own 25 per cent of the subsidiary, and expects to
conclude a deal by the middle of this year.
Mr Jan Neels, PacTel International's president and chief executive, said the
subsidiary would be responsible for the digital 'GSM' mobile phone system
launched yesterday, and Belgium's existing analogue cellular network, which
could be phased out as clients switch to the Europe-wide GSM network.
'If there is an opportunity, which is a good fit for Belgacom and ourselves,
we could work together in other areas . . . in Belgium or outside Belgium,'
added Mr Neels, a Belgian citizen. He said the development of paging
services might be one such opportunity.
Mr Bessel Kok, Belgacom's chief executive, said the GSM system - Proximus -
had signed up more than 2,500 subscribers since January 1.
The European Commission is still examining Belgian legislation which
prevents a competitor entering the mobile phone market, which it believes
could be incompatible with European competition rules.
Mr Kok said the establishment of an efficient mobile phone subsidiary meant
Belgacom had met all three targets it set itself for 1993.
The group had also reduced the time taken to connect new customers, and
launched a new image, more in line with its growing autonomy from direct
government control.
The Belgian government has repeatedly indicated it wants to privatise part
of Belgacom, possibly as early as this year. But senior Belgacom executives
believe this may be too soon, given that restructuring is still under way,
and the group must prepare for full liberalisation of the European telecoms
market by 1998.
PacTel is itself being spun off from its parent company, which also owns the
California company Pacific Bell.

The Financial Times


International Page 14

940106

