FT943-12642

FT  23 JUL 94 / Markets: A welcome from investors - The Bottom Line


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


John Robb, Wellcome's suave Scottish chairman and chief executive, claims he
is not overly concerned about his company's share price which has more than
halved since 1992.
'I've given up complaining about it,' he insisted unconvincingly on Thursday
as he explained the group's latest results. He then spent five minutes
lamenting that the company was undervalued.
Still, Robb should be pleased with the reaction to this week's results. In
March last year, when he announced a 33 per cent rise in pre-tax profits, he
watched his share price plummet 97p in two days. Since this week's
announcement of a 12 per cent rise in pre-tax profits to Pounds 182m for the
four months to June 30, the shares actually climbed - up 19p to 634p.
The reasons for the shares' rise were not hard to fathom. Wellcome's
underlying sales growth was impressive given a difficult environment.
Sales of Zovirax, Wellcome's anti-herpes drug and the world's fourth
best-selling medicine, rose 17 per cent. Growth in the US was 27 per cent.
And European sales were up 9 per cent, in spite of price cuts in Italy and
France.
The question is whether Robb can sustain above-average growth. Even in the
short-term, 27 per cent Zovirax growth in the US is clearly unsustainable.
Robb said his objective was continued double-digit growth. The main threats
to that goal are all directed at Zovirax, by far and away his biggest
product.
The first threat is from SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American healthcare
group, which is in the process of rolling out Famvir, the first direct
competitor to Zovirax. The company has already launched it in the UK and is
about to challenge Zovirax in the US.
'Famvir doesn't keep me awake at 3 o'clock in the morning,' said Robb. Dr
David Barry, Wellcome's newly-appointed director of research, development
and medical, pointed to the details on Famvir's US package insert,
describing the effectiveness and risks associated with the drug.
Rather than Famvir, the biggest threat to Zovirax is its patent position.
Its patents in Germany have already expired, and those in the US and UK end
in 1997.
Robb admits he cannot duck this. But he has a defence strategy in place. The
first element is a joint-venture with Warner-Lambert, one of the most
powerful US non-prescription medicines groups, to market the product over
the counter. This should significantly extend Zovirax's product life,
generating additional revenues, admittedly at a lower margin than in the
prescription market.
In addition, this month, Wellcome filed the regulatory dossiers in 19
countries for Valtrex, a successor to Zovirax, which Robb claims is more
effective and just as safe.
Nevertheless, some analysts wonder whether the difference will be sufficient
for cost-conscious health organisations to pay significantly more for
Valtrex than an off-patent version of Zovirax.
If Robb wants an example of what can happen when a significant product's
patents expire, he need only look at the other main set of results in
pharmaceuticals this week.
SmithKline Beecham has been over-shadowed by a significant patent expiry for
years and in May, the US patents for Tagamet, SmithKline Beecham's biggest
drug last year, ceased to be protected from low-price generic competition.
As he announced his second quarter results on Tuesday, Jan Leschly, chief
executive, insisted the 9 per cent decline in Tagamet sales did not
represent the full impact of the expiry which had occurred only half way
through the period. It was far worse, he said.
The reason for such candour is that the pain from Leschly's patent expiry is
almost over. Instead, Leschly wants investors to concentrate on his newer
products - up 81 per cent year on year - and his Dollars 2.3bn acquisition
of Diversified Pharmaceutical Services.
As Robb fights to protect his herpes franchise, Leschly can look on with
some smugness. He has been through the experience awaiting his counterpart
at Wellcome.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940723

