FT943-13315

FT  20 JUL 94 / Russian criminals using City to launder millions


   By JIMMY BURNS and JOHN LLOYD


   LONDON, MOSCOW


Russian criminals are laundering millions of pounds of crime profits on UK
money markets but are escaping prosecution, a UK police intelligence chief
warned yesterday.
Mr Albert Pacey, director general of the UK's National Criminal Intelligence
Service, said banks and building societies had reported 200 cases last year
of 'suspicious' transactions involving Russian businesses or individuals.
Amounts varied from several hundred thousand to several million pounds. The
money reaching the UK is part of the Dollars 20bn in capital Russian
officials believe is leaving the country each year.
The lack of information and regulation in Russia was undermining the
agency's attempts to pursue suspects, said Mr Pacey, presenting the NCIS
annual report yesterday.
'Until banking and money laundering regulations are put in place in Russia,
it will be difficult to successfully prosecute cases across borders,' said
Mr Pacey, who was in Moscow last week for discussions about possible
co-operation on crime intelligence gathering.
The NCIS had identified cases of Russian banks handling illegal profits, and
using shell companies in the UK as vehicles for money transfers, he said.
'Russian criminals regard the UK as a good place to launder their money
because the City of London is one of the major banking capitals of the
world.' There was growing concern that money laundering could lead to
violent crime, as it has in Russia.
Mr Michael Hyland, a member of the UK's joint steering group on money
laundering, which is chaired by the Bank of England, said last night:
'Russian money laundering is a potential problem. It does the reputation of
City of London institutions no good if they find themselves involved in
sophisticated international scams.' He added: 'Tackling the problem is a
challenge not only to banks but also to lawyers and accountants who may be
handling property deals and other transactions on behalf of Russians.'
In Moscow, Mr Mikhail Suduk, acting head of the department on organised
crime in the interior ministry, said yesterday that while he welcomed a
decree passed earlier this month by President Boris Yeltsin to fight
organised crime, parliament should flesh it out with further laws.
He also called for legislation which would allow the police to open the
books of any company suspected of money laundering or other criminal
activities.
The main abuses, according to Mr Suduk, involved the transfer of funds
between Russian banks - with extensive forging of central bank orders to
transfer money to enterprise accounts.
He urged Russia to sign a Council of Europe convention on international
co-operation on the seizure of illegal funds.
CIS balks at Russia's
peace-keeping bill
Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940720

