FT941-5541

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Shop around for the best car
insurance - Bethan Hutton finds a few telephone calls can result in serious
savings


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Shopping around for motor insurance really pays. You might find a quote for
half your present premium if you just took time to make a few telephone
calls.
Research by Telesure, one of the new telephone-based insurance brokers,
found differences in premiums of more than 100 per cent in some cases, and
30 or 40 per cent in many. That can easily mean a saving of Pounds 100 or
more. 'I think that rating, overall, is very random,' says Simon Ward,
Telesure's chief executive.
Insurers set their rates in line with their own claims' experience. So, if
your insurer has had a lot of these from drivers with your model of car, or
living in your area, your premiums could rise. Another insurer with far
fewer claims would offer you a much better rate.
But if your renewal is due next month, and you start to shop around now, you
cannot rely on getting the same rate in a few weeks. Premiums can change
significantly from month to month, let alone year to year or between
companies.
There are many loyal (or lazy) customers who renew every year with the same
company assuming that, if their premiums are rising, other companies will be
raising rates in the same way.
Unfortunately that is not necessarily the case: your insurer will have no
compunction about bumping up rates for existing customers, while a rival
might be keen to attract new business and would make you a much better
offer. Most insurers will accept transferred no-claims bonuses, so you do
not have to feel tied.
The motor insurance market is just emerging from a period of steep price
rises - more than 20 per cent a year - to compensate for horrendous claim
rates due to crime and the recession. The industry is also changing shape as
the arrival of Direct Line, the cost-cutting, telephone-based direct
insurer, and its imitators force the old giants of the insurance world to
re-think their strategies.
Some sections of the motor insurance industry are now murmuring about a
price war. That could be exaggerated, but companies moving into the direct
insurance market need to grab a big-enough share of the market to justify
the huge investment in computer systems, staff training and so on.
The easiest way to build up market share is to offer low premiums, even if
that means making a loss for the first few years. And if direct writers are
lowering premiums, the rest of the industry will fight back.
So, consumers could benefit, at least in the short term. Indeed, things are
looking better for car owners than they have for some time.
If insurers want to avoid a price war, they may start trying to compete on
other factors, such as service - promising to offer smoother claims
procedures, for example. This appears to be the direction being taken by the
latest entrant to the direct market, Guardian Direct.
It is, however, far less easy for consumers to shop around for good service
than for low prices. The proof of good service really comes when you claim -
which, with any luck, will be long after you have made your choice.
There can be some confusion between direct insurers and telephone brokers,
especially as both tend to advertise widely with cheap insurance offers.
Direct insurers are those which sell only their own policies, and only
directly to the consumer over the telephone. They cut out third parties,
which reduces administrative costs, and should allow them to charge less.
Telephone brokers have access to quotes from many different insurers, and
use a computer to find the lowest for you. Some of them deal with a select
panel of a dozen insurers, while others quote for more than 100.
It might appear that telephoning a broker is always a better move than
calling a direct insurer - why get one quote when you can get a dozen or
more? But there is a catch.
The direct insurers - which can offer highly competitive rates for average
motorists - do not allow their policies to be sold through brokers. Some
insurers will not sell direct, while others offer different policies and
rates depending on whether they are sold direct or through a favoured
broker. There is no single number you can call to get access to every policy
from every insurer.
So, shopping around is still a time-consuming process, even though you can
now do most of it sitting in an armchair by the telephone. You might have to
resign yourself to an hour or two on the line to half a dozen direct
insurers or telephone brokers (to make it easier, many of them use freephone
or local rate numbers and operate extended office hours). You could then
spend the next morning or lunch break, checking how conventional high-street
brokers measure up, before making up your mind.
In the end, the time factor could give telephone brokers the edge. Giving
such details as your car's make and model, your address, occupation and
accident record over the telephone can take several minutes.
Unless your patience - or eagerness to save money - is boundless, you will
soon tire of repeating the same information over and over again.
A broker gives access to dozens of insurers in the time it would take to get
a single quote from a direct insurer; and as direct insurers proliferate,
you will not want to call them all.
Most of the telephone brokers do not charge directly for the service - they
take a commission if you buy insurance through them. But a couple of new
telephone-based companies are charging consumers more directly.
Insurance Selection charges Pounds 15 to find you the lowest quote from its
panel of 100 insurers. If the quote is not at least Pounds 30 less than the
renewal from your present insurer, the Pounds 15 is refunded.
OneQuote takes your details on a premium-rate telephone line (36p or 48p a
minute) and finds the lowest quote on its system before putting you in touch
with a local broker who is agent for that insurer.
 ---------------------------------------------------
                  DIRECT INSURERS
 ---------------------------------------------------
Admiral                         0800 600800
Churchill                       0800 200300
Direct Line                    081 686 2468
GA 1-2-1                        0800 121000
Guardian Direct                 0206 222200
The Insurance Service           0272 242222
Preferred Direct                0800 850750
 ---------------------------------------------------
                 TELEPHONE BROKERS
 ---------------------------------------------------
AA Autoquote                    0800 444777
OneQuote*                       0891 515515
SelectDirect                    0345 335335
Telesure                       081 665 9988
Insurance Selection*           071 404 2800
 ---------------------------------------------------
* Charge made for quote.
 ---------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page III

940305

