FT942-15637

FT  14 APR 94 / Arts: Ghost from a Perfect Place - Theatre


   By DAVID MURRAY


In Philip Ridley's second Hampstead Theatre play, the 'ghost' is Travis
Flood, a revenant from lengthy American exile back to Bethnal Green, the
'perfect' scene of his younger gangsterhood. He manifests himself in the
dingy flat of crumbling old Torchie Sparks, as a pre-booked client for her
whoring granddaughter Rio, met by chance in a graveyard. Their sudden
acquaintance has much older roots than they realise. It takes most of the
play to dig them up, rather slowly, though things take a nasty turn well
before that.
The names represent a certain restraint on the playwright's part: in his
award-winning Fastest Clock in the Universe (1992), the dramatis personae
included Sherbet Gravel and her fiance Foxtrot Darling. There is room for
conjecture that Ridley begins a play by thinking up such monickers, and then
imagining characters who could fit them. That would explain a lot. His
director here is again Matthew Lloyd, who anchored the evasive, quirkily
formal dialogue of The Fastest Clock in a densely palpable situation, kinky
and explosive.
Ghost is a tougher nut, for its very structure is wilfully formal. The first
act comprises two extended duets: one for Torchie and Travis, including her
long recall of the old days when he was a respected East End brute, and his
own account of his plushy Hollywood retirement now; the other for Travis and
Rio (a Pirandello echo: remember the father-daughter confrontation in the
Six Characters brothel?). Each narration draws its hearer into helping to
re-enact it on the spot. Inevitably, there is a whiff of Actor's Exercises
in the air.
Act 2 goes directly over the top, with Rio joined by her teenage
'Cheerleaders' - Miss Sulphur and Miss Kerosene, sister-harpies in matching
gold get-ups - to subject her client to sado-masochistic torment
(choreographed by Ian Poitier). At least one woman in the audience fled
during the cigar-burn treatment. When the weightiest facts come out at last,
Travis drops another mask or two as the action curdles into a dying fall.
But the dramatic force of a return-to-bleak-reality presupposes an earlier
brave facade; here, since what went before was all actorish games, no room
has been made for any real, ground-level pain to surface.
Nonetheless, John Wood has a whale of a time as Travis. Initially six feet
of baleful loom, in a rectangular don't-mess-with-me suit and improbably
black hair and beetle-brows, he soon melts into a kind of blinking
benevolence in his old stamping-ground. Enthralled by Torchie's memoirs, he
multiplies his tics, double-takes, horse-faced moues and sudden stentorian
roars to a ripe Michael Hordern level. Bridget Turner's Torchie keeps pace
with him; and as Rio, Trevyn McDowell's vicious Madonna-clone fulfills the
darker promise of her Middlemarch Rosamund for the BBC. I didn't believe a
word of any of it, but others might find its arch rhythms weirdly
compelling.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940414

