FT941-12871

FT  28 JAN 94 / Qatar discusses Dollars 1bn Israeli gas deal


   By JULIAN OZANNE


Qatar has confirmed it is negotiating a natural gas deal with Israel worth
more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 671m) and that is also considering moves to
ease the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jahr al-Thani, Qatari foreign minister, said in
Washington that the Gulf state had started preliminary discussions with
Israel. Further development, he added, would depend on a feasibility study
and progress in Middle East peace talks, particularly negotiations between
Israel and Syria.
The minister said also that Qatar was considering taking action to lift the
Arab boycott of Israel and would discuss the issue with Mr Warren
Christopher, US secretary of state, who has been pressing Arab states to
ease sanctions.
Mr Hamad al-Thani's statement follows a secret meeting in London last Sunday
with Mr Shimon Peres and Mr Moshe Shahal, respectively Israel's foreign and
energy ministers. Mr Peres yesterday confirmed the meeting had taken place.
For months Qatar had categorically denied Israeli reports it was discussing
the gas project with the Jewish state.
The Israeli-Qatari gas project involves supply of natural gas to Israel and
the use of Israel as an export terminal for Qatari gas through the
Mediterranean Sea to Europe. Qatar has reportedly pledged to supply the
Israeli market with natural gas for a 25 years.
Israel needs 6.7m tonnes of oil equivalent a year to convert its electricity
generation from coal and oil to gas. It is also looking for cheaper energy
sources to supply its petrochemicals industry in the Negev Desert. The
Qatari project could also sell natural gas to the Palestinian
self-government region.
Israel says Qatar has agreed to pay Dollars 1m for a feasibility study. One
option is to build a gas pipeline from the Gulf state to the Israeli port of
Ashkelon, where Qatar would construct a gas liquefication plant. Another is
to ship gas to the Israeli Red Sea port of Eilat and pipe the gas from there
to Ashkelon. A third component of the project might be to build a pipeline
under the Mediterranean to transport Qatari gas via Israel to Europe.
Mr Shahal said Israel was talking to more than one Gulf state about
importing gas. It had made progress in its project to link its electricity
grid to Egypt's; an early project would be to connect Eilat with the
Egyptian Red Sea resort of Taba and the Jordanian port city of Aqaba.
Israeli officials believe the Qatari project is a step towards regional
co-operation and integration in the Middle East.
In the energy sector, Israel says other projects are being considered,
including a gas pipeline from Egypt, an Israeli-Jordanian solar energy
scheme, a possible oil export terminal, and exploiting the difference in the
levels of the Dead and Mediterranean Seas to produce electricity and
desalinate water.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940128

