FT944-5973

FT  01 DEC 94 / TSB chief in reform call to societies


   By ALISON SMITH


Measures to increase the accountability of building societies to their
members were proposed yesterday by Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman of the
TSB Group.
Sir Nicholas urged that this accountability be brought closer to that of
public limited companies' to their share-holders.
Giving evidence to the cross-party Commons Treasury committee, he put
forward proposals to require societies to give more financial information to
the millions of members who own them, and to reform voting arrangements.
He said that instead of the 'one member one vote' system currently operated,
voting powers should reflect the relative stakes of members in an
organisation.
If societies were concerned that this would be unfair to smaller investors,
just as there was a minimum investment which entitled a member to a vote, so
there could be a maximum which would put an upper limit on the weight of an
investor's vote.
His comments came towards the end of the committee's inquiry into financial
regulation. The MPs are due to meet today to decide whether to issue an
interim report before Christmas on the supervision of societies.
They are aware that if they leave their conclusions until a final report on
financial regulation generally - which could not be published until next
year - they would probably miss the opportunity to contribute to the
Treasury's review of societies' powers and accountability.
The committee has yet to take evidence from the Building Societies'
Commission, the sector's statutory regulator. This is likely to be arranged
soon.
The future of the commission has been called into question by some of the
committee's witnesses, and some MPs have expressed support for the idea of a
single supervisory regime, probably located within the Bank of England, to
cover both banks and building societies.
Sir Nicholas said yesterday that having a single regulator would reduce
confusion because the businesses carried out by the two types of
organisation were converging.
He said that while he had 'no rooted objection to the concept of mutuality',
he was not convinced that this was an appropriate form of ownership the more
complex an organisation became.
If societies were to be given more powers, he said, they should be obliged
to make clear to members the greater risks they were incurring as they
developed into new areas of business. They should also give members annual
and half-yearly reports, and report any serious merger approaches promptly.
He welcomed the guidance issued to societies after the Cadbury report on
corporate governance, but regretted this had not included the setting up of
nominations committees.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941201

