FT942-14616

FT  19 APR 94 / Merrill Lynch avoids trading slide


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


The upheaval in financial markets in recent weeks failed to dent the trading
profits of US financial institutions Merrill Lynch and Chase Manhattan.
Other US banks, though, have already reported sharp falls in trading income
in the period, mainly because of tumbling prices in the emerging securities
markets.
Merrill Lynch maintained its trading income at Dollars 667m in the first
three months of the year, a similar level to the fourth quarter of 1994,
though down 12 per cent from the record Dollars 761m reported in the first
three months of 1993.
Mr Joseph Willett, chief financial officer, said the result reflected the
fact that Merrill relied on orders from customers for much of its trading
income and hedged most of its positions.
The firm also benefited from its broad range of trading activities, with
higher profits in some areas offsetting declines in others.
Merrill suffered a 'modest loss' during the quarter in trading emerging
market debt, he said.
Chase Manhattan sold off much of its holdings of emerging market debt early
in the year, avoiding the worst of the blood bath in these markets after the
Federal Reserve started to raise interest rates on February 4.
Yesterday, the bank reported trading income of Dollars 179m, in line with
the Dollars 175m of a year before.
Mr Michel Kruse, chief financial officer, said losses made on trading such
debt since the middle of February had been more than offset by profits made
in disposing of positions before this.
'It was a very tricky environment, particularly in the second half of the
quarter,' he added.
Last week, First Chicago said it lost Dollars 54m on emerging market
securities in the first quarter, leading it to report an overall trading
loss of Dollars 25m in the period.
JP Morgan, thought to be the biggest trader of emerging market debt,
reported trading revenues of Dollars 356m, down from Dollars 469m a year
before. In the previous quarter, emerging market debt trading had boosted
its revenues to Dollars 606m.
Mr Willett added that hedges used by Merrill to reduce the risk from its
trading positions had held up relatively well during the period.
However, widening yield spreads on corporate, emerging market and non-dollar
debt instruments meant that 'hedges will not be perfect'.
Chase and NationsBank, Page 18; Merrill Lynch, Page 19

The Financial Times


International Page 17

940419

