FT943-13141

FT  21 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Copper climbs to two-year peak


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent and REUTER


   BRUSSELS


US investment fund buying came out of the blue to propel copper's price to a
two-year peak on the London Metal Exchange yesterday.
There was no particular reason for the sudden renewed interest of the funds.
Some dealers suggested that, having 'played' in the palladium market in
recent days, the funds decided to turn their attention to another metal
likely to benefit from increased international economic activity.
The weight of buying forced those who had sold short in the hope of being
able to buy back later at a lower price to run for cover. Also 'buy' signals
were triggered on the computers used for trading by some speculative funds.
Copper for delivery in three months reached Dollars 2,557 a tonne, its
highest since July 1992, on the LME early yesterday after the funds first
prompted a rise on the New York Commodity Exchange late on Tuesday.
Profit-taking later saw it ease back to close at Dollars 2,538.50 a tonne,
up Dollars 65.
Many analysts were expecting the copper market to consolidate and for there
to be some profit-taking during the mid-year months when demand slows.
However, the London-based consultancy, Bloomsbury Mineral Economics in its
latest Copper Briefing Service, pointed out that, when the copper market
rose strongly in 1987-88, prices increased steadily each month for more than
one year, shrugging off the usual seasonal influences. 'It will be a crucial
test of the strength of the present market to see whether or not copper
prices simply carry on rising through the northern hemisphere vacation
shut-downs,' it said.
Nevertheless, the market faced a number of bearish factors in the second
half, according to BME. Exports from the Commonwealth of Independent States
might increase from 15,000 to 25,000 tonnes a month; some mines on standby
could reopen, encouraged by recent high prices; and the first of the new
generation of big green field mining projects in Chile and Canada could come
on stream. This might cause the copper price to pause in its rise for some
time but BME remained confident that an underlying supply deficit would
cause prices to strengthen further in 1995.
Union Miniere, the Belgian metals group, said it would spend BFr2.8bn
(Pounds 56m) on a new 200,000-tonnes-a-year copper smelter at Olen, northern
Belgium, to replace an existing refinery, Reuter reports from Brussels.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940721

