FT942-12207

FT  30 APR 94 / World Stock Markets: Cinderellas of Europe nudged into
limelight - Prospects for electrical utilities


   By MICHAEL MORGAN


Europe's electricity utilities, for years the public sector Cinderellas of
the industrial sector, have found themselves nudged into the limelight since
the mid-1980s by a succession of generously priced privatisations.
Last year they held centre stage as investors, initially attracted by their
potential for solid earnings growth during an economic downturn, saw their
share prices outperform in rising equity markets.
Kleinwort Benson calculates that, during 1993, power utilities across Europe
rewarded investors with an average total return of 72 per cent, their best
performance over the last four years. They also outperformed their domestic
markets by an average of 19 per cent.
The year's star performer was Motor-Colombus in Switzerland, whose share
price rocketed by 219 per cent as the company pulled back from moves to
diversify its business begun in 1990, and underwent a restructuring to
refocus on electricity.
While many observers expect the sector to continue its outperformance this
year, as interest rates continue to decline, results are unlikely to those
of 1993.
Mr Adam Dickens at James Capel says that the broker's own utilities sector
index, 60 per cent of which is made by electrical utilities, has
outperformed the JC European index by 1.5 per cent since the start of the
year, helped by evidence that the cyclical sides of the diversified
utilities are starting to show significant recovery.
Mr John Willis at Kleinwort Benson, who sees little in the way of regulatory
action from the European Commission to disturb the companies' progress this
year, expects the sector to report average earnings growth of 20 per cent in
1994. Financial charges will fall, he says, although determining the exact
bottom line impact is complicated by the companies' debt structure.
'The core utility business will benefit from lower interest rates as
industrial production begins to rise. This leads to higher energy sales
volumes. In addition, those utilities with cyclical businesses should also
benefit from an improving economic picture,' he says.
Miss Isabelle Hayen at Lehman Brothers does not expect to see the same
momentum in share price movements during 1994 because the magnitude of bond
yield reductions is likely to be much less than in 1993. She also says that
the earnings momentum of cyclical stocks is expected to accelerate in the
current year, making it difficult for the utilities to remain so relatively
attractive.
Nevertheless, Miss Hayen sees structural changes afoot in the European
electricity industry which, she says, will shape the future environment in
which the supply companies operate.
Since the latter part of the 1980s, she says, there has been a growing
movement to introduce more competition, which continues to gain momentum.
Competitive pressures are also growing as result of the concerted efforts of
the European Commision and from consumers who are becoming more vocal about
the need to be placed competitively in the global markets, including access
to cheap energy.
She notes that the industry, itself, is also becoming more competitive.
Utilities in mature and more competitive markets are finding it harder to
increase their earnings and are therefore looking to diversify
internationally. In addition, the trend is also influenced through the
increasing willingness of other countries to open up their electricity
markets to foreign investors.
Finally, Miss Hayen says, privatisation not only increases the relative
importance of the electrical supply industry in market capitalisation terms,
but it also offers investors an opportunity to invest in large companies
which can be viewed as proxies for their domestic markets. 'Even more
appealing is the potential opportunity to invest in companies which may
stand to benefit enormously from operational and financial rationalisation.'
On a pan-European view, Mr Willis expects further outperformance from
Austria's EVN, which, he says, is likely to gain from any liberalisation in
the domestic electricity market.
This could be an unsettling year for RWE, Veba and Viag, Germany's big three
power utilities, he says, as the nuclear debate rolls on, frustrating the
companies' plans to establish a long term generation plan. The companies
face an inquiry by the Federal Cartel Office into the validity of the
present concession arrangements while at the same time, the three have
embarked on a massive capital expenditure programme in eastern Germany,
estimated by the Association of Germany Electricity Producers to total
DM60bn between 1993 and 1997.
In Italy, the new government will have to decide whether to go ahead with
the privatisation of Enel later in the year, while the Spanish electricity
industry, which will see a further 10 per cent of Endesa privatised this
year, should benefit from higher demand, interest rate cuts, a more stable
peseta, and a tariff increase.
Mr Willis sees the UK electricity sector continuing to be supported by the
twin pressures of low interest rates and lack of dividend growth in the
market generally. He forecasts dividend growth for the generating companies
to average 15 to 17 per cent, with 14 to 15 per cent for the distribution
companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940430

