FT942-12854

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (7): Solvency debate hots
up - The Goode report may be more radical than it seemed


   By NORMA COHEN


The fund management industry breathed a sigh of relief last September, when
the government's advisory panel on pension regulation produced only a modest
blueprint for reform.
The pension law review committee, chaired by professor Roy Goode, could well
have recommended a sweeping overhaul of pensions law so draconian that
employers en masse would have abandoned their commitment to the traditional
final-salary pension schemes.
Not only would that have left many workers bereft of retirement incomes, it
would have decimated the UK fund management industry which has grown up on
investing the assets of final salary schemes.
Instead, the Goode committee set itself the more modest goal of considering
reform which would do no more than ensure that any pension promise made in
respect of past service would be fully honoured.
The initial reaction, including that of the Confederation of British
Industry, the main UK employers' body, was overwhelmingly favourable.
The main recommendations called for a new pensions regulator; an
industry-wide compensation scheme, to cover fraud, theft or
misappropriation; a requirement that each scheme have at least one third of
its trustees appointed by the members; and a requirement that all schemes
meet minimum solvency standards. Schemes that did not meet at least 90 per
cent of the minimum standard would have three months to add cash to make up
the shortfall.
However, since then, there has been ample time for a re-think; and upon
closer examination, the Goode committee recommendations may be far more
radical than they at first appear. This is because there are employers who
make pension promises that they cannot say, with hand on heart, they will be
able to meet.
In particular, the outcry has been over the proposed minimum solvency
standard. The debate has left the actuarial profession sharply divided over
exactly what this will mean for schemes and their investment advisers.
The reasons for the outcry have to do with the way solvency is calculated. A
scheme would have to show that it had enough assets to purchase accrued
benefits for all members on a cash-equivalent basis, to be certified
annually by the scheme actuary.
However, while UK pension schemes on average hold 80 per cent of their
assets in equities, cash equivalents are calculated according to yields on
gilts, which historically have yielded less than equities. R. Watson, the
firm of consulting actuaries, warned that holding schemes to that rule would
require wholesale shifts out of equities and into bonds, forcing employers
to add cash particularly to mature schemes.
Other firms of consulting actuaries have firmly disagreed with the analysis.
At William M. Mercer, actuaries produced data showing that the average fund
would only have been required to add cash to meet minimum solvency
requirements immediately after the stock market crash of 1974, and that even
then, rises in share prices over a five-month period would have bailed out
most schemes.
In March, the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries, after studying the issue
for several months, recommended to the Department of Social Security some
changes in the way cash-equivalent yields are calculated, intended to
address some of these concerns. Under those proposals, scheme actuaries
would calculate cash-equivalent values for each individual member based on
age.
For the youngest members, cash-equivalent values would have a high equity
component, declining steadily as the individual neared retirement age. The
DSS has sent the proposals to the CBI and others in the industry for
comment.
It also suggested that, should the minimum solvency proposals find their way
into law, there should be a five-year phase-in period.
DSS sources have said that, of all the interest groups making
representations to government over the final form of any pension reform
bill, the CBI is the most significant. To date, the CBI has not made its
response known.
However, a CBI spokeswoman said the group was likely to say that, while it
views the proposals as a step in the right direction, 'the government should
go further'. Any effort requiring employers to add cash to schemes will
prompt the abandonment of final-salary schemes 'and that is not in anyone's
interest'.
The CBI has other objections to the Goode committee proposal on minimum
solvency. First, the three-month period given to a company to make good a
shortfall below 90 per cent solvency ought to be raised to three years;
while the three-year period which a company has to increase assets from 90
to 100 per cent of solvency ought to be increased to the average remaining
service life of the scheme.
However, the government runs the danger that, in its efforts to meet the
objections of the CBI, it may recommend a package of pension reforms which
leave a scheme members little better off than they are today.
'The report has to be seen as a single package,' warns Prof Goode. Unless
all of its elements are adopted, the others will be far less effective in
protecting pensioners and more expensive to administer than they would be
otherwise.'
Also, CBI members have yet to take on board the fact that many of them are
indeed too heavily invested in equities given their own maturity profile.
'It is the age of the scheme that dictates asset allocation and not the
minimum solvency standard,' said Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of
PosTel, the UK's largest pension fund and a member of the Goode committee.
Schemes with low cash flow from contributing members could well find that,
while equities outperform bonds over time, there may be years when slow
dividend growth does not deliver enough cash to meet liabilities. The
pensions promise would then have to be met by a cash contribution from the
employer.
Thus, even if the CBI persuades the government to further water down the
requirements for minimum solvency, employers will not have escaped their
problem.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940427

