FT941-3503

FT  16 MAR 94 / Treasury urged to act on Tube funds


   By ROLAND RUDD


Senior members of the panel set up to promote private finance in
public-sector projects yesterday urged the Treasury to end a funding logjam
for the London Under-ground.
A large number of the members of the government's private finance panel
recommended that ministers should put a deal to lease new trains for the
Northern Line out to competitive tender. They believe the issue could become
a test case for the panel.
ABB Transportation, the Derby-based manufacturer of rolling stock, has
offered to build, maintain and operate about 100 new trains for Pounds 440m
under a 20-year licensing deal.
Some members of the panel want the Treasury to accept the deal if no better
offer comes out of the competitive tendering process.
The Treasury has rejected the ABB offer because its guidelines state that
there is little attraction in leasing if it represents a deferred purchase
because this could normally be financed more cheaply by the government.
Treasury ministers also believe that ABB's payment for supplying the trains
should be directly linked to traffic on the Northern Line.
But panel members have questioned how the operating risk can be transferred
to a supplier which has no control over the Northern line's operation.
One member said: 'If the private finance panel cannot persuade the Treasury
to see a way through this problem there is little point in our existence.'
Although the panel was careful not to make a public recommendation, the
lobbying by senior members to break the impasse was yesterday welcomed by
many Conservative MPs representing London constituencies.
A number of them yesterday added their voices to calls for renewed
investment for the Northern Line.
Mr John Marshall (Hendon South) said the government should take advantage of
the offer from ABB.
ABB's proposals would meet almost half of the Pounds 1bn costs of
modernising rolling stock, signals and track. The newest rolling stock on
the line is 34 years old.
The Department of Transport is strongly in favour of the proposals.
London First, the business consortium which seeks to promote the capital, is
seeking to gain support for the ABB deal from leading business-men.
Some members of the private finance panel also want the Treasury to think
again about a Pounds 4m deal to lease automatic access gates for 12 of its
busiest stations.
It was the second time in a month that a London Underground proposal to
bring in private finance to pay for investments had met Treasury objections.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940316

