FT941-17052

FT  06 JAN 94 / Banks agree to shore up Banesto


   By PETER BRUCE and JOHN GAPPER


   MADRID


The Bank of Spain has pressed the country's big banks and savings banks into
opening a Pta300bn (Pounds 1.4bn) line of emergency short-term credit on the
interbank market to help shore up liquidity at Banesto, the struggling
commercial bank whose management was replaced by the authorities last week.
Spanish retail depositors have withdrawn up to Pta250bn from Banesto since
its chairman, Mr Mario Conde, and the rest of his board were dismissed by
the Bank of Spain on December 28. The move came after the central bank's
inspectors found a Pta503bn over-valuation of assets at Spain's fourth
biggest bank.
Mr Luis Angel Rojo, governor of the central bank, met senior executives of
the banks and savings banks on Tuesday, winning agreement from them that the
banks would supply 70 per cent of the credits Banesto needs, with the rest
being supplied by the savings banks.
A representative of one savings bank described the meeting as 'tense',
reflecting unease, particularly among the savings banks, at being forced to
come to the assistance of Banesto. The commercial banks may also be asked
later this year to help recapitalise Banesto with a temporary equity
injection.
The Bank of Spain has undertaken to guarantee loans made through the credit
line to Banesto, which by September last year was Pta504bn in debt in the
interbank market.
Details also emerged yesterday of an earlier attempt by JP Morgan, the US
bank which advised Banesto, to persuade the Bank of Spain that Banesto could
survive under its former management. Morgan's effort was led by Mr Roberto
Mendoza, a Morgan vice-chairman, who also sat on Banesto's board. Morgan
estimated the over-valuation of Banesto's assets at Pta372bn, compared with
the central bank's figure of Pta503bn.
Morgan drew up a plan late in the year to write down Pta265bn of Banesto's
Pta7,000bn assets immediately, using Pta180bn of the bank's capital reserves
and releasing a tax credit of Pta85bn.
According to the intervention document drawn up by the central bank, Morgan
also intended to help Banesto raise up to Pta230bn of fresh capital over the
following 18 months.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940106

