FT944-2682

FT  16 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Dollars 15bn Russian oil project in danger


   By JOHN THORNHILL


   MOSCOW


A Dollars 15bn project to develop the Timan Pechora oil basin in Russia's
Arctic circle is in jeopardy following last-minute demands by the Russian
partner for a 50 per cent equity stake.
The western consortium, consisting of Texaco, Exxon, Amoco and Norsk Hydro,
overcame a series of legal and fiscal obstacles and had intended to sign a
protocol agreement this week in the presence of Mr Al Gore, US
vice-president, who is in Moscow to promote trade links between the two
countries. 'This is now the only stumbling block to the deal,' said Mr
Thomas Hazen, president of the Timan Pechora company, who has been
negotiating the project for the past four years.
The consortium would have signed a production-sharing agreement to act as
contractors to the Russian government. Moscow would have retained all
ownership rights to the reserves and received about half of the project's
cash flow in taxes, royalties and profit-sharing. The consortium expected to
spend about Dollars 15bn over the next 12-15 years developing the region.
Archangelskgeologia, the local geological company which discovered the
reserves, estimates there may be as much as 5bn barrels of oil in Timan
Pechora.
But Archangelskgeologia, a government-owned company, has now demanded a 50
per cent equity stake in the project. A company spokesman was quoted in a
local newspaper as saying: 'We are not some kind of Indonesia or Angola - we
do not need to give such a project entirely to foreigners.'
Under the original proposal it would have served as a non-equity contractor
to the western consortium. Part of the appeal of Timan Pechora for western
companies had been the absence of a powerful local oil industry, such as
that found in western Siberia, Russia's main oil region.
Mr Hazen said Archangelskgeologia was not 'financially qualified' to assume
a prominent role - given it did not even have enough money to pay its
workers - and even if it were 'it would take away half of our interest'.
Under the original proposals, Texaco and Exxon would each have had a 30 per
cent stake in the project with Amoco and Norsk Hydro each owning a 20 per
cent share. The partners would have invested funds in proportion to their
equity interest.
Mr Hazen said the project had firm support from the upper reaches of the
Russian government. 'I am confident that this problem can be resolved but
this is a Russian problem which needs a Russian solution,' he said.
Disputes between regions and the central authorities in Moscow over
ownership of oil reserves have been one of the main impediments to new oil
developments in Russia.
The Timan Pechora region is seen as one of the most promising oil fields in
Russia. Nine western companies and four Russian companies are currently
discussing a feasibility study to build an offshore terminal to provide a
direct link to export markets. This would involve another Dollars 2bn of
investment.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941216

