FT942-14651

FT  19 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rubber pact negotiations set to
resume in the autumn


   By REUTER


   GENEVA


Negotiations on a producer/consumer rubber pact are to resume in the autumn
after the failure of this month's 10-day session to agree on price
stabilisation measures, reports Reuter from Geneva.
Producer and consumer states were reported to have made good progress at the
talks, which ended on Friday, but remained too far apart on key price issues
to finalise a deal to replace the 1987 International Natural Rubber
Agreement, which expires in December.
'We still differ on the reference price, the price range, and how to review
and revise the price,' consumer delegate Mr Derek Taylor, representing the
European Union, said after a last-ditch meeting failed to bridge the
differences.
Resumption of negotiations between the 29 rubber exporting and importing
states had been tentatively scheduled for October 3-14 in Geneva, according
to a statement from the conference secretariat.
'The core issues have been narrowed down but we now have to get down to the
nitty gritty,' Mr Taylor said.
The Kuala Lumpur-based International Natural Rubber Organisation, which
administers the pact, will review the outstanding issues at a meeting in
May, to prepare the ground for an October deal.
'The conference has allowed us to clarify where we stand. . . we now have to
do more work,' said Mr Ahmad Zubeir, a Malaysian producer representative.
The current pact, unlike other commodities agreements, has been reasonably
successful in offering consumers orderly markets in return for supporting
Inro, and by protecting producers from sudden price slumps through buffer
stock buying operations.
Consumers wish to maintain the current deal's market orientation and they
seek a future reference price at or close to the current 196.84
Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilogram. Led by the United States and the
European Union, which together consume 40 per cent of world supplies, they
have said they cannot justify any imposed market-lifting measures.
But producers want a reference price above 200 cents.
They argue that the market price, although temporarily buoyed by seasonal
tightness and economic recovery, is too low to encourage smallholders to
stay in business.
'But we have to know what price they are seeking and why,' Mr Taylor said.
'Producers have not presented the economic rationale for higher prices amid
sufficient supply,' explained a trade expert. 'Their approach is too much
tied to past trends. We need a price that is economically justified and not
one which is the product of political pressures.'
Consumer delegates added that the current pact cost them enough. 'Trying to
push prices up and hold them there would be prohibitively expensive,' one
said.
Nevertheless, tyre manufacturers have agreed that they would prefer the
long-term security of supplies to rock-bottom prices now.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940419

