FT944-2387

FT  16 DEC 94 / Arts: Delicious French bonbons at the Wigmore Hall


   By ADRIAN JACK


The Nash Ensemble has a well-established association with French music of
the 19th and 20th centuries. The group is celebrating its 30th anniversary
with six concerts of French music from Saint-Saens to Poulenc. Saturday
night's programme was a delicious selection of chocolates.
The choice for gourmands would probably have been Quatre poemes Hindous by
Maurice Delage, one of a small number of Parisian composers you could call
exquisite. Delage's settings are exotic, sharply imagined evocations of
India, scored for voice with a lovingly chosen ensemble of pairs of flutes,
clarinets, an oboe, harp and string quartet. The ample, weighty vocal
quality of the soprano Francoise Pollet seemed well-suited to these
languorous yet colourful pieces.
It was less so in Faure's song cycle La Bonne Chanson, in which a lighter
touch was needed. The version was Faure's own amplified one which adds a
string quintet to the piano - a patchy affair: Faure leaves out the piano
for long periods, then suddenly brings it in only to make the strings seem
superfluous. Faure himself preferred the songs without the strings.
An arrangement of Ravel's Sonatine seemed a second-best substitute for the
piano original, too. The Nash's harpist, Skaila Kanga, had adapted Carlos
Salzedo's arrangement for flute, cello and harp by replacing the cello with
a viola, spreading the interest more evenly. It fell short of redeeming a
lost cause, for all the artistry of Skaila Kanga, flautist Philip Davies and
viola-player Roger Chase.
After two slightly sullied masterpieces, the evening ended with one in its
pristine form. Faure's second Piano Quintet, completed in 1921, is
characteristic of the austerely searching quality of his later years. In
each movement the streamlined consistency of texture is a cover for
provocative, unexpected turns of melody and harmony. The first movement and
slow third movement somehow convey serenity and anguish at the same time.
The scherzo slithers by. The finale is surprisingly brief, as if impatient
for its radiant conclusion. A fascinating work, beautifully played.
On Tuesday evening Francoise Pollet returned to the Wigmore Hall in a
recital of French songs with the baritone Francois Le Roux and pianist Roger
Vignoles. Le Roux was warm but rather tremulous - fine in an untypically
fluttering song by Chausson (Les Papillons) but inclined to chop up Faure's
Le chanson du Pecheur and Chanson's baleful La caravane.
Pollet's voice production was blustery, too, though she sang Falla's
Seguidille with great gusto. The singers joined in Duparc's passionate duet
La fuite, adding Bizet's breezier setting of the same words as an encore.
Oddly they were most impressive when really stretched by the grand, arched
phrases of Berlioz's Les nuits d'ete. Pollet found her best form in the
tragic, statuesque appeals of Absence. The role allotted Vignoles was to
suggest the shimmer of the orchestral version with alarmingly few notes: it
was remarkable how evocative his contribution seemed.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941216

