FT942-12294

FT  30 APR 94 / Perverse market logic drives up yen: Examining the factors
behind the dollar's dramatic slide against the yen


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   LONDON


The dollar yesterday narrowly avoided sinking to an historic low of less
than Y100, but few on the foreign exchanges believe this is more than a
temporary respite.
Sentiment towards the dollar is now so negative that most analysts believe
it will fall through the Y100 level, and that this will trigger a further
precipitate decline.
'Once it breaks that, anything is possible, up to Y95 or Y90, because it is
such an important break,' says Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at the
Industrial Bank of Japan in London.
Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS, says a lot of
investors have held onto their dollar positions, but expects them to sell if
the dollar falls below Y100. 'This is a market trading on fear in
circumstances of illiquidity,' he notes.
Mr Chertkow says a 10 per cent fall, to Y90, would 'not be a big fall given
the weight of funds'. He says in these circumstances markets can move much
further than fundamentals would justify. He cites the case of the dollar
rising from DM2.94 to DM3.4750 in six weeks from December 1984 to
mid-February 1985 when fundamentals suggested that DM3 should never have
been breached in the first place.
It was not supposed to be this way. Indeed, at the turn of the year,
forecasting the dollar was supposed to be one of 1994's easy tasks. Both
economic growth and interest rates in the US currency's favour were seen as
making it virtually certain that the dollar would strengthen against
European currencies and the yen.
These were the main factors why most investors and analysts felt the dollar
would rise to DM1.80-90 and Y115-Y120 in 1994, from DM1.7450 and Y112.50
where it started the year.
Although the dollar is weak against both the yen and the D-Mark, it is the
Japanese leg of events that it is propelling the market. 'The driving force
continues to be the market's perception that the trade dispute is going to
carry on for some time,' says Mr Hannah.
Perversely, the market holds the view that the worse Japan's politics, the
better for the yen.
This logic has its root in the US-Japan trade dispute, where the issue is US
pressure for Japan to curb its Dollars 50bn bilateral trade surplus with the
US. Political instability in Japan is seen as hampering the prospects of the
government delivering market-access agreements which will improve US import
penetration.
In these circumstances the market believes that the US administration will
talk up the yen, to make Japanese exports less competitive, as a way of
closing the gap.
Mr Brendan Brown, head of research at Mitsubishi Bank, is sceptical of the
trade dispute as an explanation for yen strength. He explains it, instead,
as a function of fairly tight monetary policy, repatriation of capital by
Japanese investors from abroad, and foreign buying of Japanese equities.
He asks rhetorically: 'How can the economy with the largest savings (and
current account) surplus consistently import long term capital? Economic
arithmetic and logic tells us that Japan must be the principal supplier of
capital to the world economy, not an importer of funds.'
One way of restoring equilibrium will be for the yen to rise to the level
where Japanese investors see no residual risk in exporting funds, while a
tumbling Nikkei stock market index (a yen below Y100 will push Japanese
exports sharply down) will drive foreigners out.
Analysts argue that a level around Y90 will probably only last a few months.
After that the yen is expected to weaken to the Y115-120 level, depending on
progress with the trade dispute.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940430

