FT942-12804

FT  28 APR 94 / Mexico weathers market storms: Damian Fraser on the role of
the newly independent central bank


   By DAMIAN FRASER


Mr Miguel Mancera, head of Mexico's newly independent central bank, has had
a testing month. In the four weeks since the bank won autonomy, he has
confronted exceptional volatility in Mexico's financial markets and has
defended the peso from devaluation.
The peso's survival is in part due to the management skills of Mr Mancera
and his colleagues. Working closely with the finance ministry, he let
domestic interest rates rise sharply to 18 per cent last week, convincing
investors of the government's commitment to a stable exchange rate and
drawing in money from those who calculated rates had reached their peak.
This role is not new to Mr Mancera, who ran Mexico's central bank for over
11 years before it was made independent. While Mexico has periodically
suffered political or economic turmoil, Mr Mancera's advocacy of low
inflation, and fiscal and monetary prudence has been unwavering, and much
criticised by those who have argued for policies more conducive to economic
growth.
A generation older then the rest of Mexico's economic cabinet, the
61-year-old Yale-trained economist was working in Mexico's central bank when
the rest of the economic cabinet were just beginning primary school. He is
known for personal frugality, dislike of appearing in public, and methodical
working habits.
He says policy during April would have been the same without independence
since he enjoys a 'perfect understanding' with the finance ministry. Over
the past month he has tried to calm the jittery financial markets after the
rise in US bond yields and political turmoil sparked by assassination of
presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio.
Measures included permitting the peso to weaken against the dollar to the
limit of its pre-set band, spending central bank reserves, and raising
interest rates.
Despite praise from the financial community, many businessmen complain the
policy of high rates is hurting economic growth, and believe a devaluation
and lower rates may be in the economy's interests. The economy grew by just
0.4 per cent last year, in part because the government kept interest rates
high to defend the currency from speculators, while the current account
deficit reached 7 per cent of GDP.
Mr Mancera defends government policy as having brought inflation down to an
annual rate of 7 per cent from nearly 160 per cent six years ago. He is
convinced low inflation is vital for stable economic growth and in the best
interests of the poor. He believes central bank independence will
institutionalise a commitment to low inflation.
Under the constitution, the central bank is required to procure price
stability as best it can, and is not obliged to lend money to the government
at below market interest rates, thereby ensuring that an increase in public
spending need not lead to an expansion in the money supply.
The terms of the governor and four deputy governors are fixed for 6-8 years
and staggered so as not to coincide with the president's.
But by the fourth year of a president's office the president will have named
three of the five bank officials, giving his nominees effective control of
the bank. In Mexico, where the president rules almost like an absolute
monarch, many are sceptical that the bank could withstand presidential
pressure to soften monetary policy.
The central bank's main weakness is that the finance ministry keeps control
of exchange rate policy. The central bank therefore has to set interest
rates so that the government can meet its exchange rate target.
Mr Mancera says a potential conflict between exchange rate and interest
policy exists in most countries with an independent central bank.
Nevertheless, if the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party wins
August's presidential election, as seems probable, the possibility of a
conflict with the executive branch is slight. Mr Ernesto Zedillo, the PRI's
presidential candidate, began his professional life working under Mr
Mancera.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940428

