FT944-2810

FT  15 DEC 94 / (CORRECTED) UK Company News: No action to be taken over
leaked BTR announcement


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


Correction (published 17th December 1994) appended to this article.
The Stock Exchange is to take no formal action after the Pounds 35.5m
disposal by BTR of three subsidiaries was announced in Australia before
London markets had been informed.
Presspart Manufacturing and Decorpart of Lancashire and Presspart of North
Carolina are being sold to management, which will combine the businesses
into a 500-employee group exporting nearly 60 per cent of its UK output.
Combined turnover is about Pounds 30m with profits of about Pounds 5m.
The sale was supposed to be announced in London at 7.30am yesterday, but the
news was out in Australia at least 12 hours earlier.
The Manchester office of 3i, which brokered the merger and negotiated the
sale, is putting Pounds 13m of equity into the venture. The Royal Bank of
Scotland is providing senior debt of Pounds 20m, with Pounds 6m of mezzanine
debt coming from Intermediate Capital Group.
Under exchange rules, quoted companies should ensure all investors get the
same information at the same time when a potentially price-sensitive
transaction occurs.
In this case, although there is understood to be some annoyance, the breach
is seen as unintentional, with little opportunity for trading between the
announcements.
BTR acquired Presspart and Decorpart when it bought the Rockware Group in
1991. Presspart has struggled under a succession of managers, but Decorpart
has prospered since Rockware headhunted Mr Ray Maddison, a steel industry
specialist, in 1990 to run it.
The companies make cans for the beer, beverages, drugs and cosmetics markets
and are understood to have recently worked out how to use metal to make the
in-can 'widgets' which gassify beers, solving recycling problems caused by
first-generation plastic devices.
3i has insisted on Mr Ray Way, chairman of Denby, becoming Presspart's
non-executive chairman. It is also bringing in a finance director.
CORRECTION
In an article in Thursday's issue, we referred to a leaked announcement and
a breach of Stock Exchange regulations on the part of BTR in relation to the
disposal of three subsidiaries. It has since been made clear to us that
there was no breach of Stock Exchange regulations, nor was the announcement
in any way prematurely or incorrectly disclosed. Accordingly there was no
issue for the Stock Exchange to consider. We regret the error.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

941215

