FT943-1042

FT  26 SEP 94 / Haitian leaders meet US officers after gunfight leaves
several dead


   By JAMES HARDING and GEORGE GRAHAM


   PORT-AU-PRINCE, WASHINGTON


Haiti's military leaders met US officers yesterday after the first deadly
conflict since US troops landed a week ago left a reported 10 Haitians dead
and a US sailor slightly wounded in the northern city of Cap Haitien.
President Bill Clinton, who will address the UN General Assembly today,
regretted any loss of life, but warned that US troops would continue to
respond to hostile action against them.
The conflict on Saturday evening around police offices in Cap Haitien has
highlighted difficulties surrounding the intervention, which has been
carried out like a combat operation in hostile territory, in spite of an
agreement to work with Haitian military authorities.
The incident may also prompt international criticism of the US over what
some might see as an excessive use of force.
However, in the US, Senator Sam Nunn, the chairman of the Senate armed
services committee and a member of former president Jimmy Carter's team
which negotiated the Haitian generals' agreement to leave power, said there
might be more such incidents.
He said yesterday: 'This is the first bad incident we've had involving,
directly, American troops, but it won't be the last . . . It's regrettable,
but remarkable we haven't had more.'
Under an agreement reached last week, hours before a US invasion was due to
hit Haiti's shores, the military government, which seized power in a bloody
coup in September 1991, promised to co-operate with US forces in their
mission to restore elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
General Raoul Cedras, Haiti's military leader who has agreed to step down by
October 15, was flown to Cap Haitien yesterday with Mr William Swing, the US
ambassador, and General Henry Hugh Shelton, the US commander of the Joint
Task Force in Haiti.
The trio were understood to be meeting Haitian military and police officials
to ensure their co-operation with US forces in the area' and to reduce
tension after Saturday night's killings.
A US marine patrol is understood to have opened fire when Haitians at the
police headquarters apparently fired on their unit, injuring one naval
translator, who suffered a flesh wound to the leg. The marines then 'entered
the first floor of the building and cleared that up', according to US
embassy officials in Port-au-Prince.
Ten Haitians were reported killed and five others detained. US officials
added that they had recovered two .38 revolvers and one M1 rifle from the
dead combatants. They suggested that there may be other weapons in the
building.
In the wake of the shooting, civilians were reported to have ransacked
police stations and military barracks in Cap Haitien as soldiers and police
abandoned their posts.
US embassy officials said the incident was within the rules of engagement
for US military personnel which are that 'if someone shoots, you return
fire'. There will be an investigation into the conflict, although army
officers said said this would 'simply be a fact-finding operation'.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940926

