FT944-11065

FT  08 NOV 94 / Leading Article: A Budget for employment


Westminster is awash with proposals to reform the tax and benefit system
with a view to fostering employment. Owing, in part, to the separation of
the two policy areas, tax reforms aimed at raising work incentives in the
1980s tended to neglect the large disincentives to work faced by those at
the threshold of the tax and benefit systems. The second unified Budget
provides Mr Clarke with an opportunity to start redressing the balance.
By common consent, the welfare state is in need of fundamental reform.
Reforms of the tax and benefit system have not kept pace with changes in the
labour market. Approximately a tenth of the population is now dependent on
means-tested state benefits, twice as many as in 1979. In the past, economic
recovery would have lowered this figure considerably. But fewer of the
unemployed are being offered the full-time, relatively secure jobs for which
the benefit system was created. As a consequence, the relationship between
levels of welfare dependency and the economic cycle shows signs of breaking
down.
Some of the changes in the structure of employment may have been encouraged
by the tax and benefit system itself. The National Insurance system, for
example, probably explains some of the rise in the numbers working very few
hours. By and large, however, evidence of similar trends in other countries
indicates that it is the welfare state that must bend to labour market
change, not the other way round.
Reforms proposed
There is no shortage of reform proposals for the Chancellor to choose from.
The Labour Party's Social Justice Commission, the Trades Union Congress and
the Confederation of British Industry have all recently outlined what they
would like him to do in this area. Mr Clarke could usefully draw ideas from
all three, but the visionary sweep of such proposals should not distract his
attention from relatively modest reforms, which would still lessen the
system's worst flaws.
The Chancellor should focus his energy and resources on two groups whose
difficulties in the labour market are currently most acute: families with
children and the long-term unemployed. Family Credit was introduced to
eliminate the possibility that taking work would leave anyone with children
worse off. In practice, however, child care and other up-front costs
associated with taking a job, coupled with the withdrawal of housing and
other benefits, ensure that this kind of 'unemployment trap' is still a
problem for unemployed people with children.
The new childcare costs 'disregard' within family credit, announced in the
last Budget, will go part of the way to improving the situation. But further
help is needed to ensure that people can bridge the gap between leaving
income support and beginning to receive family credit. At present, around a
third of family credit claimants receive 'fast-track' approval for their
application.
Guaranteed income
The Chancellor should make a commitment that no-one will experience any loss
of income - however short-term - by taking a job. The best way to achieve
this would be to institute a guaranteed 1-2 week overlapping payment of
income support after a person starts work. This would have the added
advantage of helping to meet one-off expenses related to going back to work.
The biggest obstacle to taking a job for the long-term unemployed is not the
structure of the benefit system, but rather employer preferences. Mr Clarke
should lower national insurance contributions for companies employing the
long-term unemployed. If necessary, a well-tailored scheme could be funded
by raising the upper earnings limit on National Insurance, which already
causes an unjustifiable dip in marginal income tax rates before people reach
the higher rate band of income tax.
Mr Clarke is fortunate in having an opportunity to combine the politically
fashionable with the worthwhile. Yet whatever aspect of the problem Mr
Clarke decides to tackle, one rule must be obeyed. Nothing impairs the
efficient functioning of the benefit and tax system more than its
administrative complexity. Job centres and benefit offices are graveyards
for wheezes born of past ministerial publicity-seeking. Mr Clarke must not
add to the list.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941108

