FT943-727

FT  28 SEP 94 / Defence buying will stay British, says Rifkind


   By BERNARD GRAY


Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, said yesterday that the reluctance of
other countries to open their defence procurement markets to competition
meant that Britain would continue to use domestic sources for the vast
majority of its equipment.
About 90 per cent of procurement spending went on British-made equipment, he
said. The government did not object to a more open procurement policy, but
other countries did not agree. UK procurement policies were therefore
unlikely to change. Mr Rifkind was answering questions after making a speech
at the Royal United Services Institute.
Britain is considering a number of big procurement deals involving
international competitors. These include transport aircraft for the Royal
Air Force, attack helicopters for the army and a conventionally armed
stand-off attack missile.
Mr Rifkind commented that much of what President Yeltsin said at the United
Nations on Monday, when he called for further nuclear arms reductions,
seemed to relate to existing agreements. But the Yeltsin text should
nevertheless be studied 'for any new nuggets'. The UK had always worked on
the basis of a minimum credible nuclear deterrent, and had not been in
competition with other countries.
Mr Rifkind said in his speech to the institute that there was a 'quiet
revolution' - assisted by the Front Line First review of costs - in the
management culture of the Ministry of Defence.
He said 17 defence agencies had been created in the past 10 years and there
was a much greater emphasis on personal responsibility and accountability. A
system of budget holders had been established which would produce efficiency
gains.
The ministry had needed to go beyond that, however, to meet the savings
required by the government. The Front Line First programme had done this
across services and departments. The Ministry of Defence yesterday sent
unions a consultative document about changes to its procurement executive.
About 500 jobs are likely to go in the wake of the Front Line First review
because of the streamlining of management, transferring some work from
contractors to staff, and the agency's move to Abbey Wood near Bristol.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940928

