FT941-3597

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (6): An academic manque - John
Plender discovers how Jack Rose read the property cycle better than most
developers / Autobiography


   By JOHN PLENDER


Square Feet
by Jack Rose
RICS Books, Pounds 9.95
169 pages
Few people are less like the conventional stereotype of the millionaire
property entrepreneur than Jack Rose.
While others of his kind took elocution and dreamed of shooting pheasants on
a country estate, Rose was busy rewriting the property industry's leasehold
valuation tables. When his company, Land Investors, had become one of
Britain's better known quoted property concerns, his idea of a good time was
to go out for an Indian or Chinese meal with his wife.
In an age when the fortunes of property developers have largely been
dictated by the ebb and flow of bank credit, this academic manque, who never
took any professional exams, read the property industry cycle better than
most.
Above all, Jack and his younger brother Philip, who died in 1977, were
famously risk-averse. Having graduated from estate agency into development,
they allowed partners, including such well known property men as Harry
Hyams, Felix Fenston and Stanislas Radziwill, to take all the financial
risk. Jack Rose was the detail man, who brought meticulous professionalism
to the task of acquiring and undertaking developments. Only when he had
established a secure financial base through a host of partnership deals was
he prepared to take on the full risk of development.
The Rose brothers' good fortune was to have gone into property in time to
exploit the opportunities thrown up by post-war reconstruction. In the
period of cheap money in the 1950s and 1960s, it was possible to raise an
office block in the knowledge that the cost of acquisition and construction
could be recouped from a long-term mortgage debenture when the development
was completed and let. The rent on the building would cover the cost of
servicing the debenture from the outset. As long as demand for space
remained strong, and the planners perpetuated the shortage of supply created
by the Luftwaffe, people with drive and market knowledge had a unique
opportunity to become rich.
This did not prevent them from cutting corners, as this autobiography makes
engagingly clear. Rose's first employer built his country house estate
agency business by ruthlessly poaching other firms' clients. When Jack and
Philip Rose set up their own estate agency they were forever putting up 'To
Let' boards outside property without permission from the owner, in the
knowledge that the boards would stand for a potentially lucrative month or
so before being removed.
'At one time,' Rose recalls, 'anyone boarding a number 14 bus at Marble Arch
and sitting on the top deck might well have thought that Jack Rose & Co
owned most of Oxford Street'.
The picture that emerges of the estate agency business is unflattering and
wholly convincing. The tale becomes even more picaresque when the Roses
advance to development. As a landlord, Jack was not past breaking and
entering premises at the weekend where the office tenants had legitimately
refused him entry. A friendly builder would then discreetly carry out
improvements that were needed to make the building saleable to an
institutional investor.
Nor is the book reticent about the racy behaviour of others. Rose was at
school with the late Felix Fenston, a developer who did acquire a country
estate and social graces. Fenston's grander friends might well have been
surprised by Rose's tale of how Fenston cynically defrauded one of their
earliest employers. Had these revelations appeared in a book by an
investigative journalist, they would probably have been noisily serialised
in a Sunday paper and caused a dreadful fracas.
There are not many prominent property people with whom Jack Rose did not
have dealings. Yet it is characteristic of the man that he offers little in
the way of anecdotes about legendary figures like Cotton and Clore, and
prefers instead to tell of Sam Champagne, a multi-millionaire cabbie who
lived alone in a small flat and continued to drive his taxi to the end of
his days, sometimes taking fares from people he took to inspect his
property.
Yet Rose, the philanthropist and boffin-cum-entrepreneur, has his silences
and his quirks. Despite professing a love of painting and the arts, he says
little in this book about the appearance of the buildings that he developed;
the photographs suggest that there was plenty to be reticent about. Though
no respecter of conventional wisdom, he is surprisingly respectful both of
the City and the property establishment, and delights in his recent
membership of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
More endearing is his pleasure at having fulfilled his academic ambition by
winning a Master of Philosophy's degree from Reading University for a thesis
on property.
Interestingly, he expresses no regret that his company was driven into
receivership within four years of his selling out in 1986 - though he does
mildly regret having sold before the market peak.
Had Jack Rose been born in the Potteries, instead of a pub in London's
Hoxton, it would have been tempting to detect an echo here of Arnold
Bennett's novel The Card. As it is, the book contains plenty of nuggets
about a fascinating, highly individualistic industry, as well as a revealing
picture of the London in which the author spent his childhood. The man
shines through, even - perhaps especially - when the prose betrays the
occasional lack of polish.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940315

