FT942-14789

FT  19 APR 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Help when you're all at
sea - Exporting / Ian Hamilton Fazey offers a run-down of places offering
advice to traders


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


British government help for UK exporters used to come from the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, scattered through embassies around the world, along
with the Department of Trade and Industry in the UK. But for the last two
years government initiatives have been run by a joint directorate known as
Overseas Trade Services.
Industrial leaders, senior civil servants and export lobbyists say services
are improving;
nevertheless, where to go for advice has always been a problem for small
businesses. The latest attempt to solve it, a planned nationwide network of
200 one-stop shops called Business Links, is supposed to end the confusion
presented by an array of enterprise agencies, chambers of commerce, training
and enterprise councils and other initiatives.
However, there are only a handful of experimental ones at present - and
probably only about 60 or 70 will play a 'hub' role.
For the moment, one way of tapping into overseas trade services is to
telephone the nearest regional DTI office, or the Welsh Office, Scottish
Office or Northern Ireland Industrial Development Board.
Information is the prime tool available, much of it generated by the
government at taxpayers' expense. Indeed, the Treasury is making the DTI
justify the Pounds 173m annual cost. This annoys the CBI and people like Ian
Campbell, director-general of the Institute of Export, who say the UK's
foreign competitors do similar things and the UK cannot afford not to.
A quarter of the staff of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office are in
commercial posts. There are 203 sections around the world, of which 12 are
in the US, seven in Germany and five in France. British staff in each
section do a four-year tour of duty, supported by local staff. About 6,000
market information reports are produced each year, so the information base
is vast and should be helpful, if only as a starting point. It can be
supplemented by other services.
The Export Market Information Centre in London (071 215 5444/5445) allows
you to do your own desk research from government databases, published
directories, trade statistics and market reports.
There is an automated service matching companies to new export intelligence
received daily by DTI. This is available through Prelink (081 900 1313).
The government offers online access from your office computer to all its
export intelligence through FT Profile (0932 76144), the electronic database
owned by the Financial Times.
Market Information Enquiries will assemble a tailor-made package of
information on export opportunities for products, processes or services. It
charges Pounds 35 for basic information and then in four-hour units for more
complicated inquiries ranging from an initial Pounds 70 up to Pounds 355 for
between 16 and 24 hours' work.
The Export Marketing Research Scheme is more specific and detailed,
providing professional advice and financial support, whether the work is
done in-house or by a professional consultant.
The Export Representative Service will help find a representative overseas
through the government's own experts in the market concerned. The charge is
Pounds 355 for up to 24 hours' work, Pounds 710 for up to 48 hours and
Pounds 1,065 for longer.
Overseas Status Reports provide assessments of the suitability of potential
representatives or companies you want to do business with, but not
creditworthiness. Charges are similar to those for Market Information
Enquiries.
Trade Fair Support pays for half the space and gives a fixed construction
grant for up to three exhibitions in each market, but up to five in Japan
and some parts of Germany and the US.
New Products from Britain is a media relations service; Pounds 60 buys a
professionally written news story aimed at securing editorial coverage in
appropriate media in target markets.
Trade Missions, organised by chambers of commerce or trade associations, are
subsidised. Many companies find them a cheap way of sampling a market at
first hand and for making contacts for subsequent visits. Reciprocal social
obligations will usually involve attending a couple of receptions.
The Programme Arranging Service usually builds on market information
obtained through Market Information Enquiries, the Export Marketing Research
Scheme or the Export Representative Service. It helps arrange appointments
and gives advice on local business and culture in your target market.
In-Market Help goes one step further, offering accompanied visits by local
commercial experts and a de-briefing afterwards to help you consider your
next steps.
This concludes the series. Previous articles have appeared on February 1, 8,
22, March 8, 22, April 5.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940419

