FT942-12338

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (9): Short-term
optimists are elusive - Equities / Global overview / A number of markets hit
all-time highs early in the year, but it has been generally downhill ever
since. However, amid the talk of corrections, bargains are available


   By DOMINICK COYLE


The suggestion offered here in the last issue of the Review, that investors
take some profits from the 1993 stock markets bonanza, proved useful,
especially as the first quarter of this year progressed.
A number of markets hit all-time highs in January and early February,
including Wall Street, London, Frankfurt and Paris, but it has been
generally downhill ever since.
Just as the quarter ended with the Easter break came the 'Garzarelli
factor'. Ms Elaine Garzarelli is more than a stock market analyst with
Lehman Brothers in New York; she has been held in considerable awe by both
market-watchers and participants ever since she accurately predicted
(virtually alone among her peers) the 1987 crash.
Ms Garzarelli warned at the end of March that the US market could fall by as
much as 15 per cent before the current 'correction' was completed  - a
forecast which sparked an immediate one-day fall of 72 points on the Dow
Jones index.
American investment sentiment, already shaken by monetary tightening by the
Federal Reserve, appeared less impressed with Ms Garzarelli's subsequent
clarification, that she wanted to distinguish between a current correction
and her belief that Wall Street would be sharply higher a year from now.
New York's jitters quickly spread to other markets - Italy, Japan and most
of the Nordic countries were exceptions during the quarter - and global
investors with a neutral stance, based on the FT Actuaries World Index, had
a negative total return of 1.8 per cent.
But that small worldwide loss cloaked some massive setbacks. Hong Kong,
Malaysia and Singapore, all star attractions last year, were sharply lower
over the quarter. The Pacific markets, excluding Japan, were down by almost
18 per cent as the 1993 flood of money into emerging markets went into
reverse. Tokyo itself returned a positive 16 per cent plus for both sterling
and dollar investors. Europe collectively was off by 4.4 per cent, weighed
down by a near 8 per cent fall in London.
As the second quarter opened, it was hard to find market optimists, at least
for the short term. Market sentiment is seldom based wholly on fundamentals,
but it can spread like wildfire, especially when it is negative. Sellers
encourage more sellers, and in global market trading there is often a
simultaneous rush for the exits.
Market liquidity (the 'weight of money' argument, which drove many bourses
to starry heights in 1992-93) is being reversed as American funds in
particular perceive that interest rates are on the way up again on worries
about higher inflation - more feared than obvious, for the time being.
There have certainly been signs of institutional selling of Pacific markets,
although some US and European funds have moved lately to overweight
positions in Japan itself. Most fund managers, however, are being very
cautious, setting both their equity and bond portfolios in neutral
positions, based on the FT-A Index, although with a somewhat higher overall
cash element. It won't make for outperformance, but it will provide an
answer of sorts for trustees when the April-June quarter comes to be
measured.
Yet, despite institutional and private-investor caution, and a whole lot of
talk about market corrections, there have got to be some bargains out there,
for such is the nature of stock markets. Neutral weightings in countries can
still allow scope for well-informed stock selection, and already some
investors are buying in anticipation of a return of consumer confidence in
the big economies.
In the last quarter, the consumer goods and services sector globally was off
4 per cent, the same as the energy sector. Capital goods did less badly at
minus 2.2 per cent. All three should benefit from economic growth. The US is
already looking very good in this respect, and better news is coming through
in Britain all the time. Germany is hoping for a sharp rise in exports this
year and next, and that just may explain why some big Swiss and French funds
are reportedly overweight in German equities and bonds. But then they invest
for the long haul.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940429

