FT944-11132

FT  08 NOV 94 / Underground to probe tunnelling method


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


London Underground is to hold its own inquiry into the 'new Austrian'
tunnelling method which is being investigated by the Health & Safety
Executive following the collapse of a tunnel under construction at Heathrow
Airport.
The latest inquiry has been launched by managers in charge of the Pounds
1.9bn Jubilee Line extension where work has halted on two stations - London
Bridge and Waterloo. Both stations were being built by the 'new Austrian'
method.
LU ordered work to stop on the stations following the Heathrow collapse.
Work has halted at two other stations being built as part of a Pounds 300m
rail link from Heathrow to Paddington station in central London.
LU is concerned that work on the two Jubilee Line stations should not be
delayed longer than necessary.
It hopes its investigation will enable an early decision on whether to
resume work using the 'new Austrian' method or switch to an alternative
method which might cost more but would prevent an even more expensive delay.
BAA, the airport operator, meanwhile, is conducting a separate inquiry into
the collapse at Heathrow.
The 'new Austrian' method requires engineers to utilise the strength of the
ground surrounding the tunnel and keep to a minimum the amount of extra
strengthening required to prevent collapse or catastrophic settlement.
A thin layer of fast-drying concrete is sprayed over the walls of the
tunnel. Once the project is sufficiently advanced a reinforced lining is
installed. The method, which allows faster construction and greater design
flexibility, can be up to a quarter cheaper than alternative tunnelling
techniques.
A delay in construction, however, would be very damaging if it meant that
the project could not open on time and start earning expected revenue as
happened at the Channel tunnel.
The Waterloo station, for the Jubilee Line, is part of a Pounds 157m
contract which includes constructing a new rail tunnel between Green Park
and Waterloo and a new station at Westminster. Only Waterloo station is
using the 'new Austrian' method.
The work on a new London Bridge station is a single contract worth Pounds
76m. Only two out of 12 stations for the Jubilee Line extension are being
built using the 'new Austrian' method.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941108

