FT941-16876

FT  07 JAN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Valuations may hit pensions smoothing


   From Mr ROBERT C ROSS


Sir, Gordon Clark (Letters, January 6) makes the important point that the
financial health of a pension fund is measured by the difference between the
value of its assets and the value of its liabilities. The actual performance
of the assets per se is far less signifIcant than the development of the
funding level.
Mr Clark draws attention to the fact that the rate of increase in market
values of pension assets in 1993 has exceeded the rate of increase in
actuarial value of assets by almost 30 per cent. The reason that actuaries
value pension fund assets by discounting future dividend flows to a present
value is to smooth the 'aberrations' of market movements.
The benefit of this approach is that short-term market movements do not
necessitate changes to long-term contribution rates which may subsequently
be reversed.
Over a long period of time one would expect the actuarial and market values
to converge - they are both heading to the same place but the former,
hopefully, will have a smoother path. However, the comfort which this
smoothing provides may be illusory. If the path of actuarial values diverges
from that of market values, then this must mean that the actuary's
assumptions about dividend growth were wrong because they have been shown to
be inconsistent with events in the market. The actuary will revise his
assumptions to move his valuation back in line with that of the market,
causing a discontinuity in the actuarial value and potentially a
corresponding shift in the recommended contribution rate. Thus there is a
danger that the suppression of fluctuations in market value in the
short/medium term will be released at intervals in the longer term,
obviating the apparent benefits of trying to smooth out the real world.
If prevailing actuarial assumptions are maintained, then many year-end 1993
asset valuations will be as much as 25 per cent below market values.
This may cause some actuaries (if not yet their clients) to consider whether
they are still heading along the wrong track. A recommendation to end a
contribution holiday because credit is only being given for 75 per cent of
the market's valuation of the fund's assets may not be well received in some
quarters.
Robert C Ross,
Frank Russell Company,
6 Cork Street,
London W1X 1PB

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940107

