FT942-15312

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: Restated results show losses at
Woolworth


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Woolworth, the US-based retailer, has restated its financial results for all
four quarters of the year ending January 29 1994, and confirmed that profits
reported for the first two quarters had been illusory.
Last year, Woolworth reported it had scraped into profits of Dollars 1m for
the first quarter and Dollars 2m for the second.
This week's restated figures show, however, that the company actually made
losses of Dollars 24m and Dollars 10m in the first and second quarters
respectively.
Woolworth said it was not yet ready to explain the errors.
A special committee of the board of directors was investigating the events
that had made the restatement necessary, it said.
However, the fact that the first two quarters' profits have turned into
losses is likely to reconfirm suspicions that costs which should properly
have been taken in the first two quarters were deferred until later in the
year, in a misguided attempt to keep the company out of the red.
Woolworth had warned at the end of last month that its quarterly figures
would have to be restated. A few days later, it announced that Mr William
Lavin, chairman and chief executive, and Mr Charles Young, chief financial
officer, were temporarily stepping aside while an investigation was carried
out.
On Tuesday the company announced that its full-year figures for last year
would stay the same, but that the quarterly breakdown had been changed 'to
reflect a correction of gross margins and certain selling, general and
administrative expenses'.
It also brought forward to the third quarter the reversal of a Dollars 145m
repositioning reserve that had been taken in the fourth quarter.
Significantly, the board also reconfirmed the fourth-quarter dividend of 29
cents per share on the common stock, bringing comfort to the company's
institutional shareholders, who hold the shares mainly as a yield stock.
Mr John Adams, interim chairman and chief executive, said that the
announcement concluded the part of the inquiry relating to the financial
results, and should put to rest any concerns about the company's financial
position.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940415

