FT941-17073

FT  06 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Private affairs


Britain is not a theocracy. Personal relationships are, or should be, a
matter for the individual conscience, guided, where appropriate, by church
or mosque. The government should think hard before intervening. It
traditionally sustains contracts, such as marriages. It must protect the
vulnerable, as it is attempting to do by chasing fathers for maintenance
payments through the Child Support Agency. It has a duty to consider the
public expenditure consequences of any particular action, as when it reviews
payments to single parents. Beyond that, it should shut up.
Mr Tim Yeo, a capable junior minister, has fallen victim to the
Conservatives' failure to recognise the limitations of what the state can
usefully say about private behaviour. Since last autumn a number of
ministers have babbled about family values and morality as if they were
something more than politicians. The public perception that a moral crusade
has been launched is partly the result of careless speeches on subjects that
have not been properly thought through. It is also a consequence of the
prime minister's desperate search for a theme that could unify his party.
Rightwing ayatollahs shamelessly preached the virtues of family life at the
Tory conference in Blackpool last October. Were there no adulterers in the
hall?
Since then, the slogan 'back to basics', dusted and refurbished in Downing
Street, has further confused matters. The purpose may have been to encompass
more rigorous teaching methods and a new strategy for the control of crime,
but the effect was to introduce an atmosphere of fundamentalism into British
political discourse. This is consonant with English history, which is
punctuated by fits of ersatz morality. The present example is a sorry
indication of the lengths to which an unpopular government will go in an
effort to restore its fortunes. The effect on Mr Yeo's constituency officers
was predictable. They indicated that they wanted him to resign as a
minister, which would punish him for his adultery, but not as a member of
parliament, which might cost the Conservatives the seat. Moral gestures have
their boundaries.
Coming from a party that cast down, then took up again, Lord Parkinson this
is piquant. From a government that flies the flag of individual freedom it
is particularly curious. Since 1979 successive Conservative administrations
have promised less regulation, less governance, more space for individual
enterprise and initiative. Today it is even making instant pronouncements on
such tortuous subjects as the correct age at which a woman may be assisted
by her doctor to have a baby. That too is a moral issue, best left to
theologians and philosophers. The Conservatives should think again about the
meaning of 'family values' and 'back to basics'. In the age of
privatisation, the greatest absurdity would be to nationalise morality.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940106

