FT943-12865

FT  22 JUL 94 / No longer as safe as houses: The repercussions of losses
made in the US market for securities based on home loans


   By RICHARD WATERS


Take a Dollars 1,500bn financial market, a handful of ambitious investment
banks, and a group of incautious investors willing to risk their (or someone
else's) money. Add the latest high-tec wizardry Wall Street has to offer.
Then sit back and wait for external events to take their course - an
unexpected rise in interest rates, for instance. Suddenly, you have the
ingredients for a market upheaval, 1990s style.
The US's market in mortgage-backed securities, by which many home loans are
financed, has provided just such a spectacle in recent months. The latest
victim, UK drugs company Glaxo, indicated last week that it had lost about
Pounds 100m from investments in this and other risky markets. It joins a
long list of others which have suffered significant losses on the market -
from US investment fund Askin Capital (which has lost a large part of its
Dollars 600m capital and been forced to file for bankruptcy) to a US
subsidiary of Bank of Montreal (whose losses reached Dollars 51m), and
Kidder Peabody, the investment bank owned by General Electric.
The debacle not only raises questions about risk assessment on Wall Street
but threatens to spill over from the financial into the real world. The
impact of the upheavals in the mortgage-backed securities market on other
bond markets may have slowed US economic growth by forcing up long-term
interest rates, though the precise effects are incalculable. As Wall
Street's fingers have been burnt, families in the US have found it more
expensive to buy their first homes. Some investors in US mutual funds
(similar to UK unit trusts) - which have played the market will have lost a
small amount of their capital.
The damage mortgage-backed securities has caused seems strange given their
seemingly humble purpose of providing money for people to buy homes. Rather
than the cash coming directly from a financial institution such as a bank,
it is provided by investors who buy bonds. Mortgage payments by home owners
cover the interest and principal payments on the bonds. By pooling thousands
of such domestic mortgages, Wall Street has created a multi-billion-dollar
market which is now reckoned to account for more than Dollars 1,500bn, or
about half of all home loans in the US.
Problems have arisen because the evolution of these products has not stopped
there. Since the late 1980s, the mortgage-backed bond market has been
subjected to the sort of financial engineering which has made a new
generation of Wall Street traders rich. The theory behind the re-engineering
was simple: why not mould the bonds into instruments which would match the
needs of particular groups of investors more closely?
This task was achieved with the help of technology developed in the market
for derivatives - complex financial instruments whose value is based in part
on that of an underlying market. Bonds were pooled and their interest and
principal cashflows divided to create new, more exotic financial products.
After the most attractive parts of the bonds have been made into new
instruments, the remainder - known as 'toxic waste' - is sold cheaply to
risk-hungry investors, retained by the investment bank, or perhaps thrown
together with odds and ends left over from other pools of mortgages to
create more new instruments (some known as 'kitchen sink bonds', since a bit
of everything has been thrown in).
All these reconfigured mortgage-backed bonds go under the name of
collateralised mortgage obligations (CMOs). By some estimates, as much as a
half of all mortgage-backed bonds have been converted into CMOs. Because
they are sometimes heavily geared, their price can move sharply with changes
in interest rates, giving investors more bang for their bucks.
If that was the end of the story, there would be little to distinguish
mortgage-backed securities from other fixed income instruments. But the
market has a unique feature: when interest rates fall, home owners may pay
off their loans and take out a new loan at a lower interest rate. When rates
are high, they probably won't pay them off at all.
A failure, by those who design and invest in the products, to predict what
homeowners would do in the unusual financial market conditions since last
summer has wreaked havoc.
The problems began at the peak of last year's bond market rally. Against
most expectations, long-term US bond yields fell to historic lows, as
investors grew confident that inflation (the bond-buyer's worst enemy) was
no longer a threat. Mortgage rates fell with them. That unleashed a wave of
mortgage-refinancing by home owners on an unparalleled scale.
The complex computer programmes used to construct and value CMOs did not
predict that people would behave in this way. By paying off their old loans
at such a rapid rate, homeowners played havoc with bond prices. CMOs took
the brunt of the pain: 'Interest only', or IO, bonds (created out of the
interest payments from mortgage-backed securities) fell furthest, as
investors lost their expected future interest payments. The shock waves were
felt from the bond-trading floor at securities house Salomon Brothers all
the way to a string of small municipal authorities in Ohio, which had bought
IOs.
This spring, it was the opposite story in the mortgage-backed bond market.
As US bond yields rose along with short-term interest rates (in turn pushing
up mortgage rates) homeowners stopped paying off their old loans. The
Mortgage Bankers Association estimates that the value of mortgages
refinanced, which reached Dollars 550bn in 1993, will fall to just Dollars
150bn this year.
With the level of refinancing lower than expected, investors have suddenly
found that bonds which had an expected life of, say, two years, are unlikely
to be repaid until much later. The average duration of bonds in Salomon's
mortgage-backed bond index has jumped from 3.2 years at the beginning of
February to more than 5 years.
One indirect result has been a barrage of selling in the US government bond
markets. As the duration of mortgage-backed bonds rose, many investors sold
long-dated government bonds to hold down the average duration of their
portfolios.
The actions of regulators may have worsened the impact. US banks are under
pressure to show their CMOs at market value in their accounts. That means
that if prices are volatile, there is less incentive to hold such bonds.
Some regulatory pressure has been more direct. Worried about the losses that
some supposedly safe mutual funds have taken on complex financial
instruments, the Securities and Exchange Commission, which regulates US
investment markets, wrote to mutual fund managers earlier this month to warn
of the dangers. These funds should work out a way to 'dispose of the
securities in an orderly manner, consistent with the interests of the funds'
shareholders,' the SEC said.
The CMO debacle has revealed some of the shortcomings in the way modern
financial markets operate. Dealers and investors alike put much trust in the
ability of computer-driven analyses to predict what would happen to prices
in different market conditions. As things turned out, their assumptions were
wrong.
Also, they failed to take account of the risk inherent in tailor-made
financial instruments for which there is no ready market. The lack of a
market accentuated the price falls. And the fact that many unsophisticated
investors, such as local government treasurers, were sucked into the market,
is testimony to the poor controls in their organisations and the willingness
of investment banks to sell complex securities to people who do not really
understand them.
Nor are regulators and policy makers blameless. They failed to pay enough
attention to innovations in the CMO market at an earlier stage, and when
finally prodded by losses, may have over-reacted.
Like all market upsets, this one has created opportunities for contrary
investors. Other markets have seen turn-abouts: the US junk bond market,
pronounced dead at the end of the 1980s, roared back to life with a record
year in 1993. Investors who bought junk bonds at knock-down prices have made
their fortunes. The same is true of some CMOs, for those brave enough to buy
them. But in the current climate, there are few takers for toxic waste.
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES: TROUBLE IN HOMES
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Mortage-backed bonds ownership (dollars bn)
                             1991       1992       1993
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Banks                         277        306        337
Life insurance companies      185        244        268
Pension funds                 157        173        194
Mutual funds                   79        105        123
Savings and loans             157        156        163
Others                        385        420        427
Total                        1240       1404       1512
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Mortgage Bankers Association of America. Inside Mortgage
Securities
 --------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940722

