FT941-13011

FT  27 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Wildrose reveals details of Norton reverse
takeover


   By TIM BURT


Intrigue over the future of Norton Motors (1993) escalated yesterday when
the motorcycle manufacturer's Canadian owners released details of its
proposed reverse takeover in North America.
Wildrose Ventures, based in Vancouver, said an unnamed 'listed public
vehicle' would acquire a 51 per cent stake in Norton together with options
on a further 39 per cent for an undisclosed sum.
Under the transaction, the shell company - listed on the US bulletin board
in pink sheet securities - will be renamed Norton BSA.
Wildrose shareholders will receive Norton shares on a 1-for-1 basis, but the
new shares will be treated as an additional dividend and will not dilute or
replace their existing holdings.
Overall, the Canadian company will receive 9.25m of the 10m shares issued in
the listed vehicle.
The transaction has been arranged by Mr Nelson Skalbania, the Canadian
deal-maker who describes himself as a Wildrose consultant.
Mr Skalbania's daughter, Rozanda, admitted that the main investors behind
Wildrose were two Vancouver families: the Aquilinis - a property group with
a 10 per cent stake in Norton - and the Skalbanias themselves.
Ms Skalbania, who is running Norton's UK plant in the Midlands, said:
'Wildrose's sole purpose was to do the Norton deal. The families involved in
funding it were the Aquilinis and the Skalbanias.'
Wildrose has been seeking a shell for Norton since June last year when it
was suspended by the Alberta Stock Exchange over irregularities in the
proposed takeover.
Mr Chris Agagnier, president of Wildrose, said a new listing was necessary
to finance Norton's expansion.
Those expansion plans involve some bizarre ideas including Blue Thunder  - a
flying car which would have 'vertical take-off and full hover capabilities;
as simple as a motorcycle to operate; and lands safely with full power
failure'.
Another scheme involves a joint venture with MiG, the Russian aircraft
manufacturer, to produce bicycles from recycled titanium.
There are even proposals to buy a Bulgarian ski company 'to produce a line
of Norton BSA skis'.
Ms Skalbania, who said the schemes also depended on joint venture funding,
hinted that Norton planned to produce a new motorcycle - the TT558 - in the
spring.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940127

