FT942-12285

FT  30 APR 94 / South African Elections: S Africa poll chaos casts doubt on
result


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   ULUNDI, KWAZULU


South Africa's first all-race elections may yet turn out to have been
relatively free and fair; but if they do, no thanks will be owed to the
Independent Electoral Commission, the body charged with conducting the poll.
Though polling took place in an atmosphere of political tolerance
unprecedented in South Africa - a tribute to the spirit of ordinary South
Africans who put rivalries aside for a time - the IEC has managed,
singlehandedly, to cast doubt on the fairness of the vote.
Through incompetence compounded by deceit, the Commission provided countless
invitations to fraud. And the sad irony is that the Commission's records are
in such disarray that no one will ever know - or at least be able to prove -
just how many illegalities actually took place.
The catalogue of IEC inefficiencies and negligence would be funny if its
consequences were not so serious. On the eve of the poll, scores of idle IEC
media officials were unable to provide the name of even one polling station
in Soweto, the biggest black township in the nation. When details were
finally furnished, they turned out to be incorrect.
But that was no more than annoying. According to IEC's own officials, the
commission has no idea of the location of the 35m ballot papers despatched
for the poll; papers were sent to central distribution points, but what
happened to them after that, no one knows. When reports of shortages started
came in, it printed more, but these have no serial numbers or counterfoils,
making it impossible to reconcile them afterwards.
Appropriately, the commission does not know exactly how many extra papers
were printed, because some were done locally. Estimates range from 8m to
12m.
Of the additional papers, some 3m were sent to the Eastern Cape for the
Transkei 'homeland,' where shortages were serious. But the whole of the
Transkei has only 1.57m potential voters. Some 10m ballot papers had already
been sent for the Eastern Cape, including Transkei - three times the total
number of voters in the combined areas. No one knows what happened to those
original ballots.
There can be few more open invitations to fraud than to send excess ballot
papers to an area such as Transkei, its administration corrupt and chaotic,
its chief minister an ANC candidate.
Even before the voting, Transkei head Gen Bantu Holomisa symbolically handed
over the keys of the 'homeland' to the ANC. It is difficult to believe that
he and his supporters could not find ways of using excess ballot papers to
improve their party's performance.
The tragedy is that no one will ever know whether they have done so - or
whether the rival Inkatha Freedom Party has done the same in KwaZulu.
In both areas, electoral officers are almost entirely drawn from the
'homeland' civil service, and neither civil service employs many people who
do not toe the ruling party line.
In almost every case, agents from the dominant party are the only ones
present at polling stations - along with IEC monitors, again local people
with predictable party sympathies, and international observers who make
fleeting visits which could never detect secret frauds.
No records are of those who have voted, and there is no voters roll, so
there is nothing to stop electoral officers from completing a few thousand
ballots and stuffing them into boxes undetected. In both areas, temporary
voter cards are issued on the flimsiest proof of identity and age. In
KwaZulu, the word of the local chief or induna (headman) is sufficient; but
chiefs are paid by the KwaZulu government and are solidly behind Inkatha.
Given a system with so few in-built controls, it will be impossible to tell
whether electoral officials, party agents, or the two working together
colluded to stuff ballot boxes with illegal papers - though if it turns out
that 25m or 30m South Africans voted, far more than the 22m estimated voting
population, this will be a clue.
Not to be put off by facts, Judge Johann Kriegler, the IEC chairman, has
already declared the election an 'outstanding success.' One can only wonder
how he would define a failure.
For though violent political intimidation, so much a feature of the election
campaign, was totally absent from the poll, the administrative mess
engineered by the IEC could still jeopardise the result. One could assume
that fraud on both sides will largely balance out (though smaller, cleaner
parties will suffer); or take a charitable view of human nature and assume
few irregularities took place.
Any element of doubt could still cause political problems in the new South
Africa.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940430

