FT941-5480

FT  05 MAR 94 / China MFN chances weakened


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


China's arrest of a prominent dissident yesterday cast a shadow over the
visit to Beijing next week by Mr Warren Christopher, the US Secretary of
State, and further weakened the chances that the US will extend China's most
favoured nation trading privileges.
Mr Wei Jingsheng, who was released last September after 14 years in prison,
was detained yesterday after meeting with the US's top human rights envoy
and just one week before Mr Christopher's arrival.
Chinese officials also confirmed the detention of three other dissidents.
The State Department refused to make any immediate comment on the arrest of
Mr Wei, who was a leader of the Democracy Wall movement in 1978-79 and is
probably the Chinese dissident who is best known outside China.
President Bill Clinton last year extended China's MFN status for one year,
on condition that it meet US demands for free emigration, put an end to the
use of prison labour in exported goods, and make progress in other areas
such as the release of political prisoners, the protection of Tibetan
culture and allowing outside radio broadcasts.
While Clinton administration officials have indicated some encouragement at
the steps the Chinese government was taking, they have also repeatedly
warned that China has not yet done enough to fend off revocation of MFN in
June.
'There already has been some progress in recent months. There has got to be
more, and this is going to have to involve actions as well as pledges,' said
Mr Winston Lord, assistant secretary of state for East Asian affairs.
Mr John Shattuck, the State Department's human rights envoy, met last week
with Mr Wei, whose arrest appeared to come in response to his comments to Mr
Shattuck on the need for the US to maintain a tough line on human rights.
Before leaving China for Hong Kong yesterday Mr Shattuck said he was
disturbed by the reports of new detentions, and again called on the Chinese
government 'to release those who have been incarcerated solely for the
peaceful expression of their views.'
US officials accompanying Mr Shattuck had earlier been encouraged by hints
that China was considering abolishing the law against 'counter-revolution'
under which most political dissidents have been imprisoned.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940305

