FT944-2502

FT  16 DEC 94 / Dispute over UK colony as hard as the Rock: Spain and
Britain seem unable to control developments in Gibraltar


   By TOM BURNS and JIMMY BURNS


British officials have long compared annual meetings with their Spanish
counterparts to discuss Spain's claims to the UK colony of Gibraltar to
'visits to the dentist'.
Stepped-up border controls by Spain, which claims that the Rock has become a
drug smuggling and money laundering centre, are likely to make the next
round of talks between British foreign secretary Douglas Hurd and his
Spanish counterpart Javier Solana, scheduled for next Tuesday in London,
more painful than ever.
The 2 1/4 -sq mile Crown colony that nestles under a towering limestone rock
near the southern tip of Spain remains an intractable problem on the
diplomatic agenda of both the British and Spanish governments. The
increasing assertiveness of Mr Joe Bossano, Gibraltar's chief minister since
1988, has served to drive the bilateral talks even further down a dead-end.
The embarrassing truth about the talks is that neither side has anything of
substance to say to the other for both appear impotent to control
developments on the Rock.
In fact, each of the parties involved with Gibraltar has a separate agenda:
Spain wants territorial sovereignty over the Rock which the Gibraltarians
refuse to accept; the UK is committed to respecting the wishes of the
Gibraltarians but it wants to monitor closely what goes on in its colony;
and Gibraltar wants freedom from Spanish claims and from British
interference.
What makes it all the more difficult is that the border controls, ostensibly
to build up a data base on the Rock's drugs business, often result in
six-hour queues stretching deep into the colony's overcrowded urban centre.
Gibraltarians resent it as much as they did the blockade imposed by General
Franco in 1969 and lifted only after 16 years.
Accusations of bad faith, real or imagined whispering campaigns and sheer
ill-temper fostered by past fears and present frustrations have replaced the
optimism that marked the re-opening of Gibraltar's land frontier with Spain
in 1985 and the start of the so-called Brussels negotiations process between
London and Madrid to discuss 'all aspects' of the future of the colony.
Meanwhile Gibraltar, described by Spain's prime minister Mr Felipe Gonzalez
as a 'stone in the shoe' of Madrid's relations with London, has been pushed,
and has pushed itself, into an isolation that is wholly at odds with an open
European economy.
Effective lobbying in Brussels by the Spanish, who claim sovereignty over
Gibraltar, has, among other things, prevented the airstrip, which divides
the Rock from mainland Spain, from gaining the benefits of air traffic
deregulation within the EU.
But the tough tactics employed by Spain as it pursues its 281-year old claim
over Gibraltar are increasingly overshadowed by Britain's efforts to reclaim
a measure of control over a colony that it fears may have cut loose from
Whitehall's moorings.
Mr Bossano believes a return to a virtual frontier blockade is bad enough.
But worse is the squeeze he suspects is being engineered by London to
undermine the colony's attempt to make itself economically self-sufficient
as a step towards self-determination.
The view from London is that Mr Bossano has overstepped his brief by
seeking, though without much success, to set up Gibraltar as an off-shore
financial centre selling banking services to the European Union as a de
facto member but with looser regulations than in the UK. Britain is
responsible for the Rock's external affairs under the terms of the colony's
1969 constitution and Whitehall is firm about its supervisory powers, in
particular those covered by EU directives concerning the financial sector.
The festering relationship between Whitehall and the colony's local
government came into the open this summer when Gibraltar's London-appointed
attorney general, Mr John Blackburn Gittings, resigned nearly a year before
his three-year posting ended.
He had concluded that conflicts of interest in an increasingly politically
charged environment had left him with no option but to stand down. As
attorney-general, Mr Blackburn Gittings had to pursue the dual role of legal
adviser to the Gibraltarian government and legal representative of the
British government at a time of growing tension between Mr Bossano and
London.
At the centre of that tension is Mr Bossano's accusation that Whitehall's
regulatory supervision prevents Gibraltar from developing tax-efficient
financial services similar to those in Luxembourg. 'I think (the UK) is
hampering us,' he says. 'It could be a long-term strategy to make Gibraltar
look to Spain for its future.'
Mr Bossano says the EU allows discretion in the implementation of its
directives and that Whitehall should allow more leeway over those that
directly affect Gibraltar's interests. This makes Whitehall nervous.
'We are making absolutely sure that we have control over financial
regulations in Gibraltar,' says a senior UK Treasury official. 'In the past
the Gibraltarian government has had a very large say and this is no longer
the case.'
Seen from Madrid, the core of the Gibraltar problem is that London has been
too lenient with Mr Bossano. 'We are coming round to thinking that London
cannot deliver anything on Gibraltar,' says a Spanish diplomat who will be
attending the London talks.
At the same time, as the recent border controls demonstrate, Spain is making
no attempt to 'win the hearts and minds of the Gibraltarians', say British
officials. They point out that the Spanish government was angered when Mr
Bossano attended the IMF-World Bank meeting in Madrid in October as part of
the UK delegation and it ignored the chief minister when he said he was
prepared to negotiate directly with Spain.
Madrid was not in the mood for such peace overtures after a 'Gibraltar
national day' that had been held on the Rock the previous month. Mr Bossano
had invited Basque and Catalan separatists to celebrate the colony's
self-determination ambitions.
Then there is the growing evidence that Gibraltar's economy, as it fails to
make headway in its off-shore banking ambitions, is becoming increasingly
dependent not just on cigarette smuggling into Spain, a traditional
money-maker on the Rock, but also on narcotics.
Madrid claims that in the first 10 months of this year 42 tons of hashish
have been seized by its police, as well as 2.3m cartons of cigarettes.
Hashish seized from Gibraltar-based boats last year totalled 38 tons, up
from 10 tons in 1992.
Spanish officials say the Rock is coming close to a Mafia-type takeover:
'Gibraltar's narcotics business is industrially organised,' says one
official.
There are few satisfactory explanations for the presence of 200-odd fast
launches - painted black to help avoid detection at night - moored in
Gibraltar's marina.
The stock response on the Rock is that the launches leave the marina empty
of goods and return empty; whatever might occur in the 9-mile wide Straits
of Gibraltar that separate Morocco from Spain is not the concern of the
colony's government. Spanish police say drugs are loaded in the straits and
off-loaded on Spanish beaches.
Smuggling has increased in importance as Mr Bossano's financial centre
ambitions have foundered - partly because of Spanish opposition and partly
because of timing, given the recent global recession. The financial services
industry's prestige headquarters was to have been a multi-million
development called Europort, work on which began in 1989 on land reclaimed
from Gibraltar's harbour by Baltica group of Denmark. The office towers are
completed but virtually empty.
After dragging Baltica Finans, the Danish group's investment unit, to the
brink of bankruptcy, Europort has continued to haunt Mr Bossano's government
because of a row over fraud and corruption.
British police have been asked by Gibraltar's governor to co-operate with
Danish police following up allegations of fraud linked to the development.
Unofficially, they are looking into whether there is evidence of corruption
by members of Mr Bossano's government.
A former Baltica employee has testified at a Danish court hearing into
Baltica's near collapse that a payment of Pounds 250,000 was made to a
Gibraltar minister in connection with Europort.
Mr Bossano denies any impropriety by members of his government. 'There are
allegations of fraud by Danes against Danes involving Danish money. There is
no Gibraltarian money involved,' he says.
The UK and Spain, as allies in the EU and Nato, cannot allow the Gibraltar
problem to degenerate further. North Africa, clearly visible from the Rock,
is enough of a security flashpoint for Europe as it is.
In the circumstances, the best outcome for the talks next week would be a
realisation by both sides that the Brussels negotiating process has run its
course and that a radically different approach is required.
One way forward, favoured by some Spanish foreign ministry officials, could
be for Madrid to take up Mr Bossano's olive branch and begin discreet
contacts with the chief minister to find out what is on his 'shopping list'.
Should Madrid take such a plunge it might well find to its surprise that Mr
Bossano, who is a tough bargainer but is ultimately a realist, will be
willing to settle for some form of dual sovereignty or leaseback arrangement
that will respect the Rock's identity and institutions. This was suggested
by Spain ten years ago, and Madrid says London has never properly responded.
Mr Bossano needs a deal because he cannot afford to have Europort, the
duty-free shops on Main Street and the hotels losing increasing amounts of
money (the Holiday Inn hotel, the second-biggest, has applied for
receivership). And certainly he cannot afford to have the blackened hulls of
the stripped-down speedboats in the marina as virtually the only sign of
financial success.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941216

