FT941-3541

FT  16 MAR 94 / Settlers ready to be martyrs or heroes: Hebron Jews could
spark war


   By JULIAN OZANNE


A photograph of Rabbi Meir Kehane, the slain Jewish racist who advocated
religiously sanctified Jewish violence against Arabs, is proudly displayed
in the bedroom of a 13-year-old boy in Hebron, the city that has become a
flashpoint of Israeli-Palestinian violence.
'I don't agree with Kehane but when a boy grows up and his father is stoned
and his friend's father is murdered by Arabs, you must understand why he
might see Kehane as a hero,' says the boy's mother, Mrs Ruth Hizmy.
Rising Jewish settler militancy has become the greatest political threat to
the government of Mr Yitzhak Rabin and the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. At the least, the settlers promise a nationwide campaign of civil
disobedience to resist evacuation from Palestinian areas. At worst, rising
emotions, fears and Jewish religious fundamentalism could explode into a
Jewish-Arab civil war and even Jewish-on-Jewish violence.
The 40 Jewish families settled in Hebron are in the vanguard of Jewish
militancy. Hebron is the breeding ground of the two Jewish terrorist groups,
Kach and Kehane Lives, banned by the government this week.
The Hebron massacre has worsened the settlers' tendency to be an insular
community sustained by the belief they are on a mission from God to maintain
a Jewish presence amid the 110,000 Arabs who live in Hebron, burial place of
the biblical patriarchs Abraham and Jacob, and an area sacred to both Moslem
and Jew.
They refuse to see Hebron as occupied. For them it is an intrinsic part of
the land of Israel promised to the Jews by God. Part of their cultism is
reflected in their deep belief they are being victimised, not only by the
Arabs but by their 'treacherous' Jewish government. They believe all
outsiders do not understand them and are part of a conspiracy to defeat
their religious goals.
Like all messianic cults, they have martyrs and heroes and a powerful faith
in the sanctity of dying for one's beliefs. They strongly believe in
expanding their numbers by breeding; the average family has six children,
and talking to the children is like talking to the brainwashed.
Mrs Shani Horowitz, originally from New York, moved to Hebron because she
wanted to live somewhere 'where by just sitting I was doing something for
the Jewish people.'
In passionate and often angry tones, she says the Hebron settlers are like
the early Jewish pioneers who built the state of Israel through settlement.
'Hebron is spiritually and geographically the centre of Jewish life. Because
we live here, Jews can come and visit the sites and holy places. We are the
messengers. We are sitting here for the rest of the country.
'Evacuating Hebron is like evacuating the Wailing Wall. Hebron is the second
most important Jewish city after Jerusalem. We are very much on the front
line, on a mission as soldiers. We are holding on tight to the land of
Israel. We are redeeming this place from being barren of Jews.'
The government's timid moves against the settlers has exposed the weakness
of Mr Rabin's political will. He fears that acting against the Hebron
settlers will fuel right-wing opposition to the peace process and force the
government into surrendering a powerful pawn in the drawn-out negotiation
with the Palestinians.
But the government's refusal clearly to state the long-term line of its
withdrawal from occupied Arab land has bound all 125,000 settlers together
in common cause with the Hebron settlers. The belief is that any move
against Hebron is the thin edge of the wedge. Most of the cabinet realise
that Hebron and some other settlements will have to be evacuated sooner or
later; the more the government delays, the more strongly organised the
settlers become.
Yesterday, hours before an anti-government demonstration, the Yesha council
of Jewish settlements said: 'It is inconceivable that a Jewish government
could make Hebron Judenrein (clean of Jews) ..The Rabin government has no
mandate for an 'ethnic cleansing' of Hebron or to carry out its policies of
capitulation (to the PLO).'
The settlers are preparing a campaign of fierce civil disobedience against
any effort to evacuate them. They have urged the army to disobey orders, and
implicitly threaten violence. 'If the government tries to evacuate Hebron it
will be a declaration of war against the Jewish people,' said Mr Noam Arnon,
a Hebron settler. 'We are not going to move. We are not going alive. They
will have kill us.'
Mr Arnon says settler leaders are calling for non-violence because they know
that violence damages their cause. But he warns that if the army leaves,
Hebron settlers will take up arms against the Arabs in a civil war. Jewish
law has a strong prohibition against Jewish-on-Jewish violence, but Mr Arnon
says that if the army tried to evacuate Hebron by force, 'with deep
emotional and religious feeling, people might lose self-control. Then,
horrible, terrible things might happen.'
With up to 15,000 army-issued automatic weapons in the settlers' hands, ten
of thousands of licensed handguns and the possibility of secret arms caches,
these are threats the government cannot take lightly. But the more the
government delays a political decision on settlements, the more the settlers
threaten the fragile peace process, and the stability of the government
itself.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940316

