FT942-14924

FT  18 APR 94 / FT Guide to the Week


MONDAY 18
Hosokawa succession
Japan's ruling coalition is expected to put forward Tsutomu Hata (left),
foreign minister, as candidate for the prime ministership in a parliamentary
vote to be held this week. The vacancy follows the resignation of Morihiro
Hosokawa on April 8.
Meanwhile, Michio Watanabe, a member of the opposition LDP and a former
foreign minister, plans to form a breakaway party. His hope is that the
ruling coalition's dominant right wing may then back him for the
premiership.
EBRD meeting: The board of governors of the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development holds its third annual general meeting in St Petersburg,
Russia (to Apr 19). It will discuss a new strategy that concentrates
resources on the private sector.
European Union foreign ministers begin a two-day session in Luxembourg. On
the agenda are financing of the EU's common foreign and security policy,
talks with Ukraine on a possible partnership and co-operation accord, and
the EU-Cyprus association council.
Strasbourg: The final European Parliament session before the European
election in June begins (to Apr 22).
Benazir Bhutto, Pakistan's prime minister, begins her first official visit
to Germany (to Apr 21). It intends to cement the 'very friendly' relations
between the two countries. Germany is Pakistan's third most important
trading partner and the visit includes talks with Siemens, one of several
German companies which have invested DM53m (Dollars 31m) in Pakistan and to
which Bhutto will look for more investment as she pushes ahead with
privatisation. Talks with the government are expected to centre on nuclear
weapons, Yugoslavia and Kashmir.
Hungary begins its 'small shareholders programme', an attempt to broaden
privatisation, with a public offering of shares in Sopron Brewery. On the
same day, retailer Fotex expects to complete a Dollars 100m international
equity offering, the largest by an east European company.
Chernobyl check: International Atomic Energy Agency officials are to make a
tour of inspection of the Chernobyl nuclear power station (to Apr 22). Their
visit comes after a report described the plant as unsafe. It was the scene
of the world's biggest nuclear accident, when reactor number 4 exploded 8
years ago this month.
Holiday: Zurich (markets closed).
TUESDAY 19
Arafat visits Moscow
Yassir Arafat, leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organisation, is to
visit Moscow in an effort to obtain stronger support from the Russians in
the joint US-Russian sponsored Middle East peace process.
Later in the week, Mr Arafat may hold talks with Shimon Peres, Israel's
foreign minister, during the Crans Montana economic conference both will be
attending in Bucharest.
Rights issue: An Australian parliamentary delegation begins a three-day
visit to Bougainville, the Pacific island controlled by Papua New Guinea. It
has been the scene of bloody clashes between secessionist rebels and PNG
defence forces.
Access has been negligible since the conflict escalated five years ago, and
one of the delegation's aims is to investigate alleged human rights abuses.
Airport dispute: The European Commission is due to decide whether to start
infringement proceedings against Air France for discriminating against
non-French airlines at Orly airport, Paris. The debate, which is likely to
prove controversial, has already been delayed for several weeks after the
Commission bowed to French demands that it be delayed until after Air
France's unions had voted on the airline's restructuring plans.
The UK and other member states insist Air France is abusing a monopoly
position at Orly (left), and the decision is likely to prove highly
political in the light of the other row bubbling in the Commission over the
huge state aid package the French government recently gave the airline.
Euro Disney: The heads of the loan syndicates to the troubled theme park
near Paris will this week be in tense negotiations to persuade all the
group's 61 banks to approve proposals for its FFr13bn (Dollars 2.2bn)
financial restructuring. Only four of the banks have yet to agree to an 18
month interest holiday. All 61 lenders are expected to have rubber-stamped
the rescue deal by Friday.
Swedish bond: Sweden is to auction Skr10bn (Dollars 1.3bn) of 20-year
index-linked zero-coupon bonds, starting today, and continuing on the 20th
and 22nd. It is Sweden's first issue of bonds to be linked to inflation, in
the form of the consumer price index.
FT Survey: Estonia.
WEDNESDAY 20
IMF prepares for spring
The International Monetary Fund prefaces the spring meetings of its
governors in Washington DC with the publication of its World Economic
Outlook. Early drafts suggest the IMF has upgraded its forecast for growth
among the Group of Seven countries to 2.4 per cent, against 2.2 per cent in
September, largely because of higher growth expectations for the US.
Prospects elsewhere in the G7 are uninspiring, although Britain can look
forward to growth of 2.5 per cent, in spite of this year's tax increases.
Rio Group meeting: Foreign ministers from the Rio Group, which represents
Latin America and the Caribbean, meet their counterparts from the European
Union in Sao Paulo, Brazil (to Apr 23).
Nigeria's official 'war against indiscipline and corruption' is due to start
today. The military regime promised in November an extensive purge, but
corruption probes in the central bank and the oil industry have disclosed
nothing yet.
Hanover Messe, the world's largest industrial fair, begins (to Apr 27). Some
350,000 people are expected to visit the 1m sq m exhibition area, where
6,848 assorted companies from 60 countries will display their wares.
UK unemployment figures for March are expected to show a further fall after
February's seasonally adjusted decline of 38,800. A surprise rise in January
raised doubts about the recovery, but unemployment appears to have resumed a
downward trend. Analysts predict a seasonally adjusted drop of about 25,000.
UK average earnings will be closely watched. Last month, they revealed a
slight pick-up in wage inflation. An unchanged annual rate of 3.25 per cent
is expected for February.
UK PSBR: Government borrowing figures for March and the whole 1993-94
financial year are published. Although March is traditionally a month of
high expenditure, the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement is still expected
to undershoot the Pounds 50bn budget forecast. The consensus forecast points
to a March PSBR of Pounds 11.1bn, and borrowing of Pounds 45.8bn in 1993-94.
Kremlin chess contest:
The Intel chess grand prix opens in the Kremlin, Moscow, where Gary Kasparov
faces 15 challengers, including Britain's Nigel Short. Speed games, with 25
minutes for each player, will decide the Dollars 160,000 prize fund.
Follow-on tournaments are to be held in New York, London and Paris.
THURSDAY 21
Russia says no to Nato
Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, was due to sign the Partnership
For Peace today - but has now said he will not. The change of mind follows
Nato air strikes on Serb positions round Gorazde which were not co-ordinated
with the Russian side.
On Sunday, he said: 'We want a more serious and substantive agreement. . .
an agreement that will exclude unilateral actions, particularly military
ones in areas where we clearly have to co-operate.'
Crans Montana: The Romanian capital Bucharest hosts its first big
international conference since the Ceausescus fell in 1989, with the Crans
Montana Economic Forum (to Apr 24). The meeting, devoted to emerging
markets, is due to be attended by seven heads of state, 10 prime ministers
and 13 foreign ministers.
Aluminium pact: Trade delegates from some of the world's big
aluminium-producing countries meet in Brussels. They will discuss progress
following their historic agreement, reached in January, to cut world output
by between 1.5m and 2m tonnes. Western companies have announced annual cuts
of more than 900,000 tonnes, but Russia is having difficulty reaching its
objective of cuts of 300,000 tonnes by the end of April.
Kohl in Hungary: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany visits Hungary to boost
the country's governing conservatives ahead of elections on May 8. Germany
has championed Hungary's bid to join the European Union, and Hungarian prime
minister Peter Boross will want to make domestic political capital out of
the special relationship.
Queen's Awards for Industry
The 1994 winners of the Queen's awards for export, technological, and
environmental achievement are named today. The awards
honour companies that have achieved an outstanding increase in export
earnings, an advance in the application of technology or a benefit to the
environment. They are held for five years from their announcement.
FT Survey: Queen's Awards to Industry.
UK retail sales: A disappointingly low 2.5 per cent annual growth in retail
sales in February sparked fears that consumers were curbing spending ahead
of this month's tax rises.
March figures, published today, will be watched closely by the markets for a
further indication of consumer confidence. The City consensus, for a 0.3 per
cent month-on-month increase, making the annual rise 2.7 per cent, is in
line with CBI reports of modest growth.
Holiday: Brazil (markets closed).
FRIDAY 22
Papandreou meets Clinton
US President Bill Clinton receives Andreas Papandreou, Greece's prime
minister, at the White House in Washington. The US is is expected to press
Greece to be more flexible in its dispute with its neighbour Macedonia over
its name and flag.
It is Mr Papandreou's first visit to the US since he founded the Panhellenic
Socialist Movement (Pasok) 20 years ago. Previously, he lived in the US for
25 years, and headed the economics department at the University of
California at Berkeley.
European steel: European Union industry ministers meet in Luxembourg.
Discussions will centre on the steel industry and a Commission proposal to
extend a rescue plan until November while companies finalise ways to cut 8m
more tonnes of capacity in hot-rolled products.
Saleroom: Canaletto's A Capriccio of the Scuola di San Marco in Venice is
the centrepiece of an auction of old master paintings by Christie's of
London. The work, which dates from the 1740s, is estimated to fetch between
Pounds 1m and Pounds 1.5m.
WEEKEND 23-24
G7 takes stock
Finance ministers and central bank governors from the Group of Seven
industrial countries gather in Washington on Sunday to review economic
growth, prospects for employment, and efforts to support Russia's struggling
economy.
Their meeting - the third this year - may also focus on recent turbulence in
financial markets, following the US decision in February to raise short-term
interest rates.
Bafta awards: The British Academy of Film and Television Arts on Sunday
presents its Production and Performance Awards for the best films, actors
and television shows of the year.
El Salvador holds a run-off on Sunday in the presidential contest between
Armando Calderon Sol, of the ruling rightwing Arena party, and Ruben Zamora,
who heads a leftist coalition which includes the former FMLN guerrilla
group. Mr Calderon Sol is the favourite, after just failing to gain 50 per
cent of the vote in the first round.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940418

