FT943-879

FT  27 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Inchcape warns on Japanese car sales


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Inchcape, the international motors, marketing and services group, yesterday
confirmed that the strength of the yen had hit sales of Japanese cars in
Europe, but said all the rest of its operations were performing well.
Mr Charles Mackay, Inchcape's chief executive, said: 'It has been very tough
for the Japanese manufacturers - and might be for some time. But make no
mistake, they will be back.'
Mr Mackay said the Japanese had moved their vehicles too far upmarket,
seeking higher prices and offering more sophisticated equipment. This had
cost them sales when recession struck, but they were now bringing in new
models and cutting their production costs.
Inchcape reported a 4 per cent drop in pre-tax profits, from Pounds 130.4m
to Pounds 125.5m in the six months to June 30 on flat sales of Pounds
3.03bn.
Sir David Plastow, chairman, pointedly failed to repeat the optimism he
expressed at the group's AGM in May that the full-year profits would exceed
last year's level of Pounds 272m. However, analysts were reassured by the
overall tone of the statement. The shares, which have fallen by a third this
year, closed unchanged at 410p in a falling market.
Sir David described the results as a 'satisfactory overall performance' -
particularly since the previous period included a Pounds 10.6m profit
contribution from a joint venture exporting Toyota vehicles to China, which
had now ended. Excluding this, underlying group profits grew 6 per cent, in
spite of a Pounds 20.6m drop to Pounds 19.6m in the profits contribution
from distributing Japanese vehicles in Europe.
Inchcape said its Japanese motors businesses held up reasonably well outside
Europe, and the contribution from the group's European and American marques
around the world improved strongly. The retail motors operations were now
benefiting not only from the rationalisation in the UK and continental
Europe, but also from an upturn in the cycle in the UK. Operating profits
from total motor activities fell 11 per cent to Pounds 81.8m.
The marketing stream increased operating profits by 20 per cent to Pounds
34.2m after a difficult 1993, although Japan continued to suffer from from
recession.
All the services businesses performed strongly. Insurance - primarily Bain
Clarkson - grew operating profits by 31 per cent to Pounds 19.4m. Hogg
Group, bought for Pounds 177m in April, contributed Pounds 1.1m after
financing costs in its first month.
Testing services increased profits by 23 per cent to Pounds 9.8m, with the
the petrochemicals business benefiting from restructuring over the last two
years. An upturn in mining exploration activity helped the minerals
business.
Shipping services raised profits 26 per cent to Pounds 7.8m, with a
particularly good performance from the North American and Middle East
operations. The small buying business returned to profit.
Earnings per share fell by 7 per cent to 14.8p (15.9p), while the interim
dividend rose by 3 per cent to 6p (5.8p).
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940927

