FT942-14846

FT  19 APR 94 / World Trade News: Canada warns US in wheat dispute


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


Canada has warned it will retaliate against US products if the Clinton
administration goes ahead with threats to restrict imports of Canadian wheat
at the end of this week.
The Canadians' response follows concern in Ottawa that US agribusiness
interests are using the wheat dispute as a lever to wring concessions in
other areas of US-Canada farm trade. Mr Jack Wilkinson, president of the
Canadian Federation of Agriculture, said US demands had grown 'even more
onerous' in recent weeks.
In particular, the US has recently indicated dissatisfaction with the high
tariffs which Canada plans to impose on poultry, eggs and dairy products.
Under the Uruguay Round these tariffs are due to replace quotas and other
non-tariff barriers.
The US contends that Ottawa is required to dismantle the tariffs quickly
under the US-Canada bilateral free trade agreement, which stipulates that
neither country can impose new customs duties. Canada maintains the FTA and
the North American Free Trade Agreement grant specific exemptions for
'supply-managed' products.
Talks between US and Canadian ministers on the wheat dispute broke down in
Marrakesh last week. Mr Mike Espy, US agriculture secretary, said if no
agreement was reached by Friday the US planned to raise tariffs on wheat.
Mr Ralph Goodale, his Canadian counterpart, indicated that retaliatory
action would be taken against California wine and rice, chicken products,
apples and baked goods.
The dispute stems from a sharp increase in sales of Canadian wheat,
especially durum, in the US. Shipments are expected to reach 2.5m tonnes in
the current crop year, compared with the usual 1.3m-1.5m tonnes.
Washington complains that the wheat is excessively subsidised, and has
proposed a cap on wheat imports from Canada of about 1.5m tonnes a year.
Ottawa counters that the US's export enhancement programme has created a
wheat shortage in the domestic market, prompting buyers to turn to
high-quality Canadian grain. The Canadians also point out that US exports to
Canada of processed farm products - such as pasta and flour  - have risen
sharply in recent years.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940419

