FT942-16377

FT  11 APR 94 / People: TWA - Erickson switches sides


   By FRANK MCGURTY


Last spring, Jeffrey Erickson was on the winning side of a David-and-Goliath
battle which pitted upstart Reno Air against Northwest, one of the biggest
US carriers, writes Frank McGurty.
With a lot of help from the US justice department, Reno's chief executive
succeeded in forcing Northwest to abandon plans which he said were intended
to stop his airline from expanding its services into mid-western markets.
Erickson, recently appointed president of Trans World Airlines, now finds
himself on the opposite side of the great divide. His challenge is to revive
another of America's flying behemoths, humbled in recent years by
competition from smaller, low-cost airlines such as Reno.
That Herculean task may prove to be humbling to the 49-year-old industry
veteran. Erickson is taking over a carrier which stumbled badly this winter
after emerging from two years of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
In January, the airline endured the embarrassing departure of two senior
executives, including its chairman William Howard, who quit under a cloud
after only six months.
Howard's successor, Donald Craib, has no experience in running an airline -
which can only enhance Erickson's value. After cutting his teeth in
management jobs at Aloha, Midway and Continental airlines, Erickson took the
helm at Reno at the time of its 1990 initial public offering.
But his record there was mixed, analysts say. The so-called 'niche' carrier,
with 17 leased aircraft and a mere 1,200 employees, increased losses with
each year of operation. Whether Erickson can succeed in turning round TWA -
with 26,000 employees, nearly 200 aircraft and a more tangled route system -
remains an open question.
Kevin Murphy, an analyst at Morgan Stanley in New York, is pessimistic. He
believes the airline's days are numbered, and expects Erickson to serve as a
'caretaker' while it follows Pan American into oblivion.
If so, Erickson, who began his career 25 years ago as a senior engineer at
Pan Am, would have travelled full circle.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940411

