FT944-2731

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: Sprint shares battered by price
pressure worries


   By CLARE GASCOIGNE


   NEW YORK


Shares in Sprint, the third largest telephone company in the US, fell 11 per
cent yesterday following a warning that fourth-quarter income would be hit
by price pressures in the long-distance market.
Mr Arthur Krause, executive vice-president and chief financial officer, said
long-distance income would fall from its third-quarter high of Dollars 165m,
although it would remain above 1993's fourth-quarter figure of Dollars 133m.
The change from the strong growth seen in recent months knocked Dollars 3
7/8 off Sprint shares, which closed at Dollars 26 7/8 .
'Competition for residential customers has intensified during the quarter
and we have seen price pressures in the business market,' Mr Krause said.
AT&T, the biggest long-distance phone company in the US, recently launched a
marketing campaign.
Sprint said it planned to target advertising and marketing spending in
profitable areas, but refused to give further details.
Long-distance phone services account for the bulk of Sprint's income,
amounting to 71 per cent of its Dollars 230m net income in the third
quarter.
However, Mr Krause said Sprint expected growth in volume for the fourth
quarter compared with a year ago, adding that volume in the long-distance
division would increase by between 10 and 11 per cent.
The Kansas City-based group has formed a series of alliances in recent
months to meet the growing competition in the US telecommunications
industry. In October, it formed a partnership with three US cable companies
to provide telephone, entertainment and information services.
On Tuesday, Sprint announced an alliance with Telefonos de Mexico (Telmex)
to provide services throughout North America.
Sprint said at the time its alliance with Telmex would help it create a
seamless North American telecoms network. Sprint is already aligned with
Call-Net, a Canadian long-distance carrier, and operates four cross-border
fibre optic connections with Telmex between the US and Mexico.
Mr Krause said that local and cellular operations were continuing to perform
'in line with expectations'. Cellular operations, which accounted for 14 per
cent of the company's net income in the third quarter, were its fastest
growth area.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941216

