FT942-15910

FT  13 APR 94 / Recruitment: Carnage of chiefs in Tecs battle is leading to
new tactics - A fledgling sector is demanding skills that are rare in the
present climate of public and private polarisation


   By LISA WOOD


Norman Stoller, chairman of a successful, rapidly growing company, admits he
made a mistake last year in the selection of a new chief executive for the
training and enterprise council of which he is the non-executive chairman.
'We chose the wrong man,' says Stoller, whose employer-led Tec, in Oldham,
Lancashire, will next month begin advertising the post again.
Oldham Tec is not alone, however, in having trouble recruiting the chief
executives who provide the day-to-day management of Tecs, which are
responsible for administering budgets of more than Pounds 2bn a year
delivering government funded training and fostering enterprise in their
localities.
Figures disclosed this week by the Department of Employment show that since
April 1990, when the first Tecs were set-up by the department, 35 of the
original 82 chief executives have left their posts.
It is an extraordinarily high level of turnover, probably unmatched by any
sector. Some have been sacked by their boards, others have left by mutual
consent. A substantial number, about 20, who were on secondment from the
civil service have returned to the Department of Employment.
In some cases, appointment of successors has been controversial. At Kent
Tec, for example, the local county council pulled out of talks on merging
its economic development unit with the Tec because its candidate was
unsuccessful for the chief executive's job.
Commentators on Tecs might conclude that the part-time volunteers who form
Tec boards  - mostly senior executives  - have exercised poor judgment in
their selection processes of the individuals who many believe are critical
to the success of any Tec. Can they do any better in the future?
In time, as they are able to give greater consideration to the sort of
management style they want, is the conclusion of the rash of management and
recruitment consultants who are currently working with Tecs.
For the job of chief executive of a Tec, as with a number of jobs that are
emerging in bodies such as NHS Hospital Trusts, has no role model. These new
jobs, which are growing in number and which have been specifically targeted
by a host of recruitment agencies and newspaper advertisements, require both
the commercial skills of the private sector and knowledge and sensitivity as
to how the public sector works.
Because they are spending public money, recruits must also expect opprobrium
if they demand a luxury car and a high salary. Yet, at the same time they
will be asked to demonstrate excellent interpersonal skills.
Mr David Howells, an independent management consultant, who has worked
extensively with Tecs, says: 'The specification is truly demanding. Tec
boards need to recruit the Archangel Gabriel, or one of his key henchman, to
do the job. There are a number of people who are truly effective, but their
numbers are limited.'
An advertisement placed this week for such a Pounds 55,000 a year post at
Hertfordshire Tec says 'ideally, candidates will combine sound management
experience in industry and commerce, together with public sector experience,
which includes dealing with government departments and agencies'.
It is a mixture that is rarely found in the private sector, except perhaps
the defence industry, from which some of the most successful chief
executives have been drawn.
An advertisement for an NHS hospital trust would place similar emphasis on
not only a keen understanding of the NHS but also the financial disciplines
and skills of the private sector.
Such discipline is still generally lacking according to a government report
published this week. It said that many hospital and community trusts were
failing to meet government financial targets. Managers had to make a number
of changes, including tighter financial reporting regimes, as well as making
information about their activities more generally available.
NHS trusts have not yet had the fall-out rate of senior managers experienced
by Tecs, but this may only be a matter of time as boards, made up
predominantly from the private sector, become more demanding. At present
most manager posts go to career NHS staff, mainly because the NHS is so
'horrendously complicated', according to Mr Alan Bedford, manager of the
South Downs Health NHS Trust.
However, according to Bill Philips, head of public sector practice at NBS,
recruitment consultants, the NHS trusts will need to give more consideration
to how they recruit in the future. 'The NHS is unlikely to generate as many
senior managers with the requisite skills as it needs,' he says. 'Therefore
it needs to bring in talent from outside. It is how it is done that needs to
be considered carefully.'
So what is to be done? Boards of Tecs argue that progress in their
appointments of senior staff will be made as the role of the chief executive
becomes clearer, and they become more adept at drawing up job
specifications.
Stoller's first appointment at Oldham Tec in April 1990 was a civil servant.
In line with many other Tecs, he was constrained in his recruitment
processes. 'Tecs should first consider appointing the training agency
manager,' the government had said when it established Tecs. If they decided
not to do so, the appointment became limited; the salary could be covered by
public funds only up to the average of the relevant civil service grade.
Stoller, however, does not regret the appointment. He says he knows some
Tecs which initially appointed chief executives from the private sector only
to be disappointed. Some civil servants developed the necessary qualities to
run a Tec, others did not. Likewise, some private sector people struggled to
understand the system.
'In order to get the Tec running we had to understand government rules,' he
says. 'But, people who have started a business from scratch know that it
takes one kind of person to get a ball roll and that is not necessarily the
same person who will get it rolling faster. There are so many things we are
involved in now, including income generation, that the job needs a different
type of person.'
While the newly defined post is being openly advertised, there is an
internal candidate. This is a route that recruitment and management
consultants say may need to be taken more frequently.
'Talent may have to be identified and groomed internally,' says Mr Paul
Hutt, Hay Management, which has worked with more than 30 Tecs in developing
effective management models.
It is a strategy that some NHS trusts are also adopting, bringing in
individuals from the private sector at finance director and similar levels,
so that they can be acclimatised to the newer climate before internal
promotion.
Perhaps this form of entry into the profession should be considered by the
growing number of managers who have been shed by the private sector and are
considering jobs in this fledgling sector where there will continue to be a
growth in opportunities. The traditional view that are either public sector
or private sector jobs is being challenged and there are now a growing
number of jobs that are neither one thing nor the other.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940413

