FT942-15391

FT  15 APR 94 / Arts: Dissonance in Prague - Andrew Clark finds Czech
Philharmonic supporters out of tune with its new conductor


   By ANDREW CLARK


There is disharmony at the Philharmonic. Not at the London, Berlin or New
York philharmonics, but in Prague, where the Czech Philharmonic and its
audiences are deeply divided about the first foreign music director in the
orchestra's 98-year history.
In most countries, the appointment of a foreign conductor would cause few
problems, and could even add to an orchestra's prestige. Not one of London's
four independent orchestras, for example, has a British music director. But
in the Czech Republic, where national pride is identified with leading
artistic institutions, the arrival of Gerd Albrecht from Germany has aroused
intense passions.
The issue recently took on a political dimension when Albrecht turned down
an invitation for the Czech Philharmonic to play at the Vatican. President
Vaclav Havel openly criticised him for 'damaging the esteem of the Czech
Republic'.
Albrecht's appointment is hardly new. In 1991, the orchestra held its
first-ever vote for the post of chief conductor and by the narrowest of
margins, Albrecht defeated the Czech incumbent, Jiri Belohlavek. But it is
only in this season, since Albrecht took up the appointment and began
conducting regularly in Prague, that the consequences have become clear.
In the post-revolutionary atmosphere of freedom and democracy, the players
saw Albrecht as a passport to fortune. He bore the promise of lucrative
foreign tours and recording contracts, none of which has materialised:
western agents and record companies are only interested if the orchestra
works with Czech conductors. 'The orchestra is losing out,' says Anthony
Howard of IMG Artists, the agency which has organised the orchestra's recent
visits to Britain.
'A lot of concert promoters are interested in the Czech Philharmonic, but
not in Gerd Albrecht. He's not regarded as a top-notch conductor and he's
German. The package doesn't fit. The Czech conductors with whom the
orchestra used to work may not have been household names, but they fitted in
and produced good results. Albrecht's appointment was not a good idea.'
Albrecht nevertheless has many supporters in Prague. While increasing the
profile of Bruckner and other German composers, he has conducted a wide
variety of Czech repertoire, programming rarities by Fibich and Martinu
alongside popular works by Dvorak. 'The Czech Philharmonic has always been
charmed by conductors like Sawallisch and Albrecht,' says one local critic.
'Albrecht has the detached, perfect German baton.'
But these qualities are exactly what opponents cite as alien to the
orchestra's tradition, and many older members of the orchestra and its
audience remember the German wartime occupation. 'He's a good enough
conductor,' says one orchestra veteran, 'but whether he's right for us is
another matter. The Czech Philharmonic became famous by playing under great
Czech conductors like Talich and Ancerl. When Albrecht conducts, everything
is exact and cool. It lacks spontaneity and the Czech spirit.'
If Albrecht had the international reputation of Colin Davis or Kurt Masur,
his opponents would doubtless accept him. But the orchestra cannot afford a
front-rank foreign conductor.
It has given Albrecht a five-year contract with sweeping powers, enabling
him to veto the Vatican concert, which had been offered to another
conductor. 'A strong management would take control of the situation, but
there's no one with the guts or the knowhow to do it,' says one Philharmonic
insider. 'The orchestra is paying for its own arrogance. They'll be crawling
back to Belohlavek in five years.'
Ironically, the two main beneficiaries of the Albrecht controversy have been
Belohlavek and the Prague Symphony Orchestra. Belohlavek, still only 48 but
with a reputation as a strong orchestral trainer, has wasted no time in
developing his freelance international career. The Prague Symphony is
picking up prestigious engagements at home and abroad which would previously
have gone to its older rival. Under its chief conductor, Martin Turnovsky,
it has traded profitably on its Czech character.
'We want to be a Czech cultural institution that is open to the world,' says
Roman Belor, the Prague Symphony's manager. 'At the same time, we feel a
responsibility for the continuity of Czech culture. There's something
special in the atmosphere of Prague and the Bohemian countryside, in the
traditions handed down and the mixture of middle-European influences, which
give a distinctive sound to the music made and played here.
'It doesn't prevent foreigners from giving good performances. But the
advantage of Czech conductors and Czech orchestras playing this music is
that they are Czech - they were born here.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940415

