FT944-14436

FT  22 OCT 94 / Food and Drink: Just a little local difficulty - Wine / A
look at a sour taste in the northern Rhone


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


Does France's oldest wine region need an enfant terrible? Almost certainly
not, but never mind, Michel Chapoutier shows no signs of either growing up
or calming down, which makes life for the rest of us extremely entertaining.
His neighbouring vine growers on the famous, vine-covered hill of Hermitage
in the northern Rhone Valley just south of Lyons are less amused. Indeed the
atmosphere in the tiny, wine-dominated town of Tain l'Hermitage, where all
but one of the famous names of the Rhone are based, has become distinctly
vinegary.
The trouble with young Chapoutier, who took over this substantial family
business from his father as recently as 1989, is that what he makes up for
in fervour, he lacks in statesmanship. He is diminutive, wears a swot's
pebble glasses, has a rare passion for irony and visibly tries, invariably
unsuccessfully, to control his tongue.
He is utterly besotted with bio-dynamism, the Steiner-inspired farming
techniques which involve regenerating the soil in harmony with astrology. He
is also convinced that low yields are the key to wine quality, and usually
accompanies his tasting notes with impressively low hectolitre-per-hectare
statistics.
Michel Chapoutier is equally convinced, however, that most other producers
in the northern Rhone (including his father Max) have got it wrong, and
rarely misses an opportunity to point this out.
Things came to a head this summer when Robert Parker, the influential
American wine critic, clearly much taken with the intensely concentrated
'new' Chapoutier style, printed Michel's complaints that during the
difficult, wet 1993 growing season the chemicals used by neighbouring
vine-growers affected the margins of his vineyards, leaving them vulnerable
to the fungal diseases which ravaged many non-biodynamic vineyards.
The result was an intemperate letter to Parker from the creme de la creme of
Hermitage, including Gerard Jaboulet, Chave, and Delas, vilifying
Chapoutier, claiming that his Hermitage vineyard had in fact been treated
with weedkiller, and had been sprayed by helicopter. These other growers
also included some figures which suggested that Chapoutier's average yields
were considerably higher than he claimed.
Now Michel Chapoutier has issued his response in this dispute between the
most prominent inhabitants of Tain l'Hermitage (population 5,000), all of
whom work cheek by jowl.
He must have chuckled at the helicopter accusation, for of course there is
nothing essentially anti-organic about heli-spraying - indeed the fanatical
Lalou Bize-Leroy, 'the queen of Burgundy', applied several tisanes by
helicopter to her world-famous vineyards last year.
The weedkiller claim is furiously rejected by Chapoutier and described as
one of the most serious. His reply also contains some laborious play with
statistics, notably with red and white wine areas as factors, to demonstrate
that Chapoutier's yields in Hermitage were a relatively modest 33.15 hl/ha
in 1993 (in Chateauneuf-du-Pape just 20.46 hl/ha).
The rain, which also dogged this year's harvest in the northern Rhone, is
unlikely to wash away the issues involved in this dispute, however. Gerard
Chave describes Chapoutier's response as 'Unbelievable. I have never seen
anything like this in the whole of my professional life.'
Chapoutier acknowledges in his reply that he is widely criticised for being
young and passionate, and claims that it is his youth which spurs him to
take a long-term view, embracing the methods and low yields which he
believes will preserve the good name of France's great wine appellations.
What is interesting, he concludes, is to ponder the real motivation of his
angry neighbours? With the irritating tunnel vision of any young
revolutionary, he suggests they are propelled by fear of these 'new'
techniques, and the sacrifices that will be necessary to implement them.
In modern viticulture, radicalism means a return to traditional roots, a
rejection of the commercial agrochemistry which has transformed vineyards in
the last three decades. In winemaking too Chapoutier is notable for an
attachment to ancient methods, particularly the much-photographed
twice-daily pigeage, during which four muscley legs stomp down grape skins
in the firm's unfashionably open-topped, wooden fermentation vats.
Certainly the new Chapoutier wines, from 1989 onwards, are impressive. They
are refreshingly wild and intense (just like their maker), the sort of dense
essences that require good cellaring and careful handling.
And they are available in the sort of quantities that propel all but the
most limited bottlings into major distribution (Marks and Spencer even tried
its hand with a Chapoutier Rasteau but it was far too risque for it).
Majestic, Oddbins, Thresher, Adnams of Southwold, Averys of Bristol,
Gauntleys of Nottingham, Justerini & Brooks of London SW1 and Edinburgh and
Tanners of Shrewsbury all stock some wines from the new regime.
What young Chapoutier needs is an adviser, less a Max Clifford publicist
than Marcel Guigal, the softly spoken wizard of Cote-Rotie 40 minutes' drive
upriver. 'Calm down,' has been his advice to all.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941022

