FT944-6091

FT  30 NOV 94 / UN chief tries to salvage Bosnia peacekeeping: Boutros Ghali
to visit Sarajevo in 'critical high stakes' mission


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general, will today meet the
leaders of the warring sides in Sarajevo in a bid to salvage the battered
credibility of his organisation.
In what a UN official decribed as a 'critical, high-stakes' mission, Mr
Boutros Ghali will meet Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic and Bosnian Serb
leader Radovan Karadzic and lay out the conditions for the continuation of
the UN operation in Bosnia.
He will try to broker a ceasefire in the war-torn territory, and, in
particular, around Bihac, the north-western Moslem enclave, where infantry
clashes yesterday were reported to the west of the UN 'safe area'.
Mr Boutros Ghali is expected to meet an angry reception in Sarajevo, where
many resent the UN's failure to lift the 32-month Serb siege.
His last visit in December 1992 is remembered bitterly for his remarks that
he could think of a dozen places even worse than Sarajevo.
His visit coincides with intense diplomatic efforts to overcome deep splits
in the international community over Bosnia and to resume the peace process.
In a bid to get the Bosnian Serbs to return to the bargaining table,
meanwhile, envoys from the five-nation contact group yesterday also
travelled to Sarajevo, for talks with the Moslem-led Bosnian government.
The representatives - from the US, Russia, Germany, France and the UK - were
also due to meet Bosnian Serb leaders for the first time since they rejected
a western peace plan - a partition of Bosnia - in July. This meeting
followed talks with President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia in Belgrade on
Monday.
Despite diplomatic strains placed on the contact group by criticism from the
US of the efficacy of the UN's military role in Bosnia, the international
mediators appear to hold out hope of reviving their peace plan to divide
Bosnia roughly in half between the Moslem-Croat federation and the Bosnian
Serbs, who control 70 per cent of the war-torn country.
The peace process will get an additional boost when Serb rebels from Croatia
sign an agreement on Thursday on restoring economic links with Zagreb, the
Croat capital.
A close associate of Mr Milosevic yesterday said Belgrade would maintain a
direct link with Serb-held territory in Croatia, which would step up
pressure on the Bosnian Serbs to sign a peace deal.
But the Bosnian Serb leadership, which over the past two weeks has revelled
in the eruption of a serious transatlantic feud over Bosnia, is waiting for
territorial concessions.
Mr Milosevic this week has signalled that he is pushing for Bosnian Serbs to
negotiate land swaps on a bilateral basis.
Mr Mirko Pejanovic, an ethnic Serb member of Bosnia's collective presidency,
disclosed in London that he had been in touch with aides to Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister.
Mr Pejanovic - who contests the right of Mr Karadzic to speak for Bosnian
Serbs - said he had put to Russian officials the concerns of the 200,000
Serbs who live in Bosnian government-controlled territory.
Russia has strong traditional ties with the Serbs and big diplomatic
presence in Croatia, but until recently its lines of communications with the
Bosnian leadership have been weak.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941130

