FT941-5662

FT  05 MAR 94 / IG Metall in last-ditch strike talks: Engineering union
issues list of companies to be hit first


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   HANOVER


Full-scale negotiations between Germany's engineering workers and employers
were relaunched last night in an attempt to head off what would be the
industry's most serious strike for a decade.
Leaders of IG Metall, the engineering trade union, agreed to the talks
yesterday morning, but also gave the go-ahead for strike action to begin at
6am on Monday.
The first sign of progress came when both sides emerged after seven hours of
talks at 1am this morning to report back to their national executive
committees. An official said: 'All parts of the package are now back in
discussion.'
The union's regional headquarters in Hanover also issued a list of 22
companies, involving some 11,000 workers, which will be first hit by strike
action in the state of Lower Saxony. Top of the list are the Man bus plant
in Salzgitter, and Linke-Hofmann-Busch, the Preussag subsidiary which
manufactures wagons for Germany's ICE high-speed train.
Mr Zwickel said the union would take every opportunity to avoid a strike,
but he expressed doubts the latest round of talks would lead to an
acceptable wage compromise at the last minute.
However, he added that IG Metall would 'leave no stone unturned to try to
keep the engineering workers out of an all-out conflict' He blamed the
employers for the current impasse, saying they had refused to abandon their
'unacceptable positions.'
Gesamtmetall, the employers' national federation, is calling for real cost
cuts from the pay round, and has served notice of cancellation of the
existing contract on holiday bonuses - which has most incensed the workers.
As a result, the Lower Saxony engineering workers voted by a hefty 92.2 per
cent in favour of strike action in a ballot this week. Nonetheless, the
union is aware that in a steep recession, with rising unemployment, its
position is weak.
No big suppliers to the German car industry are involved, although they
amount to 40 per cent of engineering employers in Lower Saxony.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940305

