FT942-14865

FT  19 APR 94 / Strauss's ghost returns to haunt Bavaria


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


Something is rotten in the proud and prosperous Free State of Bavaria, once
a byword for the post-war success story of the German federal republic.
The reputation of the late Mr Franz Josef Strauss - political godfather of
the southern German state, several times premier in Munich, unsuccessful
candidate for federal chancellor and formerly both finance and defence
minister in Bonn - is under attack as never before.
It is not so much his political stance as Germany's most articulate and
controversial post-war conservative which is under fire, but his links with
wealthy Bavarian entrepreneurs. Now his successors at the head of the
conservative Christian Social Union in Bavaria, sister party of Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union in the rest of the country, are
fighting a rearguard action to save their absolute majority in the state
parliament, their seats in the European parliament, and ultimately their
place in the Bonn coalition.
Latest in the firing line is Mr Edmund Stoiber, current Bavarian premier,
CSU strong man and formerly chief personal aide and minister of state in Mr
Strauss's chancellery.
The irony is that he has sought to present himself as Mr Clean, presiding
over a regime free of the whiff of corruption which always accompanied the
rule of the flamboyant Mr Strauss, who died in office in 1988. Yet the 'back
to basics' moral crusade he has launched now threatens his own position.
Mr Stoiber was last week forced to release a formal government statement on
a welter of accusations from the press and opposition Social Democrats about
alleged wrongful intervention by Mr Strauss in the tax affairs of Mr Eduard
Zwick, a multi-millionaire businessman and close friend now living in
Switzerland.
Mr Strauss is alleged to have sought to have either the prosecution against
Mr Zwick - for alleged tax evasion totalling more than DM70m (Pounds 28m) -
quashed, or a compromise negotiated allowing him to return to the country.
Although Mr Stoiber, who was finance minister under Mr Strauss, has denied
any personal involvement in the Zwick saga, both Spiegel magazine and the
Suddeutsche Zeitung in Munich have published detailed allegations suggesting
they were involved.
This week Mr Zwick's son, Johannes, who has been held on remand since
January, accused of involvement in the tax evasion, is due to give evidence
before a parliamentary inquiry in Munich. Bavaria is waiting with bated
breath to see if he will provide more evidence to back up his father's
bitter claims - in an interview with Spiegel - about the close financial
ties he had with both Mr Strauss and the CSU.
Already, however, the saga has taken its toll of the political fortunes of
Mr Stoiber and the CSU. The former is now trailing his SPD rival in Bavaria,
Ms Renate Schmidt, by 47 per cent to 41 per cent, in a popularity poll
published by Spiegel. As for their parties, the CSU is still in front with
43 per cent, but the SPD (with 36) could possibly form a governing coalition
with the Greens (8 per cent) if the figures hold true in the September poll.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940419

