FT942-16124

FT  12 APR 94 / Portugal moves to boost role of small investor


   By PETER WISE


   LISBON


Portugal announced measures to promote 'popular capitalism' and draw small
investors into the country's privatisation programme yesterday.
Mr Eduardo Catroga, finance minister, said the government planned to sell
shares in state-owned companies to small savers more cheaply than to
companies or institutional investors. The move is aimed at bringing greater
liquidity to the Portuguese bourse.
In a related move, designed to enhance the competitiveness of its banking
system, Portugal is to cut compulsory cash reserves for commercial banks
from 17 per cent to below 3 per cent of selected liabilities.
The move, announced by the central bank, applies to reserves levied on the
banks' total deposits and treasury bills, excluding their offshore deposits,
and is likely to take effect before the end of this month.
The estimated Es2,000bn (Pounds 7.8bn) of banking liquidity that will be
released will be absorbed by an issue of special central bank bonds, in the
hope of preventing a sharp fall in short-term interest rates.
A Lisbon banker said: 'The central bank is being careful to ensure that
there will be little impact either on liquidity or interest rates, otherwise
the changes would blow the whole interest rate system out of the water.'
Mr Catroga said that in privatising companies considered strategic to the
economy, the state would maintain a majority of the capital or a 'golden
share', giving it veto rights over company decisions.
Leading privatisations planned for 1994 and 1995 include the sale of
minority stakes in Cimpor, a cement producer, Electricidade de Portugal, a
power producer and distributor, and Portugal Telecom, a telecommunications
operator to be formed from the merger of three existing companies.
'In the case of Cimpor, telecommunications and EDP, it is out of the
question the state could lose control', Mr Catroga said.
Portugal's centre-right government has said it plans to sell up to 30 per
cent of BFE, the trade bank, but hinted for the first time at the sale of
minority stakes in two other financial sector companies, BNU and Fidelidade.
'The state must still retain a strong position in the financial system, but
this does not mean that we cannot disperse the capital of one or two
companies such as Banco de Fomento, BNU or Fidelidade', Mr Catroga said.
Private Portuguese investors were not big enough to buy majority stakes, he
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940412

