FT942-15493

FT  15 APR 94 / Bundesbank cuts quarter point from its key rates: Other
countries follow German lead to ease borrowing


   By DAVID WALLER and SARA WEBB


   FRANKFURT, LONDON


The German Bundesbank yesterday lowered its key interest rates by a quarter
of a percentage point, saying that falling inflation justified the cut in
spite of rapid money supply growth.
The reduction of the discount rate to 5 per cent and the Lombard emergency
borrowing rate to 6.5 per cent was followed by rate cuts in Switzerland,
Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark, and raised expectations of
similar moves by Italy and France.
The Bundesbank's move, bringing short-term interest rates to levels last
seen five years ago, came in spite of explosive growth in German money
supply so far this year.
The cuts signal the bank's determination to continue its policy of slow,
small reductions in short-term interest rates. Although the Lombard rate cut
was expected, the reduction in the discount rate - the first since mid
February - took financial markets by surprise.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, said: 'We have studied the
situation very hard today and we are convinced that we are on the way to
fulfilling our most important goal of achieving price stability. Thus the
decision (to cut rates) is appropriate despite the strong monetary
expansion.'
Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, praised the move as encouraging a further
strengthening of the economy.
The influential German Banks' Association said the cuts showed the
Bundesbank's willingness to provide support for the economy within the
framework of its stability-oriented monetary policy.
In spite of the rate cuts, the D-Mark strengthened to close in New York at
DM1.71 against the dollar, compared with DM1.709 on Wednesday, and was also
higher against most European currencies.
While most analysts expect German rates to fall considerably further, the
D-Mark's strength was attributed to market fears that yesterday's small cuts
might signal that German rates had bottomed.
European government bond markets jumped initially on the rate cut news,
although the performance of some, including Germany's, later showed
uneasiness about the possibility of higher US interest rates and about the
pace of Germany's cuts in rates.
Mr Tietmeyer said that stripping out the impact of higher taxes on mineral
oil, the inflation rate was 2.5 per cent in the first three months of this
year.
Even including the effect of the oil tax, it would be down to between 2 and
3 per cent in the second half of the year, he predicted, compared to an
annual rate of 3.2 per cent in March.
He judged that the inflationary outlook had improved as a result of moderate
settlements in this year's wage round as well as added flexibility in the
labour market, which benefited the economy as a whole.
He said the credibility of the Bundesbank's monetary policy had been
vindicated this year as German long-term interest rates had risen by only
0.4 per cent compared to a rise of 1.3 per cent in US long-term rates.
Mr Tietmeyer insisted that there was no need to abandon the M3 measure of
broad money supply as the central bank's most important indicator of
medium-term inflationary developments.
But he argued that the excessive money growth in January and February (when
M3 climbed by 21.2 and 17.6 per cent respectively, on an annualised,
seasonally adjusted basis) was caused by special factors. The development of
M3 would be studied carefully in the months ahead, but as yet there were no
signs that money supply should halt the gradual easing of monetary policy,
the Bundesbank president explained.
He said that the rate reduction would itself contribute to the gradual
reduction in money supply growth, narrowing the gap between long and
short-term rates and helping to dissolve what he described as a 'liquidity
blockage' of funds parked at the short end of the yield curve.
Praise Abroad, Page 3; UK trade deficit falls, Page 15; Lex, Page 22; Bonds,
Page 29; Currencies, Page 31; World Stock Markets, Page 37; London Shares,
Page 40

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940415

