FT941-12938

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (1): A muted sigh of relief on Gatt - Exporters
see brighter prospects than a year ago. But growth is generally slow and it
is too soon to celebrate / Comment


   By EMMA TUCKER


Exporters across the globe face brighter prospects this year than they did
at the beginning of the last. But after a year of feeble growth in the
industrialised world, that is not saying much.
Growth in the world's 24 richest countries amounted to a meagre 1 per cent
last year, as much of Europe and Japan struggled with recession and the US
emerged only slowly from its downturn.
Industries struggling to sell their products into sluggish markets may find
little comfort in the latest Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) forecast for output. It predicts that overall growth for
the industrialised world should reach just 2 per cent.
However, the worst is probably over. While activity in Japan looks likely to
continue its decline, an increasingly strong expansion is taking place in
the US; European Union countries have seen the worst of their recessions,
and moderate recoveries are continuing in the UK, Australia and New Zealand.
The economic outlook for growth in eastern Europe has also improved -
economic recovery in the Czech Republic and Poland is gaining strength.
Furthermore, economists are forecasting that the improvement in the US
economy, together with post-Nafta investment in Mexico, will raise the
average growth rate in Latin America. They are also optimistic about a
continued strong expansion in Asia. Analysts at JP Morgan believe that
so-called 'emerging' Asia will grow by 7.5 per cent this year in spite of
the authorities' attempts to cool China's overheated economy.
More important: the Gatt deal, agreed in December, will bring benefits to
almost everybody, even if these are not immediately recognisable in the
short-term.
The OECD has estimated that the agreement on the Uruguay round deal could
increase the world's welfare to the tune of Dollars 270bn (at current
prices) by 2002. This is just one of several analyses - including others
from the World Bank, and the secretariat of the Gatt - which have estimated
the increase resulting from the deal, in global economic welfare, at between
Dollars 213bn and Dollars 274bn by 2002, roughly  3/4 -1 per cent of gross
global income.
On inflation, the global outlook is generally good. The trade agreement  -
and the extra competition it brings - seems likely to help shore up gains
already made on inflation in the industrialised world. According to the
OECD, inflation in 20 of its 24 member countries has fallen to 4 per cent or
less, and in most of these countries it is below 3 per cent.
Although the OECD has pointed out that, in Europe, the rate of price
increases in Germany could remain stubborn, it forecasts that the trend in
inflation will be downwards. Excluding Turkey, inflation in the area is
expected to fall to 2 1/4 per cent by 1995.
The outlook for employment, however, is bleak, especially in Europe. The
OECD expects that the European unemployment rate will rise to 11.5 per cent
next year (when more than 22m people will be out of work) from 8.6 per cent
in 1991 (when 16.5m Europeans were unemployed).
Perhaps the brightest spot for the world economy remains the successful
completion of the Uruguay trade deal and the banishment of fears that
countries will revert to a new round of trade protectionism.
But while almost all global forecasters concur that the trade liberalisation
measures agreed in the round will be good for the world economy, no one
knows precisely what the measures will mean. Many analysts, for example,
believe that even the top end of the forecasts - which show an increase in
global economic welfare of Dollars 274bn by 2002 - underestimate the likely
benefits of the trade deal.
First, the studies ignore the stimulus to trade in services, which already
amounts to 21 per cent of world trade.
Second, the estimates assume that the status quo would have been maintained
if the Uruguay round had failed.
Last, they ignore the greater international transfer of technology and
business practices. Thus the benefits to the world economy from the
completion of the round could prove to be significantly higher.
There is also some debate about where and to whom the benefits will accrue.
An OECD study looked at the different areas affected by the trade deal and
came up with the following conclusions:
Agriculture: removing 30 per cent of the tariffs and subsidies for
agriculture could yield gains of Dollars 190bn, with the 24 OECD countries
accounting for Dollars 120bn of the net gains, and the developing and
formerly centrally planned countries benefiting by Dollars 70bn.
In the final deal, it was agreed that trade distorting subsidies and import
barriers affecting agriculture would be cut over a period of six years, with
support for domestic farming reduced by 20 per cent. All import barriers are
to be converted to tariffs, and cut by 36 per cent, while Japan's and South
Korea's closed rice markets will gradually open. Tariffs on tropical
products were cut by more than 40 per cent.
Industrial goods: a 30 per cent liberalisation of manufactured products
would produce Dollars 23bn more income, with the OECD countries gaining
about 64 per cent of the extra benefit derived from the liberalisation.
According to the deal, tariffs on industrial goods will be cut by more than
one-third. More than 40 per cent of imports will enter duty free.
Services: the OECD did not examine the liberalisation of services, but it
said: 'The liberalisation of services would undoubtedly add to the income
and growth dividend, yielding additional benefits.'
Naturally the Gatt deal will bring losers as well as winners in its wake.
Producers formerly sheltered from competition by trade barriers and input
subsidies would lose from elimination of these. Food importers in particular
will suffer as a result of the higher prices projected for a number of
cereals, resulting from the agreement. Overall, however, the aggregate level
of losses is small compared with the gains.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940127

