FT943-13144

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (7): Land of stunning beauty - A look at
the prospects for high class tourism


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


The next five years should see Albania emerge as a significant factor in
European tourism, but not just yet. At present Albania is a country for the
hardy backpacker, the well-heeled business visitor willing to hire both car
and driver or, most attractive of all, the yacht-borne visitor now able at
last to anchor off Albania's virtually pristine coasts without being fired
on or arrested.
Five decades of total isolation from the outside world preserved Albania
from the destructive impact of mass tourism, but not from environmental
pollution or a countryside littered with hundreds of thousands of concrete
pillboxes, or from burning rubbish tips and rivers filthy with raw sewage -
or oil spills in the extensive oil regions of the centre and south. There
are none of the picturesque seaside towns and villages which dot the
Croatian coast or the Greek islands.
An autarkic economy with no private vehicles also left Albania with the sort
of infrastructure which existed in the rest of southern Europe 50 years ago.
The roads are pockmarked, narrow, and usually steep and winding, reflecting
the mountainous terrain, much of it virtually inaccessible except on foot or
donkey. Around 70 per cent of the country comes into this category.
There are very few hotels and restaurants and only now are service stations
being put up by private investors along the main roads. Albania is not a
place to be in a car which breaks down.
The coastal plains, now covered by virtually medieval strip farms, are
easier to traverse, but even here the roads are now full of horse and
ox-drawn carts. What is more, where traffic was once limited mainly to a
handful of official cars and old Chinese trucks, an avalanche of second hand
cars and trucks has appeared over the last two years.
City streets and country roads alike are now infested by wild,
klaxon-blowing novices unskilled in the finer arts of driving - like lane
discipline, keeping to the correct side of the road or not overtaking on
blind curves or into oncoming traffic. It is also full of traffic policemen
with a blind eye for their pals and a keen eye for foreigners to fleece.
All this, and inadequate ports and primitive airports, ensures that Albania
should remain off the mass tourism agenda for some time - some advisers
suggest for ever. But the country is definitely now on the move, has a
wealth of stunning scenery, virgin beaches and historic monuments and the
development of tourism, under Mr Edmond Spaho, the minister for tourism, is
seen by the government and foreign advisers as a priority, both to create
new jobs and to bring in hard currency.
At present, Tirana, the capital, boasts only one business-class hotel, the
Dajti, which was built by the Italians, like most of the city centre, about
60 years ago. It is an oasis for those who hate modern hotels, prefer high
ceilings to air conditioning and do not mind indifferent food when it is
served on a verandah overlooking a garden with palms. But the Dajti will be
closed for refurbishing as soon as two new first class hotels are completed.
The most impressive will be the Dollars 23m Dea hotel and office complex
complete with swimming pool and underground parking being built for the
Rogner group of Austria 200 metres down the main boulevard from the Dajti.
It is due to open by the autumn of 1995.
The 1960s style skyscraper of the Tirana Hotel just off the central
Skanderbeg Square is being refurbished by an Italo-Albanian venture and will
be managed by THI of Turin when it opens. But work has stopped at present so
the December 1994 opening date is uncertain.
Other projects in Tirana include a 200 room hotel and 10 residential villas
being constructed for Al Karafi, a Kuwaiti company, while MacRae
International, a UK company, is building up to 1,200 western-style homes and
working on plans for a tourist village at Lalzi Bay north of Durres.
Italian companies are particularly interested in building tourist villages
and associated infrastructure along the coast. Babini is planning a small
village in the Kavaja area while SICS, Torcelo and AX Holdings of Malta are
all planning to build tourist villages near Ksamil in southern Albania, just
across the straits from Corfu. The southern coastal strip between the port
of Vlore and the Greek frontier, and including towns such as Sarande and
Butrint with substantial Roman and Greek remains, is earmarked for the first
round of serious development because of proximity to Corfu and relative ease
of access. This is the area where pine forests slope down to a 100km stretch
of hitherto inaccessible virgin beaches. The aim is to develop this area
with the minimum of environmental destruction. The entire tourism
infrastructure will have to be built from nothing.
The EBRD is partially financing a scheme to promote the growth of small
restaurants and provide small scale finance for families to rent out rooms
and build small extensions. But development generally will require sizeable
investments.
With this in mind the Special Law on Investments in Priority Tourism
Development Zones has been drawn up along with a long term strategy based
largely on a report prepared by consultants Touche Ross and Euro Principals.
Tourism investments are exempt from profits tax entirely over the first five
years and enjoy a 50 per cent exemption over the next five years of
operation. Losses over the first five years can also be offset against
profits over the next five years.
As a further incentive all machinery, spare parts and raw materials are
exempt from customs duty for three years. Foreigners can be employed and
profits freely repatriated.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940721

