FT944-14408

FT  22 OCT 94 / Sport: Born to be partners - Tennis


   By JOHN BARRETT


A spirited win in this week's Marlboro Championships in Hong Kong by Byron
and Wayne Black over world No 1 Pete Sampras and fellow American Todd
Martin, ranked nine, took me back to a day in the mid-1950s.
The Black brothers' father, Rhodesia's leading Davis Cup player Don Black,
had put up with my inadequacies as a partner on the day in question to steer
us to victory in the British Covered Court Championships at Queen's Club.
They were carefree days as we made our impecunious way around the world
following the sun. Then, after getting the wanderlust out of our systems,
and accepting that we would never win Wimbledon, we returned to the real
world to make our livings and raise our families.
Don Black went home to Rhodesia and shrewdly invested his modest savings in
a piece of rich farmland in Mandara, 10 miles from the centre of Salisbury.
He built a couple of grass tennis courts so that he could maintain his links
with the game as captain of the Rhodesian Davis Cup team.
In 1965 Don married Velia Williams, from South Africa, whom he had met at a
party after she returned from a short spell as a dancer on the London stage.
Byron was born in 1969, Wayne four years later, and both boys inherited
their parents' athleticism. Almost before they could walk Don had put short,
sawn-off rackets into their hands and they virtually grew up on the tennis
court.
On November 11 1965, a few months after Don and Velia's marriage, prime
minister Ian Smith declared UDI and gradually the sanctions that were
imposed began to bite.
Velia said: 'Our business was ruined. Don had to turn to coaching to make
ends meet. It was a nightmare. Then came war with all its hardships.'
After Robert Mugabe became prime minister of the new Zimbabwe in 1980, Don
built three more grass courts, plus a hard court, and developed his coaching
business.
Meanwhile, Byron's career was taking off. He was considered the best junior
in Zimbabwe with an unusual double-handed style on both wings. 'It was just
natural. Dad never tried to change me, he just motivated and encouraged me,'
he said.
At 15, Byron won the All Africa Championships in the Cote d'Ivoire. This
earned him a place on one of the new squads for promising juniors set up by
the International Tennis Federation with help from the Grand Slam
Development Fund, which is financed by a Dollars 2m annual contribution made
by the Compaq Grand Slam Cup.
Wayne and his 15-year-old sister Cara, have enjoyed help from this scheme.
Byron's French Open doubles victory this year with American Jonathan Stark
has lifted him to a world doubles ranking of No 4. 'It was a tremendous
thrill, second only to my win over Ivan Lendl at Queen's last year. That
showed me that I could live with these guys.'
For Don and Velia their proudest moment was in 1986 when Byron, aged 17, had
beat the experienced Nigerian Tour player, N'duka Odizor, in a Davis Cup tie
in Harare. The crowd went wild and before the Nigerian team departed its
manager, Jacob Akendele, left an envelope for Byron with instructions for it
not to be opened until they had left.
Inside were a few hundred dollars and a note which said: 'There are only
three great players in the world - Borg, Becker and Black. This is to help
you buy your first stringing machine. Good luck.'
Byron and Wayne have avoided injury and since 1993 have formed the
Zimbabwean Davis Cup team, something few brothers have achieved: David and
John Lloyd were members of the UK team that reached the final in 1978, while
Vijay and Anand Amritraj did the same for India in 1987.
But only one pair of siblings has appeared in winning Davis Cup teams - the
Doherty brothers, Reggie and Laurie, who achieved four successes for the UK
between 1903 and 1906.
The dream for Don and Velia Black is that, one day, their boys might become
the second.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

941022

