FT941-3502

FT  16 MAR 94 / Defence chief's successor named


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


General Sir Peter Inge yesterday became chief of the Defence Staff in
succession to Sir Peter Harding, who resigned after newspaper allegations of
adultery.
Sir Peter, a 58-year-old Sandhurst officer who became chief of the General
Staff two years ago after service in a number of countries, had been acting
as caretaker military adviser to the government until Mr Malcolm Rifkind,
defence secretary, confirmed him as Britain's top military officer.
High among the new defence chief's priorities will be to restore morale in
the armed services at a time of almost continuous upheaval.
The resignation of his combative but popular pre-decessor - whose political
skills made him a formidable spokesman for the military in a
Treasury-dominated Whitehall - came at a time of sharp defence cuts and
fierce debate over deployment of fresh UK troops in Bosnia. Study teams are
seeking savings of Pounds 2.3bn in support operations across the military
and the MoD.
The Ministry of Defence yesterday confirmed that it was conducting an
enquiry into the 'possible implications' of the 'security angles' of Sir
Peter Harding's alleged affair with the former wife of the ex-MP Sir Anthony
Buck.
Sir Peter, 60, quit immediately details of his affair with Bienvenida
Sokolow, the divorced wife of former Tory MP Sir Antony Buck, appeared in
the News of the World.
Sir Peter Inge, who becomes a field marshal, has in turn been succeeded by
General Sir Charles Guthrie, 55, who was until yesterday commander of
British Forces in Germany.
Sir Peter's appointment to the Pounds 112,083-a-year post was warmly
welcomed by the opposition. Mr David Clark, shadow defence secretary said:
'I have known Sir Peter for some time and have a high regard for his
abilities.'
Mr Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrat defence spokesman, said: 'At a very
difficult time in defence policy there could not be a better appointment
than that of Sir Peter Inge. He will bring to the job a very considerable
experience allied to an intimate knowledge of the working of Whitehall.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940316

