FT944-14431

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: The present imperfect


   By Lord BLAKE


AGE OF EXTREMES: THE SHORT TWENTIETH CENTURY 1914-1991 by Eric Hobsbawm
Michael Joseph Pounds 20, 627 pages
Professor Eric Hobsbawm is usually described as a Marxist historian. This
can mean many things, from a slavish belief in the great man's prophetic
power to appreciation of the importance of economic factors in history. This
book is an epilogue to a trilogy on European history - the Ages of
Revolution, Capitalism and Empire - which has been widely praised. In these
volumes and his latest work the author is by no means a doctrinaire disciple
of Marx, let alone of the USSR, which purported to be the embodiment of
Marx's beliefs and the standard-bearer of his cause.
Hobsbawm divides his book into three parts: 'The Age of Catastrophe' -
1914-50; 'The Golden Age' - 1950-75; 'The Landslide' - 1975 onwards. The
first covers what he calls 'The Thirty One Years War'; the second the
immense - and to him unexpected - capitalist post-war boom which has
transformed the world; and the third, a period that he sees as one of a
slide into instability, crisis and general loss of bearings. He prefaces his
opening section with a quotation from Isaiah Berlin: 'I have lived through
most of the 20th century without, I must add, suffering personal hardship. I
remember it only as the most terrible century in Western history'. Few will
wish to dispute this judgment.
The causes of the 1914-18 war have been the subject of great controversy.
Why could the conflict not have been settled by diplomacy as a Bismark or a
Talleyrand would certainly have attempted? Hobsbawm explains its
all-or-nothing nature by the fact that, unlike previous wars waged for
limited objectives, this was waged for unlimited ends. That was true, and
even truer of the second world war, but the question why still remains. In
the case of the 1939-45 war Hobsbawm has no doubt. It was essentially
Hitler's war for world power. Nor, despite the smoke screen put up by
post-1918 German historians, can one seriously defend the rulers of Germany
in 1914 from the same charge, though the author does not say so.
What he rightly emphasises is that the second world war, unlike the first,
was ideological as well as nationalistic, and that there were three
ideologies - fascism, liberal democracy and communism - which were equally
antipathetic to each other. It was a paradox of the principle that 'my
enemy's enemy is my friend', which produced the alliance of opposites from
1941 onwards.
Without the USSR the Western allies could not have won, and its success in
waging war gave a spurious plausibility to its 'command economy' in peace.
Stalin's forced industrialisation during the 1920s and 1930s was already
such an economy, and it had at least avoided the traumatic experience of the
Great Slump.
Even as late as 1960 Harold Macmillan thought that the USSR might soon
outstrip the economic successes of the west. In fact it was already
collapsing under its own contradictions. Hobsbawm, however sympathetic he
may once have been with Marxism, is a realist and his analysis of the
collapse is shrewd and perceptive.
What would most surprise earlier Marxists is the recrudescence of capitalism
after 1945. But their hero was a poor prophet. He foresaw neither fascism
nor the welfare state and his confidence in the proletarian triumph has
turned out, like most theories of inevitablism, to be wrong.
Whatever the reason - and one can agree that there is no simple explanation
 -capitalism in the 'Golden Age' flourished as never before and brought
about vast changes in the way of life and the standard of living all over
the world. Its success has killed socialism. Marxist socialism was a
religion. But a religion of materialism has a weakness which spiritual
religions do not possess. No one can prove by experience that Christianity,
Islam or Buddism are wrong. A religion which purports to improve the
material welfare of mankind is in a different category. If it does not
deliver the goods sooner or later people will stop believing it.
From the mid 1970s the Golden Age gives way to the Landslide. The period
certainly saw major changes - the end of socialism for one. The former USSR
and its ex-satellites were indeed in a state of chaos and disarray -
transitional perhaps but no one can be sure. The capitalist world has seen
more recessions and higher unemployment than in the previous quarter
century, but 'landslide' seems an over statement. The very fact that 'Black
Monday' in 1987 did not herald a repeat of 1929-31 suggests that there are
stabilising factors present now which were not then. Nor is it convincing to
talk of the weakening of the nation state, despite Marx's dislike of it.
There are more of them then ever, and this most significant legacy of the
French Revolution shows no sign of going away. Fifteen years is not a long
period for historical perspective. Eric Hobsbawm has written a brilliant and
stimulating book. But like most historians he is better on the past than the
present.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

941022

