FT943-913

FT  27 SEP 94 / Personal View: A world of minimal job security


   By ANDREW BRITTON


Pundits are often asked whether the UK economy really can be recovering
since most people still seem so miserable. Perhaps the explanation is that,
despite the excellent performance of the economy as a whole, individuals are
quite right to be uneasy. The behaviour of the economy, and especially of
the labour market, is changing. No-one can feel altogether secure, even if
we do see years and years of steady growth with low inflation, as the prime
minister would have us believe.
Competition is hotting up, between countries, between companies and also
between individuals in the labour market. The process has been a very
gradual one, but it has been going in the same general direction now for
more than a decade.
The experience of the last recession and the present recovery suggests that
it is gathering pace. Perhaps we should try to imagine where it might lead,
to imagine a world in which job security was reduced to a minimum.
From the employer's point of view there would be obvious advantages.
Companies could expand or contract rapidly, adjusting the size of their
labour force more or less continuously. They could change the composition of
the labour force as well if they decided to change the mix of products or
the techniques of production. Sometimes they might decide to hire the same
individuals for several years in succession, because they knew that they had
skills for which the firm had a continuing need, but they would be under no
obligation to do so. Their situation would, in a word, be 'flexible'.
From the employee's point of view the situation does not seem so
comfortable. It would pay to keep one's options open and stay in touch all
the time with the external labour market. It would pay to accumulate some
reserves of savings to see one through the inevitable gaps between jobs.
On the other hand those gaps might not be quite so long if companies were
actively recruiting in the labour market all the time, and were prepared to
replace their existing workforce if the opportunity arose. It might, indeed,
not be so very different from being self-employed, especially for those who
decided to spread their risks by taking on several part-time jobs instead of
a full-time one.
Things have not gone this far, of course, and perhaps they never will. But
the direction of movement is clear enough and its implications are profound.
Not only economics is involved: for many people the company or organisation
they work for is the main focus of their loyalty and aspirations, as well as
the centre of their social life.
What will replace that focus for those who change their jobs every year or
so? How will this fit in with family life or life in a local community?
These, perhaps, are the really big questions, but there are some quite large
economic questions to ask as well.
If the labour market is to work efficiently with frequent job changes then
more resources will be needed to secure a good match between supply and
demand. There will be a greater need for 'market-makers', including
independent careers advisers, employment agencies and so on. This is a
social cost to set against the efficiency gains which may result from the
flexibility of employment from which firms will benefit.
The cost of supporting those 'between jobs' will fall in large part on the
social security system. Most of the unemployment will, hopefully, be
short-term, but there could also be an increase in longer-term unemployment
and in the numbers dependent on other forms of benefit, especially as those
who lose their jobs are likely to be those with few skills or with skills
that are no longer marketable.
There are, indeed, especially important questions about the training and
retraining of the labour force. If employees come and go so readily,
companies will have little or no incentive to pay for their training.
Individuals will have to plan and finance their own acquisition of skills
with an eye to future jobs a well as their present one. And pay
differentials for skills will have to widen sufficiently for that investment
to be worthwhile.
It is no wonder, then, that people seem anxious even as the economy
recovers. We are in a state of transition, and no one knows how far it will
go. It is a direction of change which the government has encouraged and
applauded, but it is not under its control.
Those who lose in the process will tend to blame the government, while those
who benefit will take the credit for themselves.
The author is director of the National Institute of Economic and Social
Research

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940927

