FT943-12766

FT  22 JUL 94 / Nigeria moves closer to deal with oil strikers


   By PAUL ADAMS


   LAGOS


Nigeria's military government appears ready to seek a compromise on the
industrial and pay demands of striking oil workers if they drop their
political demands and return to work.
In a meeting in Lagos scheduled for today, Mr Umaru Baba, the junior oil
minister, will meet representatives of both the main unions and the
operating companies.
The government hopes that by satisfying the unions' economic and industrial
demands, they will end their two-week strike and await a solution to the
political crisis.
There were signs at a meeting with the government and employers on Wednesday
that the junior workers union, Nupeng, was willing to end the strike in
return for settlement of two pay disputes with employers, information on the
whereabouts of their general secretary Mr Frank Kokori, and assurances that
the government will restore oil industry investment and move quickly towards
democratic rule.
Nupeng provisionally agreed to pay offers on Wednesday. The union, whose
members have received no pay since the strike began, appeared to soften
their stance and said they would consider returning to work if the oil
companies attended today's meeting and confirmed that government was
increasing investment.
The senior staff association, Pengassan, said yesterday it would attend the
meeting if invited but would not compromise on either its political or
economic demands. Pengassan insisted that the dispute could be resolved only
by meeting the head of state, General Sani Abacha.
The strikers are demanding that the military leave government and make way
for Mr Moshood Abiola, widely regarded as the winner of last year's annulled
presidential election, who is in prison facing treason charges for declaring
himself president last month. Mr Abiola's trial is due to start on July 28
in Abuja.
The strikers are also protesting against the government's under-investment
in the oil industry, which has led to payment arrears to the multinational
oil companies in Nigeria of about Dollars 700m throughout this year,
plunging the industry into recession.
The oil companies operate joint ventures, which are 60 per cent owned by the
government. They have sharply reduced development and exploration and, until
the strike, were investing only in activities essential to production.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

940722

