FT943-12793

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: A tale of two strategies in the
biotechnology sector - Celltech's deal is a dream come true but Synergen
lost a high-risk gamble


   By DANIEL GREEN


In the space of four days, the biotechnology sector has demonstrated why it
is a high-risk, and occasionally high-reward, industry.
On Monday, Colorado-based Synergen announced it was abandoning research on
its main product, laying off half its 630 staff and putting the company up
for sale.
Yesterday, the UK's Celltech achieved what is a biotechnologist's dream: a
collaborative deal with the biggest US drug company, Merck, that could net
it more than Dollars 100m a year from the start of the next decade.
The difference between the two companies runs deeper than the quality of
their respective drugs. Each followed a profoundly different corporate
strategy: Synergen decided to go it alone and Celltech to collaborate with
pharmaceutical companies.
The choice between the two is exercising to the management of many
biotechnology companies. The decisions that they take will determine the
shape of the sector and its relationship with the entire healthcare
business.
The Celltech deal has the financial complexity that is typical of the
biotech sector. The company benefits in three tangible ways:
It is to receive cash payments of up to Pounds 31.5m (Dollars 48m) over five
years related to the progress in developing an asthma treatment code-named
CDP 840;
Merck will pay for clinical testing of the drug. Phase I trials on healthy
volunteers have been completed. CDP 840 must now enter the far more
expensive phases II and III where it is given to thousands of patients;
Celltech will receive 'double-digit royalties' on sales into a market worth
more than Dollars 4bn a year. It has the option of contributing to phase III
trials and triggering a profit sharing scheme that would take the effective
royalty rate to more than 20 per cent.
These potential sums are huge to a company such as Celltech, which has a
market capitalisation of Pounds 135m.
Just as importantly, the deal represents a vote of confidence from Merck
which, as far as investors are concerned, ought to have a better idea of how
to evaluate a prospective drug than any stock market analyst. Celltech's
shares jumped more than 10 per cent when the deal was announced.
Synergen, by contrast saw its share price almost halve on Monday when it
said it would abandon its sepsis treatment Antril.
The pain was all the worse for the years of effort and more than Dollars
100m that the company had sunk into the drug: the failure came at the end of
the phase III trials.
Synergen had built its own manufacturing plant and engaged sales and
marketing teams. It was spending money at a rate - known in the biotech
sector as the burn rate - of Dollars 80m a year.
Celltech's burn rate is about Pounds 8m a year, and this outflow should be
cut by more than half by the staged payments from Merck.
The difference is deliberate. 'Synergen bet the company,' says one senior
Celltech executive. 'We don't want to do that.'
That philosophy may sound eminently sensible, but until recently it
represented a minority view in the industry. Most took the view that
biotechnology was inherently a high-risk business and that, therefore, there
must be huge rewards in prospect to attract investors.
They pointed to California's Amgen, the biotech sector's one unequivocal
success story. Amgen went it alone. It now has two drugs in the world top 25
and is forecast by stockbroker Lehman Brothers to have two of the top five
by the end of the decade.
However, the list of failed aspirant Amgens is getting longer.
The biggest apart from Synergen was Pennsylvania's Centocor, which two years
ago dropped development of its septic shock drug, but not until it had
invested in manufacturing plants and sales and marketing teams.
Centocor's fate shattered many illusions about the biotech sector and
engendered a scepticism that still restrains investors.
Increasingly, biotech companies are seeking an alternative to the Amgen,
Synergen, Centocor approach. Many, including Celltech, have picked on
Chiron, the number three US biotechnology company. Chiron has built its
success on a series of alliances with big name drug companies. They include
Germany's Schering, Switzerland's Ciba, Sweden's Pharmacia and Johnson and
Johnson of the US.
A biotech company entering into such collaborations abandons the dream of
becoming a giant pharmaceutical group. But it is a move that, as this week's
events show, has its attractions.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940722

