FT941-4010

FT  14 MAR 94 / EU procurement row with US set to flare


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


THE European Commission is heading for a showdown with the US over public
procurement after the disclosure that the US has, in the view of Commission
officials, revived efforts to woo Germany away from its European partners.
Last week the Clinton administration quietly dropped trade sanctions against
Germany, apparently implementing the secret non-aggression pact which it
struck with the Bonn government on telecommunications a year ago. Commission
officials said yesterday that the US action appeared aimed at driving a
wedge between Germany and the rest of the European Union.
The US move could trigger Commission measures against Germany if the Bonn
government was shown to have failed to implement EU trade sanctions against
the US. These were imposed last year as part of the long-running
transatlantic dispute over public procurement.
The US action was disclosed in the daily Federal Register of US government
business last Thursday, and comes ahead of a renewed effort by the
Commission and the Clinton administration to resolve outstanding differences
on opening public procurement markets.
The two sides have set a deadline of April 15, when leaders are due to
assemble in Marrakesh to sign the Uruguay Round agreement of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Arguments over fair access to lucrative contracts in road, rail and other
public sector projects flared in the early days of the Clinton
administration. But the row was defused with reciprocal market-opening
measures, supported by token trade sanctions and the promise of an
independent study into trade barriers. Later, however, Mr Mickey Kantor, US
trade representative, reached a separate bilateral understanding with Mr
Gunter Rexrodt, German economics minister. Under the oral deal, Mr Rexrodt
indicated that Germany would not apply Article 29 of the EU's utilities
directive which gives a 3 per cent price preference to EU companies, and
allows a bidder to ignore an offer if it has less than 50 per cent local
content.
The German offer challenged the EU decision to impose a Dollars 15m (Pounds
10.2m) sanctions package against the US. It also appeared to contravene the
Treaty of Rome, which awards sole competence to the European Commission on
trade policy.
A spokesman for Sir Leon Brittan, chief EU trade negotiator, said the
Commission had not initiated infringement proceedings against Germany. If
Bonn was not applying the relevant public procurement legislation that would
be 'surprising and disappointing', he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940314

