FT941-3349

FT  16 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brazil seeks markets for orange
juice - US imports are expected to fall further


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


Brazil, the world's biggest exporter of frozen concentrated orange juice
with a commanding 86 per cent share of the international market, will need
to step up its sales efforts in Europe and Asia to compensate for further
declines expected in exports to the US.
Mr Rogerio Braga, president of Cambuhy Citrus, one of Brazil's largest
orange-processing companies, believes that the country's share of the US
market is likely to fall to between 5 and 10 per cent by the end of the
1990s, partly as a result of the recently agreed North American Free Trade
Agreement. This compares with the heyday of Brazilian exports to the US in
the 1970s, when 60 per cent of Brazil's total production of frozen
concentrated orange juice was sold in North America.
'Florida and Mexico, which has been granted special tariff conditions under
Nafta, will certainly be able to supply almost all of North America's
demand,' he told an international fruit conference last week in Rotterdam.
Speakers at the conference, which was organised by the port of Rotterdam and
Rabobank, the Dutch bank that specialises in agri-business, said that the
world's fruit sector also faced challenges caused by changes in the way
fruit and fruit juices were marketed. Increasingly, fruit growers and food
retailers were attempting to eliminate 'middlemen' such as brokers, import
agents, packers and wholesalers.
Mr Braga said the decline in orange juice sales to the North American market
over the past few decades was probably irreversible, meaning that Brazil
would have to concentrate on Europe, already its biggest market, and on new
markets in Asia such as Korea.
In spite of sharp increases in exports to Europe, there was room for further
growth, he said, because consumption of fruit juice was barely half the US
figure of 29 litres a person a year. In some countries, such as France,
Italy and Spain, consumption is still in single digits.
Consumption in Asia is low in absolute terms but rising rapidly.
'It took us 15 years to see Europeans consuming orange juice at half the
levels of Americans,' Mr Braga said. 'We might be able to get south-east
Asia to that level in half that time.'
Besides shifts in trade flows, Brazil and other fruit producers are
grappling with the shake-up in traditional relations between food retailers
and food suppliers.
The rise of discount chains and 'own label' products in established
supermarkets has affected every link of the chain, from growers to packers.
'Retailers are cutting their fat and have put tremendous pressure on the
food processing industry,' Mr Braga explained.
At the Netherlands' largest supermarket chain, Albert Heijn, the trend was
towards concluding partnerships directly with growers of fruits and
vegetables, said Mr Krijn Dorsman, executive vice-president of
merchandising. 'There are too many links in the chain between supplier and
consumer,' he said, noting that every link pushes up the retail price of
food.
The Dutch supermarket group has therefore moved towards a policy of working
with one exclusive partner for every product or product group in the fruit
and vegetable sector. This partner undertakes to provide sufficient supplies
to cover the supermarket chains' needs.
Mr Fred Hofman, a board member of the Bremen-based Atlanta Group, one of
Germany's biggest fruit importers, told the conference he believed that
importers and brokers would continue to have a role to play.
He added, however, that they would need to concentrate more on providing
services, such as quality control and the arranging of
'environmental-friendly' transport and packaging.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940316

