FT942-16145

FT  12 APR 94 / Arts: Fall River Legend - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


The story of Lizzie Borden ('Eighty-one things a bright girl can do with an
axe') has all the ingredients for tremendous theatre. Wicked step-mother;
potential loss of money - Lizzie thought that her father would disinherit
her; sexual tension; a final explosion of violence on a stifling day in a
repressive community. The mystery of who killed Lizzie's father and
step-mother - for Lizzie was acquitted - is no mystery at all, and Agnes de
Mille's famous old barn-stormer, Fall River Legend rightly presents Lizzie
as homicidal. It has now entered the Birmingham Royal Ballet's repertory - I
saw it as the BRB Covent Garden season ended on Thursday - and the company
serves it up hot and strong.
It is dubious choreographic stuff, but its fustian is astutely judged.
Motivation trails its coat throughout; characterisations are blatant, and
the dance rarely makes any sense of them. But the story is crackingly good,
and the sight of a ballerina clutching an axe can still give a frisson of
horror. The reason for this BRB staging is what Fall River's purpose
originally was: to provide a stunning role for a dramatic ballerina. The
ballet was made in 1948 for Nora Kaye, a consummate dance actress with
American Ballet Theatre. I saw and was bowled over by her then - as also by
Alicia Alonso, who actually gave the first performance - and I think BRB's
Marion Tait, the justification for this staging, no less good.
Tait is a dance actress of rare finesse. She has the right 'look' - the
searching gaze; that sense of a troubled spirit in quest of release  - for
Lizzie. As with so many of her finest readings - notably in the MacMillan
repertory - we are as much moved by the absolute precision of Tait's playing
as by her expressive power. She has never given a predictable or mechanical
performance: everything is felt, understood, and the dance has been no less
honest and subtle. As Lizzie, she takes the stage like a diva - the part
demands it; Tait can supply it - but she gives purpose to every scene, and
makes us forget much of the surrounding choreographic chit-chat. Lizzie's
anguish, her sense of being victimised, her tremulous eagerness for love and
her sudden malicious caprices, are shown with a sharp, nervously precise
outline that speaks exactly of the girl's spiritual life.
BRB's artists - Desmond Kelly as the father; Samira Saidi as the mother;
Karen Waldie as the step-mother; Sandra Madgwick as the child Lizzie, and,
especially, Joseph Cipolla as the local priest - give a welcome depth to
paste-board characters. Oliver Smith's original design is still splendid;
the Morton Gould score a vexation to musical sensibilities. The piece is a
vehicle for Tait: she drives it to glory - as did Nora Kaye. No higher
praise is possible.
This triple bill also included the company's honourable account of
Balanchine's Serenade and MacMillan's Elite Syncopations - where style could
have been more elegantly sparky, but I greatly admired Miyako Yoshida and
Joseph Cipolla.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940412

