FT944-6065

FT  01 DEC 94 / Donors pledge budget aid for Palestinians


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


International aid donors yesterday pledged to plug the budget deficit of the
embryonic Palestinian authority in Gaza and Jericho until the spring,
winning breathing space for Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO leader, and bringing
new life to the year-old Israel-Palestinian peace process.
Following a two-day meeting of donors in Brussels, Dollars 125m (Pounds
79.6m) will be made available between now and the end of March to finance
the authority's running costs and create almost immediately 20,000 jobs in
public works programmes.
Mr Terje Larsen, UN under-secretary general for the Palestinian territories,
said: 'I leave this meeting with relief and hope, because that (financing)
gap was bridged.'
Mr Nabil Shaath, representing the authority, said the short-term financing
deal 'signals a continuing of the peace process' and 'opens the road to our
elections'.
The postponed Palestinian elections and delayed Israeli withdrawal from the
West Bank form the centrepiece of negotiations between the two sides which
restart in Cairo next Monday.
Senior officials from both camps were optimistic yesterday that the Brussels
talks signalled an emerging rapprochement. Mr Uriel Savir, director-general
of the Israeli foreign ministry, said he believed the meeting had moved
toward a position 'whereby Palestinian economic development becomes an
Israeli interest, and Israeli security becomes a Palestinian interest'.
Mr Savir hinted that Israel was looking for ways to reopen its borders with
Gaza, which were closed after recent attacks by Islamic fundamentalists.
About half the money pledged yesterday will come from a World Bank
administered fund to support the Palestinian budget, and includes Dollars
18m earmarked for the operating costs of the authority's police force. A
further Dollars 23m is for public works programmes, which officials said
would be started within weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941201

