FT942-15368

FT  15 APR 94 / A fortress would be no defence: Europe must choose
decentralisation and liberal trade, not harmonisation and protection


   By MARTIN WOLF


'Can we (west Europeans) take it for granted that we will remain sufficient
leaders in a sufficient number of sectors to survive - in the face of
countries with populations infinitely larger than ours and with levels of
social protection infinitely smaller? I say we should leave this to the
market, but only up to a certain point. What is the market? It is the law of
the jungle, the law of nature. And what is civilisation? It is the struggle
against nature' - Edouard Balladur, prime minister of France, Financial
Times, December 31 1993
Mr Balladur's very French perspective on the relation between market and
state is wrong. It is wrong, partly because the market is a sophisticated
mechanism, whose functioning depends on civilised social restraints. If
anything, it is the state that needs to be civilised. In the European Union,
treaty articles enshrining principles of competition were the chosen way to
contain the destructive proclivities of European nation states. To see what
happens when states try to 'civilise' the market, look at the common
agricultural policy, which has created a trading jungle.
Mr Balladur's view is more than wrong. It is also dangerous. The collapse of
communism offers a unique opportunity to develop a prosperous and liberal
global economy. As the world's largest single trading entity, the EU must
play a central role in securing this opportunity. The question is whether it
will. If it pays too much attention to the fears voiced by Mr Balladur, it
will not.
Historically, the EU's approach to international trade has been a compromise
which can best be labelled 'managed liberalism'. In this, the Union has
largely followed the US, combining large reductions in average tariffs with
the introduction of non-tariff barriers and reliance on measures of
contingent protection, such as anti-dumping.
The special feature of US trade policy is self-righteous pursuit of
'fairness'; in EU policy, it has been an addiction to discrimination. To
trade with the EU on a most-favoured basis is, in fact, to be among its
least favoured partners. Fortunately, the damage of discrimination has been
limited by EU participation in major international trade negotiations, the
most recent being the Uruguay Round, finalised in Marrakesh today. The
agreement with the US to liberalise public procurement announced this week
is another example.
That is the past. What of the future? Unhappily, powerful forces may push
the post-Maastricht-treaty EU in a more protectionist direction. There are
three closely related pressures: a desire to contain the forces of policy
competition among states; growing pressure from a dynamic world economy on
the faltering European one; and the aim of cementing a nascent European
political identity.
European states impose relatively high taxes and tight regulations on their
economies. The share of public spending in gross domestic product in France
or Germany is some 20 percentage points higher than in Japan, for example.
Similarly, direct taxation of labour in these two states is some 25 per cent
of GDP, against 15 per cent in Japan. High taxes and stiff regulations are
threatened by free movement of goods, services and factors of production.
This is why regulatory harmonisation was a theme of the Maastricht treaty.
Countries with high taxes and regulatory standards insist they be adopted by
poor countries with which they trade freely. The latter then demand
transfers to compensate them for the costs they are required to bear. But
the logic demanding internal harmonisation entails either the extension of
that principle worldwide or, failing that, plain protection.
Liberal trade also multiplies the costs and visibility of policy-induced
distortions. In the EU, the most important such distortions lie in the
labour market. Unemployment has been rising cycle-by-cycle over two decades.
Worse, between 1960 and 1993, employment grew by almost 90 per cent in North
America, by well over 40 per cent in Japan and by a mere 10 per cent in the
EU. Worse still, while 80 per cent of employment growth in North America
over the past two decades has been in the private sector, two-thirds of what
little growth there has been in the EU has been in the public sector. Many
of these are not jobs. They are transfers. Growing supplies of
labour-intensive manufactures threaten to worsen the EU's employment
problem.
Finally, there is the aim of political integration. The European states are
divided by language, culture and historical sympathies. How are they to be
united? Historically, mercantilism - the combination of internal free trade
with protection at the borders - helped overcome similar barriers in the
emerging European nation states. Nothing would be more natural than for a
nascent European super-state to enhance integration by underplaying internal
differences and emphasising external ones. This approach could be justified
by the need to regain the economic sovereignty allegedly lost by individual
member states.
How are such pressures to be resisted? Partly by argument. The starting
point must be the costs of protection. Perhaps the most significant is the
damage to export performance done by inward-looking liberalisation. Between
1980 and 1991 the value of the EU's internal trade in manufactures rose 167
per cent, but its external exports increased only by 79 per cent, far behind
the increases of 129 per cent achieved by the US and 146 per cent by Japan.
It is no less important to understand that harmonisation is not a
precondition for liberal trade. Rather, diversity should be welcomed as a
potential source of gains. This is partly because competition among
different regulatory regimes constrains the state by making the effects of
its interventions more transparent. But it is also because such diversity is
a natural reflection of differences among countries in their wealth,
resources and values.
Even the concern about low-wage labour must be kept in perspective. Trade
has had less effect on the earnings of the unskilled than technology. More
important, protection is an ultimately self-defeating way of preserving
unskilled labour's earnings. Far better would be a mixture of more
investment in education with subsidies to - or less taxation of - unskilled
labour.
A Europe of harmonisation, of regulation, of centralised political
decision-making is likely to become a protectionist Europe. The logic urging
harmonisation of labour standards demands their worldwide extension.
Policies leading to poor economic performance prompt a demand for protection
at the border. Finally, political integration may demand reinforcement of a
sense that Europeans are the embattled minority described by Mr Balladur.
The EU is economically valuable because it has forced member states to
follow more liberal economic policies. Its large economic size is not itself
an important source of gain, as the contrast between the high incomes per
head of tiny Singapore or Taiwan with the poverty of China suggests. Size
does not justify self-sufficiency. Europe's choices must be decentralisation
and liberal trade, not harmonisation and protectionism. On that depends the
future of its struggling economy. On that, too, depend the prospects for
harmonious economic development worldwide.
The Resistible Appeal of Fortress Europe, by Martin Wolf, is published
jointly today by the Centre for Policy Studies, 52 Rochester Row, London
SW1P 1JU, and the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research,
1150 Seventeenth Street, NW, Washington DC 20036

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940415

