FT942-12714

FT  28 APR 94 / Economic Viewpoint: It's time to put UK policy in neutral


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


British economic performance has this month received an accolade from an
unexpected source, the European Commission in Brussels. In its 1994 Annual
Economic Report it remarks: 'The UK enters 1994 with better short-term
prospects than most of the other member states; continued growth in output
is expected, with inflation remaining under control.' At the same time there
has been 'a turnaround in unemployment which was both earlier and sharper
than expected'.
These real improvements have been combined with a closer fulfilment of the
Maastricht fiscal criteria than that of most member countries. For instance
the UK general government deficit is expected to come down to the Maastricht
reference value of 3 per cent by the financial year 1996-97.
The Commission does, of course, put in some qualifiers and cautions. The
combination of the debt overhang and the weight of tax increases could still
depress consumption growth. It was this fear that caused the chancellor,
Kenneth Clarke, to argue for a cut in interest rates - against the
scepticism of the governor of the Bank of England, Eddie George - according
to the published version of their February meeting. The Commission urges,
instead, that exports and investment 'contribute increasingly' - a virtuous
exhortation we know by heart.
Meanwhile, it would be folly to take risks with interest rates to ward off a
threat which may not occur - especially as the yield on long-term gilts is
continuing to rise and sterling to slip. Neither development is alarming so
far, but both need to be taken into account. The CBI itself has stopped
pressing for base rate cuts. The most disappointing answers in its April
Trends Survey from businessmen relate to confidence and expectations. The
harder evidence of output and orders remains firm. Goldman Sachs points to a
similar discrepancy on the consumer side, where there is a quite unusual
contrast between low confidence and the actual trend of consumer spending.
One of the best recent innovations of the Central Statistical Office has
been the publication of an early flash indicator for gross domestic product.
This saves a great deal of work in putting together a vast amount of
scattered data from all parts of the economy. Much of this can now be
discarded, except for forward-looking indicators. These flash GDP estimates
are no more inaccurate than the more comprehensive estimates that appear
about a month later. The latest flash shows total real GDP in the first
quarter of 1994 some 2 1/2 to 3 per cent above both the same quarter a year
ago and the previous quarter when expressed at an annualised rate.
In most circumstances I would go by a somewhat lower figure which excludes
the volatile oil and gas sector and which has been rising more modestly.
But, on this occasion, any upward bias from the inclusion of the North Sea
sector is probably at least offset by a downward bias due to the
understatement of exports.
I have previously alluded to the remarkable increase in sterling export
prices since the UK left the ERM in 1992. While some upward movement was
likely, the recorded rise has been too large to be convincing; and it is
affected by the uncertainties in the new European Union trade statistics.
These are quite likely to overstate export prices and understate export
volume. They may understate import volumes too, but that would not affect
GDP. The net result is that UK output is not only rising, but probably
rising somewhat faster than the growth of productive capacity. Some of the
paradoxes about the fall in unemployment are being resolved by upward
revisions to estimates of the numbers of jobs, which unfortunately suggests
that productivity, even in manufacturing, is not now rising quite as fast as
it seemed to be a little while ago.
If the UK economy is doing so well, how come government popularity is so
low? There need not always be an economic explanation for everything,
especially in view of the vitriolic attacks made on John Major by sections
of the so-called Conservative media. In this case, however, it is not
difficult to find at least a contributory economic factor. Real personal
disposable income has increase by only 1 per cent a year over the past three
years, compared with 3 1/2 per cent over the previous five. Consumer
spending has itself only just regained its 1990 level; and future increases
will depend for a while on reductions in the personal savings ratio.
The pressure on personal incomes comes in large part from the need to raise
government revenues to reduce the budget deficit. But a rising share of
profits - ultimately beneficial to economic growth - is also making a
contribution. As the recovery proceeds and tax increases become a thing of
the past, personal prosperity should recover with it - although whether this
will be sufficient to save the Conservatives at the next election is far
more doubtful and not a matter about which non-partisan economic analysts
should fret too much.
The adjoining chart shows the relative positions of the main western
economies in a more interesting way than usual straight up-and-down
measures. It plots the estimated difference between actual and potential
output, as estimated by the IMF. Ideal stable growth would not be an upward
line, but a horizontal line coincident with the thick zero line on the
chart. For on this line output is growing at trend rates; and there is
neither a gap nor an excess compared with potential. Although the exact
position of each country relative to the thick line contains a large element
of guesswork, the broad trends are correct.
What they indicate in the bottom section is that France, Germany and Japan
have large amounts of slack in their economies which they show little sign
of eliminating, irrespective of whether their economies grow very slightly
or continue to decline. The largest amount of slack, and the prospect of
slightly worsening of recession, is evident in the case of Japan, which some
opponents of individualistic capitalism still want us to take as a model.
The German finance minister, Theo Waigel, has offered to bet the managing
director of the IMF, Michael Camdessus, that the projection of slow or no
growth for his country is wrong.
The US has had, on the other hand, the shallowest recession of the whole
group, and has now more than eliminated the output gap - so much so that the
Fed has begun to tighten to forestall inflationary pressures. The UK is
again in a different position: it has quite a lot of slack left in the
economy, but slack which may be eroding more quickly than the chart shows.
My own policy advice has, boringly, been the same for a good many months:
namely, leave well alone. What is, however, badly lacking in the UK - as in
other countries - is not fresh government measures but a criterion for
policy neutrality. What should base rates be if the Treasury and Bank are
trying neither to squeeze nor to stimulate the economy? Ultimately, we
should go by the growth of the national income in money terms. But, for an
immediate policy indicator, the Bank of England might take a leaf out of the
Fed's book and aim at a modest positive real rate of interest.
As underlying inflation is now around 2 1/2 per cent a year and base rates 5
1/4 per cent, we have a short-term real rate of around 2 3/4 per cent - and
obviously somewhat more for most businesses that borrow at above base rate.
This is a shade above average. Against this, evidence from gilts yields
suggest that over the next decade financial markets expect an inflation rate
of 4 to 4 1/2 per cent - clearly above the government's target range. Thus,
weighing up all the considerations, I come back yet again to: leave well
alone.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940428

