FT943-12923

FT  22 JUL 94 / Shortages push construction pay 'above 1980s levels'


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


Poaching of experienced construction executives has re-emerged as shortages
of skilled staff have pushed salaries of site managers, engineers and
surveyors higher than at the peak of the late-1980s development boom,
according to the industry's biggest recruitment agency.
Wages of bricklayers, carpenters and plant operators, have also risen
sharply in recent months. Meanwhile, building material prices have increased
by more than twice the rate of general inflation in the past year, a report
will say today.
The shadows of wage and material price inflation, which are threatening to
undermine Britain's economic recovery and force interest rates higher, can
be clearly seen over one of its biggest industries.
More than 500,000 jobs are estimated to have disappeared from the
construction industry since 1989. The loss of large numbers of managers and
tradesmen and women has left the industry with a shortage of experienced
workers as demand for construction has increased.
Employees, who 18 months ago were worrying whether they would have a job at
all, are suddenly finding they can negotiate higher salaries for the first
time in five years.
The biggest demand has come from private-sector housebuilders. Montrose
Construction Services, a recruitment agency which has filled more than
18,000 jobs in the industry in the past 12 months, said there had been surge
in refurbishment, maintenance and improvement work.
Miss Sara Reitze, its major accounts manager, said: 'Housebuilders are
starting many more development sites. They need lots of people quickly, not
just to manage new sites, but to replace existing staff which may have left
to join rivals for more money.'
Miss Reitze said a housing development site manager in south east England
could expect to earn Pounds 20,000 to Pounds 23,000 a year, with a car or
car allowance. The same person, a year ago, would have earned Pounds 18,000
to Pounds 20,000 with a car. Montrose said even at the peak, a site manager
would have earned no more than Pounds 20,000 a year.
Salaries of contracts managers, quantity surveyors and site engineers also
have risen to above previous peak levels.
Mr Robert Smith, Montrose managing director, said: 'Companies want to
recruit managers in their mid-20s to early 30s with previous recent
experience. The recession has meant that there are very few of these
available.
'Those who have left the industry have taken early retirement, found new
careers, or their treatment has left them chary about coming back. The lack
of training in recent years is another big problem,' he said.
Skilled workers are in short supply, particularly in London and south-east
England, where the resurgence in construction activity has been greatest. Mr
Smith said: 'There are estimated to be about 1,500 to 2,000 British
bricklayers working in Germany at the moment, earning up to Pounds 1,000 a
week.'
Bricklayers in London are earning about Pounds 65 to Pounds 70 a day,
compared with Pounds 50 at the end of last year. Carpenters' wages have
risen from about Pounds 50 a day last year to about Pounds 60 while earnings
of basic plant operators, diggers, lift truck operators and loaders have
increased from Pounds 45 to Pounds 60 a day.
Mr Simon Stewart, the agency's London labour manager, said: 'There have been
very few apprenticeships in the past few years, making matters worse. In the
past month Irish construction workers have begun to reappear in London for
the first time in several years.'
Montrose said wage rates had risen by similar amounts in the Midlands and
had started to rise in the north of England.
A report by EC Harris, international construction cost consultants, will
show today that building materials producers have taken advantage of
shortages to improve prices and recover some of the ground they lost during
the recession.
It estimates that materials prices rose by 6 per cent on average in the 12
months to the end of April - more than twice the rise in the retail prices
index over the same period.
Prices of structural steel and plasterboard have risen on average by 10 per
cent. Other products whose prices are up more than 6 per cent include
bricks, concrete roof tiles and blocks, clay pipes and cement.
Rises in labour and material costs, and even bigger increases in housing
land prices, have yet to be reflected in the price of completed buildings.
EC Harris says new house prices rose only a few percentage points while
construction contract tender prices rose only 3 per cent in the 12 months to
the end of April - half the rate of materials price rises.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940722

