FT942-15559

FT  14 APR 94 / International Company News: Taking Japan out of Nomura
International - The broker is quietly restructuring its European arm to
serve clients better and shift the power away from Tokyo


   By JOHN GAPPER


The change may be largely invisible to the outside world, but its
significance is enormous to an insider. Nomura International is becoming
less like the European arm of the largest Japanese broking house and more
like the US and European investment banks that it wants to emulate.
Reforms which came into effect this month are an attempt to turn the face of
Nomura International away from Tokyo and towards London. However, the
changes also imply a belated recognition that the institutional customers
Nomura serves in Europe are different from its Japanese retail investors.
'In the past, we played by Japanese rules. Now we have got to play by
international ones,' says Mr Koichi Kane, Nomura International's chairman.
Mr Kane has masterminded a shift in the firm's strategy to place its 16
European offices firmly under the guidance of its London headquarters.
On the face of it, this is a straightforward management reform which
emphasises functional reporting lines - such as those from bond salesmen in
Zurich to the heads of the fixed-income business in London - and reduces the
control exercised by regional directors in Zurich and elsewhere.
Yet it signifies a big step in the development of Japanese securities
houses, which have traditionally modelled their overseas businesses on those
in Japan.
Offices in London, Zurich or Madrid have traditionally had a single purpose:
to distribute products from Japan to European investors.
This meant that Nomura International operated less as a single entity than
as a collection of 16 offices reporting to Tokyo. 'We wanted the European
offices to look to London as their big brother, but they did not think that
way,' says Mr Kane.
The need to run the business more from London was prompted by the bursting
of the Japanese 'bubble' economy in 1989, which affected Nomura's mix of
business in Europe. Until then, when interest in Japanese equities and bonds
flagged, it had largely sold Japanese financial products.
This forced it to compete directly with US and European securities houses to
sell European products, in which it had some disadvantages. Nomura had to
build up its expertise in selling equities, bonds and complex hybrids, and
re-think its sales strategy.
Nomura in Japan is primarily a retail operation which sells to a mass of
individual customers rather than the institutional funds that dominate the
European market. This means it has relied on what Mr Kane calls 'a strong
army of sales people' to distribute its mix of products through the
branches.
To compete in Europe, it had to offer sophisticated research in equities,
and gear itself to offer complex products such as warrants and derivatives.
These must be sold to funds, which are more influenced by the returns on
products than whether the salesman is locally-based.
This drove Mr Kane to the conclusion a year ago that Nomura would have to
change to reflect the shift in business. Sales people in different European
countries would have to be members of teams run from London, rather than
being controlled primarily by heads of businesses in Switzerland or France.
Instead of changing the structure immediately, he decided to phase it in
over a year, with the full switch taking place at the start of April.
'Rather than bringing things in quickly and finding problems later, we had a
long pretending period to make sure it worked smoothly,' he says.
One problem was to persuade those in European offices to accept the
authority of newly-appointed divisional heads in London. 'Some people were
very distressed at having to report for the first time to heads in London.
They thought there had been an invasion,' says Mr Kane.
A second difficulty was to get the heads of European offices to change their
roles. 'The president of Nomura France is still there, but his role is
dramatically changed,' says Mr Kane. He says that such country heads must
now concentrate on administration and playing an 'ambassadorial' role.
However, Mr Kane says the shift has brought an immediate improvement for
some of those based in smaller European offices: notably sales people who
were previously isolated. 'Some felt they had been left alone too much
before, and they have been made members of a larger group,' he says.
Prospects have also improved for senior European nationals in smaller
offices, whose promotion chances were limited under the previous structure
because the highest local grade was as country manager, and this role was,
in effect, reserved for a Japanese expatriate.
'Even if the top European kicked out his Japanese boss, he would still only
be in charge of 25 people,' says Mr Kane. He says that by breaking national
borders, the new structure allows easier promotion; he also believes that
Europeans will increasingly dominate the new Nomura International.
Nomura's European reform could be taken further. At the moment, it operates
in Europe through 10 legal entities subordinated to its Japanese parent
company. It has stuck to this legal structure for tax and regulatory
reasons, which means its debt must be guaranteed by Nomura Securities.
Mr Kane believes it could eventually form a separate European holding
company with its own capital base. He also believes that the reforms
undertaken in Europe could form a model for other businesses outside Japan,
as Nomura develops a distinctive way of operating overseas.
It might be logical for a distinctively European business to be headed by a
European, a point Mr Kane accepts. 'I am, unfortunately, Japanese, but that
has to change some time in the future,' he says. When that happens, the
inner change wrought at Nomura may become visible for outsiders.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940414

