FT941-13031

FT  27 JAN 94 / Bulls make it an office party: Vanessa Houlder explains a
remarkable recovery in the property market


   By VANESSA HOULDER


After three years of deep recession, Britain's commercial property market is
staging a spectacular comeback.
Since the middle of last year, investors have embarked on one of the most
frenetic bouts of buying in decades. 'This is the strongest bull market for
property since 1972,' according to Mr Greg Nicholson of Hillier Parker,
chartered surveyors.
Fierce competition for investment properties, frequently attracting as many
as 15 bidders, has driven down yields sharply. Yields - the ratio of income
to value - for the most sought-after investments, such as high street shops
and retail warehouse parks, are close to record lows. In central London,
agents report that office yields fell by 1.8 percentage points to 8.3 per
cent last year, the greatest annual decline on record.
Investors are starting to see strong returns from property, albeit at levels
that lag the equity market. UK property achieved a total return of 18.6 per
cent in 1993, compared with negative returns of -2.1 per cent in 1992,
according to Richard Ellis, chartered surveyors.
There are even stirrings of interest in the development market. 'Speculative
development is now viable again in central London, assuming very low land
costs,' says Mr Geoff Marsh, managing director of Applied Property Research.
But the remarkable turnaround in sentiment does not stem wholly from a
reappraisal of property's intrinsic merits. In many regions of the country,
rents are still falling, vacancy rates remain well above long-term trends
and letting boards litter town centres.
Admittedly, investors are looking ahead to a recovery in rental growth,
which many believe is likely to resume at the end of this year. But that
does not fully account for such a pronounced revival at this stage of the
property cycle.
Instead, the surge in demand is mainly attributed to the strength of the
government bond market, where long gilt yields fell from 8.8 per cent to 6.4
per cent in the course of last year.
As equity and bond yields plummeted, the relatively high yields available on
property became increasingly attractive. Last year the institutions
increased their allocations of money to the sector - a trend likely to
continue.
Many analysts think that property will outperform the stockmarket. The
stockbroker UBS has predicted returns from property of more than 20 per cent
this year and 12 per cent in 1995, compared with returns from equities of
about 3 per cent in 1994 and less than 5 per cent in 1995.
Moreover, institutions need to invest extra money in property to compensate
for the outperformance of the equity market last year. Even though property
put in one of its best performances in years, the average weighting of
property in an institutional portfolio fell by a percentage point from 7.5
per cent at the end of 1992, in the view of Mr Peter Evans of DTZ Debenham
Thorpe, chartered surveyors.
Although the investment institutions are currently the most active buyers of
property, there is also strong demand from property companies. The quoted
property sector is flush with cash to spend on new investments, after
raising Pounds 2.39bn through rights issues last year.
As confidence comes back to the property market, there has been a shift in
the type of property being sought.
During the the recession, investors played safe. Demand was concentrated on
buildings that had secure incomes paid by financially robust tenants on long
leases. But as concern about tenant bankruptcies diminishes, investors are
placing less emphasis on security and more on the potential for rental
growth. Location is also regaining much of its traditional importance.
The question now preoccupying investors is whether the rush to put money
into property has pushed values up too far, too fast. The intense
competition for property deals has led some investors to turn a blind eye to
slight imperfections in property acquisitions, which potentially could lead
to difficulties. 'There are going to be some nasty shocks,' predicts Mr
Matthew Oakeshott of Olim, a fund manager.
More generally, property investors are at risk both from a
slower-than-expected improvement in the economy or from a rise in interest
rates resulting from an upturn in inflation.
The nature of the risk varies for different types of property. Low yielding
property, where investors have expectations of strong rental growth, has the
most to lose from a slowdown in the economy.
High yielding properties, which have meagre rental growth prospects because
the incumbent tenants are trapped by a long lease into paying well above the
market rent, have the most to lose from a rise in inflation and an increase
in interest rates. That is because the investment performance of this type
of property resembles a bond, and so would be affected by anything that
altered bond yields, such as a rise in inflationary pressures.
Although investors fear anything that could trigger a rise in interest rates
and bond yields, they may also feel a certain nostalgia for the era of
unrestrained inflation. In the 1970s, high inflation came to the rescue of
many bad decisions by indiscriminately boosting property values.
No such help is on hand this time round. 'Low inflation should make
developers and investors focus more on fundamental supply and demand
issues,' says Mr Peter Evans of DTZ Debenham Thorpe. 'They will not have the
luxury of being bailed out of bad decisions.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940127

