FT944-2956

FT  15 DEC 94 / Trafalgar House Stalks Northern Electric: Deep pockets in
search of stable profits - Trafalgar House


   By DAVID WIGHTON


For a company to be contemplating a Pounds 1bn-plus takeover bid only two
years after it nearly went under might appear to be evidence of a miraculous
corporate recovery. But it has more to do with the deep pockets of Jardine
Matheson than a turnround at Trafalgar House.
Jardine dropped anchor off Trafalgar at the end of 1992, when the
conglomerate built up by Sir Nigel Broackes was taking on water. Hongkong
Land, Jardine's property arm, captured 15 per cent of the shares and later
increased its stake to 25 per cent.
Whatever the Jardine camp thought at the time, it soon found itself at the
helm of a ship that was sinking rapidly. Trafalgar had incurred losses in
1991, although it originally reported a profit, and these mounted in 1992 as
it was forced to make heavy write-downs on its large property portfolio.
Trafalgar had raised Pounds 310m from a rights issue at the time of its
ill-fated acquisition of Davy Corporation in 1991 and a further Pounds 204m
in March 1993. But the write-downs, as well as provisions against the value
of its Cunard cruise ships, the Ritz hotel and Davy's Emerald North Sea rig,
left its balance sheet badly holed. Exactly a year ago, Trafalgar announced
the terms of a convertible preference share issue to raise Pounds 400m.
Trafalgar is now valued at Pounds 1.2bn, only Pounds 200m more than
investors have injected over the past three years.
Jardine now calls the shots at Trafalgar and Mr Simon Keswick, whose family
controls Jardine, took over as chairman in 1992.
During the 1960s and 1970s, Trafalgar bought a wide range of companies such
as Cunard, the Ritz and the Express newspaper group (floated off in 1982).
In the 1980s, it became the world's fourth largest engineering and
construction contractor with acquisitions including Redpath Dorman Long,
Scott Lithgow, John Brown and, ultimately, Davy.
But after Trafalgar recorded profits of Pounds 266m in 1989, the recession
nearly snuffed it out. Over the past three years, it has lost almost Pounds
400m before tax. Trafalgar's tax losses and unrelieved advance corporation
tax could shelter a large part of Northern Electric's profits.
Mr Nigel Rich, the Jardine man installed as chief executive in August, is
likely to argue that Northern's stable profits stream will offset
Trafalgar's highly cyclical earnings. Trafalgar's other shareholders may not
see it quite that way. Many bought into the shares as a play on cyclical
recovery, which is yet to come, and may not wish to see that diluted by
Northern's utility profits.
Mr Gavin Launder, an analyst at Goldman Sachs, commented: 'It may be a
sensible move for Jardine but it is hard to see how it is very good news for
Trafalgar House.'
Though some overseas opportunities may be opened by combining Trafalgar's
electrical engineering skills with Northern's expertise in power generation
and distribution, the business fit is minimal.
For Jardine, a takeover of Northern would be a way to exchange Hong Kong
cash for UK profits.
Given Northern's strong cash generation, a large part of the purchase price
could be funded by debt. The rest is expected to be met from the proceeds of
a share issue, probably of convertible preference shares, underwritten by
Hongkong Land. Some shareholders yesterday voiced concern that this might
allow Hongkong Land 'to buy control on the cheap'. But they also recognise
that without Jardine, Trafalgar might by now have gone to the breakers'
yard.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941215

