FT942-14396

FT  20 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Caribbean growers stand by
their bananas - EU sales are threatened but other crops hold little
attraction


   By CANUTE JAMES


In the face of continuing challenges to the European Union's banana regime
by Latin American exporters, Caribbean producers, who benefit from a
protected market, are preparing for an uncertain future by trying to
increase their efficiency.
The governments of the four Windward Islands - Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia
and St Vincent - the major suppliers to the UK, are seeking Dollars 60m to
cut production costs and put their industry in a better position to compete
with more efficient Latin American producers.
Farm leaders and trade ministers in the region are examining the more
intractable problems that have bedeviled efforts to promote agricultural
diversification in an attempt to reduce the islands' dependence on bananas
by replacing the fruit with crops that can find an equally lucrative market.
It is readily admitted, however, that there will be no immediate relief,
either through improved productivity or alternative products, if the four
islands were to quickly lose their preferential access to the European
market. Economic planners say agriculture, and mainly bananas, will continue
to be the basis of several of the islands' economies. The factors that have
made Windward Island bananas more costly than the Latin fruit are the very
reasons diversification is proving difficult.
The governments are hoping that if they can get the funds to increase
productivity and improve marketing, they will be able to lift farm yield
from the current levels of eight tonnes of exportable produce per acre and
closer to the average 18 tonnes in Latin America.
'As it now stands, even though the Windward Islands have preferential access
to the European market, they are one of the highest cost producers, and if
something is not done to reduce those costs, they are going to lose the
market,' says Mr Marius St Rose, a vice president of the Caribbean
Development Bank.
Funding for the programme is being sought by the Windward governments from
the bank and from the European Union. The intention is to improve the
quality of bananas and reduce the cost of production by 20 to 25 per cent
over three years.
Improving productivity of bananas now appears an easier task than getting
the islands' farmers to turn to other crops. Attempts at diversification
have met with little success. Farmers are reluctant to change to new crops
with which they have had little experience and for which they might not be
able to find a market as lucrative as that for bananas.
'One of the problems with farming bananas in this part of the world is that
the entire industry can be flattened overnight by a storm or a hurricane,' a
St Lucian government official explains.
But he points out that bananas 'are the only crop we know of which can be
replanted immediately andproduce for export in a few months'.
Farmers operate on small plots in often difficult terrain not serviced by
basic infrastructure such as farm roads. Transportation costs are high, and
production costs are compounded by the inability of the farmers to achieve
any benefits of scale in purchasing inputs such as chemicals.
'There is insufficient interest in non-traditional crops and this has
constrained efforts at diversification,' says Mr Collin Bully, programme
manager for the Agricultural Diversification Co-ordinating Unit of the
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States. 'Diversification is not
necessarily meant to replace dominant crops. Successful diversification
needs macro-economic framework including comprehensive land settlement and
institutions to provide extension services, marketing and technical
services.'
Farmers' reluctance to change is also rooted in their conviction that no
alternative crop will be able to provide them with the level of earnings
they have been getting from protected bananas.
They are yet to be convinced that there is a market in either North America
or Europe for an alternative product that would allow them to maintain their
standard of living. For most of the non-traditional crops that have been
suggested, ranging from mangoes to horticulture, the major markets are
already being supplied.
Changing from being primary producers to processors also presents the
islands with a similar problem. 'Small eastern Caribbean islands cannot
compete with large scale producers in other countries,' says Mr Ken Boyea,
managing director of the East Caribbean Group of Companies, which owns
several agribusiness ventures. 'We have been moving into processing and
getting out of primary production, but is difficult to get people to leave
bananas and do anything else. They fear changing to a product for which
there is no market.'

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940420

