FT942-12575

FT  29 APR 94 / Schneider affair errors leave dent in Deutsche Bank's
reputation: David Waller explains how Germany's biggest bank allowed itself
to be deceived


   By DAVID WALLER


Germany is in the grip of 'Schneider fever', says Mr Hilmar Kopper, chief
executive of Deutsche Bank, following the disappearance of property
entrepreneur Mr Jurgen Schneider, which triggered Germany's biggest property
bankruptcy in decades.
The shock waves are such that even Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president,
went out of his way this week to tell New York businessmen that the
Schneider affair - closely following the near-demise of the
Metallgesellschaft metals, mining and industrial group earlier this year -
was not symptomatic of a general crisis in the German economy.
With property experts adamant that the collapse is a 'one-off' which will
not lead to widespread crisis in Germany's fragmented property sector, those
most likely to feel financial hardship as a result of the affair are small
businessmen owed money by the bankrupt group.
At the other end of the scale - the powerful Deutsche Bank - the damage to
image and pride has been far worse, as Mr Kopper conceded on Monday.
The bank's exposure to Schneider is DM1.16bn - a mere 0.03 per cent of the
bank's lending volume, of which 'only' a few hundred million are at risk.
But as a poll this week in Die Woche newspaper revealed, 72 per cent of
those polled blamed Deutsche Bank for the property debacle - and only 18 per
cent the fugitive Mr Schneider himself, who fled the country having taken at
least DM219m of the group's money.
In a press offensive this week, Mr Kopper sought to play down the
implications of the affair. In an interview with Die Zeit newspaper
yesterday Mr Kopper blamed the surge of public hostility on 'typically
German feelings of envy' triggered by resentment at the bank's sheer
profitability.
But for all Mr Kopper's attempts to treat the collapse as a normal, though
big, bankruptcy, the debacle has once again raised the question of what
Deutsche bank knew and when, and whether it missed opportunities to prevent
the group's demise. The same questions were asked of it in the
Metallgesellschaft case.
As internal enquiries at the bank got under way, Deutsche officials
disclosed this week that the bank took a policy decision to stop lending to
Mr Schneider in 1992 when its exposure amounted to DM1.5bn out of the
property group's total borrowings of DM2.8bn.
But Mr Kopper explained that this decision was merely part of a general risk
diversification strategy. It was only last year, according to Mr Ulrich
Weiss, the board member responsible for the Mannheim area from which
Schneider borrowed money, that the bank's credit committee decided to watch
Schneider critically.
Last February, Mr Weiss went so far as to question Mr Schneider closely
following press reports chronicling his legal battles with suppliers over
his failure to meet payments, and information from the Bundesbank which put
the group's debts at over DM5bn.
Mr Weiss said Mr Schneider's answers were plausible. He promised to mend
fences with the suppliers and said that the Bundesbank figure was caused by
statistical errors.
The last contact with Mr Schneider was ten days before Easter when he and Mr
Weiss fixed up a meeting to discuss the group's future. This was for last
Monday and, not surprisingly, Mr Schneider - now facing fraud charges - did
not turn up.
Mr Weiss stressed on Monday that despite the critical questions, there was
no evidence that the group was in financial difficulties until April 7. On
that Thursday he received a letter from Mr Schneider in which he announced
that he had left the country on medical grounds and asked Deutsche Bank to
provide a bridging loan. Deutsche refused to make the loan and the main
holding company for the group filed for bankruptcy on April 15.
As fellow Deutsche board member Mr Georg Krupp explained on Monday, Mr
Schneider was up until the last minute prompt and punctual in meeting
payments of interest and capital. He also had DM583m cash at his disposal at
the end of last year- all but DM5m of which has now vanished.
But were there not other warning signs? Two smaller banks, Norddeutsche
Landesbank and BfG Bank are known to have demanded further security from Mr
Schneider at the beginning of the year. Their scepticism was based on an
audited statement of Mr Schneider's personal financial position as at the
end of last year. This statement claimed that the Les Facettes shopping
development in the centre of Frankfurt had a market value of DM983m - while
property specialists put the value at less than DM200m.
It is this development which forms the basis of Deutsche's fraud claim
against Mr Schneider. The claim says he falsified documentation when
applying for a top-up loan for the project earlier this year. It emerged in
the context of this claim that Deutsche lent DM415m against the project -
more than twice the market value.
The loan was made on the basis that it would yield DM57m in rental income on
more than 20,000 square metres of lettable space. In fact it yielded just
DM8m on only 9,000 sqm.
Mr Kopper claimed that the biggest mistake the bank made was to 'allow
ourselves to be deceived'. But critics are much harder.
'There appears to have been a total breakdown in internal control,' said Mr
Ian McEwen, banking analyst at Merrill Lynch in London.
'At no stage did anyone ask the obvious questions about valuations. Proper
oversight would have rec-ognised the anomalies and picked them up.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940429

