FT941-5650

FT  05 MAR 94 / Inkatha decides to register for all-race elections


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the conservative Zulu leader, last night sent an
envoy to Johannesburg to register his Inkatha Freedom party for South
Africa's first all-race elections, but other right-wing leaders said they
would not register before the midnight deadline.
After a frantic day of bilateral meetings between African National Congress
officials and leaders of right wing groups, the right was in disarray and
insisting on an extension of the midnight cut-off to allow it to take a
final decision.
Mr Ferdi Hartzenberg, leader of the hard-right Conservative party, said his
party would not register, but he was under heavy pressure from younger CP
members of parliament and Gen Constand Viljoen, the more moderate Afrikaner
Volksfront leader, who are believed to wish to enroll for the poll. The CP
may split if Mr Hartzenberg continues to insist on a boycott.
Officials of the Afrikaner Volksfront and the conservative Bophuthatswana
black homeland said both groups would register if the deadline was extended,
but this was ruled out by the Independent Electoral Commission.
Still, politicians might intervene to allow a change in the date for
registration if they believe this would tempt more moderate conservatives to
enter the poll, and split the right wing alliance.
Inkatha's decision to register was hedged with conditions. Chief Buthelezi
said the move was 'provisional' and did not necessarily mean it would take
part in the poll.
After a six-hour meeting the party's central committee passed a resolution
rejecting the constitution. Chief Buthelezi said he would only begin
electioneering once there had been international mediation of South Africa's
constitutional dispute.
The ANC and Inkatha have agreed to this in principle, but battles lie ahead
over who the mediators should be and whether mediation should be binding.
The constitutional gap between Inkatha and the ANC remains large, and
mediation is likely to yield a positive result only if one or the other side
is prepared substantially to abandon its demands.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940305

