FT941-3498

FT  16 MAR 94 / Life insurer refuses to answer MPs' question


   By ALISON SMITH


A direct clash between a Commons committee and a leading life insurance
company loomed yesterday after Lloyds Abbey Life refused to respond to a
question from the social security committee.
Mr Frank Field, Labour chairman of the committee, has written to Sir Simon
Hornby, Lloyds Abbey Life chairman, urging him to repair the damage done by
the response from Mr Alan Frost, Abbey Life managing director.
Abbey Life was one of the six largest providers of personal pensions to
which the committee wrote last week, asking if they took part in a survey by
accountancy firm KPMG Peat Marwick of mis-selling personal pensions to
people transferring out of employers' schemes.
The study, published in December, sparked widespread public concern when it
failed to find any evidence that sales agents had met regulators'
requirements in nine out of 10 pension transfer cases.
Mr Frost's reply to Mr Field said he recognised the committee's wish to draw
its own conclusions, but he believed that responses from individual
companies might not necessarily lead to the correct conclusions.
He expressed the view that the Securities and Investments Board, the City's
chief watchdog which commissioned the survey, should provide the committee
with all the details.
Mr Field's letter to Sir Simon came after he had discussed the issue with Mr
Peter Thurnham, the leader of the Conservative MPs on the committee. The
matter is to be raised at the committee's meeting today.
Commons select committees have wide-ranging powers to call for persons,
papers and records. As well as featuring in the social security committee's
work on aspects of personal and state pensions, the issue of pension
transfers has arisen in the Treasury committee's financial regulation
inquiry.
Mr Field said yesterday other life insurance companies to which the
committee had written had replied, though their responses had not yet been
circulated. The committee could demand that the SIB reveal which companies
had taken part in the survey, he said, but it was reluctant to do this
because the SIB had acquired the information on the basis that it would not
reveal it.
Regulators have emphasised that the findings of the KPMG study were
representative of the industry as a whole, but companies have been unwilling
to reveal their participation in the survey.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940316

