FT943-13359

FT  20 JUL 94 / Final touches put to cabinet shake-up


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Mr John Major was last night putting the final touches to a mid-term
reshuffle which will see the departure of about a dozen ministers from his
government.
As he prepared later today to unveil the most extensive changes since he
took office in 1990, senior ministers said at least three, and quite
possibly four, of their colleagues expected to leave the cabinet.
This will be accompanied by a much more sweeping shake-out in the middle and
lower ministerial ranks, with a number of promising backbench MPs entering
the government for the first time.
The hopes of Lord Archer, the best-selling novelist and Tory party
fundraiser, for a place in the government were raised by the news that an
official report into alleged insider trading had been completed by
Department of Trade and Industry inspectors. As the report landed on the
desk of Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, there was
pressure on the DTI to issue an immediate statement. Lord Archer is
convinced he will be exonerated of allegations of passing on insider
information about the takeover by MAI of Anglia Television.
The reshuffle will provide the first clear indication of how Mr Major
intends to counter the threat posed by the anticipated election tomorrow of
Mr Tony Blair as Labour leader.
The fate of figures on the right such as Mr Michael Portillo, the chief
secretary to the Treasury, will signal whether the prime minister intends to
follow the more rightwing tone of his rhetoric with a shift in policy
substance.
The three most important posts in the administration - the Treasury, Foreign
Office and Home Office jobs - are expected to remain in the hands of Mr
Kenneth Clarke, Mr Douglas Hurd and Mr Michael Howard respectively.
With Mr Heseltine determined not to be party chairman, Tory officials said
the choice would be from any one of four or five senior ministers. Mrs
Gillian Shephard, the agriculture minister, Dr Brian Mawhinney, the health
minister, Mr David Hunt, the employment secretary, and Mr Ian Lang, the
Scottish secretary, are among those mentioned as possible replacements for
Sir Norman Fowler.
Mr Peter Brooke, Mr John Patten and Mr John MacGregor - among the most
likely candidates for retirement or dismissal - were all missing from the
front bench during Mr Major's last appearance in the Commons yesterday
before the summer recess. Lord Wakeham, the leader of the House of Lords, is
also widely expected to step down.
Mr Stephen Dorrell at the Treasury and Mr Jonathan Aitken at defence appear
certain of promotion. Mr Roger Freeman, the transport minister, may just
make cabinet rank.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940720

