FT944-2872

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (3): Competition in trade finance
hots up - Arab banks outside the Arab world


   By ROULA KHALAF


'We have stopped being a bank of big loans and big transactions, today it's
back to basics' says Mr Bernard Jacquet, chairman of the management board of
Union des Banques Arabes et Francaises (UBAF), Paris.
His words aptly summarise the fate of Arab banks set up in the West in the
heyday of Arab Banking with the ambitious aim of recycling the mountains of
capital exported from the Gulf. After falling victim to the LDC debt crisis,
most of the banks either went bankrupt or were taken over by Western
counterparts.
The few lucky survivors - including remnants of the UBAF Group, Saudi
International Bank and United Bank of Kuwait - have largely scaled back
their ambitions and are now focused on carving out comfortable niches from
their western bases.
The former UBAF group, once a loose federation of banks in the West with
common Arab public sector bank shareholdings, has now divided into separate
banks in each of Paris, London and Rome. The Paris and London banks have
secured an important stake in the trade finance between Europe and the Arab
World.
UBAF Paris, the larger of the two with Dollars 5.2bn in assets, has had a
harder time shedding its LDC debt problems, given a relatively significant
exposure to Middle East countries, including Iraq. Unable to generate enough
earnings to cover provisions in recent years (the bank lost FF722m in 1993),
the bank turned to shareholders again this year. Mr Jacquet says the latest
capital injection of FF501m, which raised total coverage to a comfortable 66
per cent, will be the last.
The trade finance business, meanwhile, is becoming increasingly competitive,
and business from Gulf countries - a big market for the bank - is down this
year. This has forced UBAF to streamline operations - staff has been cut by
15 per cent in the last four years, says Mr Jacquet - 'we're doing our work
smoothly and calmly and trying to do what we know how to do: trade finance,'
he says.
Trade finance business at UBAF Bank Ltd in London (1993 assets: Dollars
1.1bn), 75 per cent owned by Arab shareholders and the rest by Midland Bank
PLC, is focused on North Africa, and while business with Tunisia and Morocco
is flourishing, Algeria continues to be a critical risk.
With LDC problems behind it, and 78 per cent coverage of problem country
risk, the bank was able to release Pounds 7.5m in provisions back into
income last year, which allowed it to register total after-tax profits of
Pounds 18.7m and pay dividends for the first time since 1986. The London
rating agency, IBCA, raised its individual rating of the bank this year.
UBAF London opened its first overseas office in Beirut, Lebanon this year,
but 'our raison d'etre remains trade finance and we have no plans for a
concerted break-out into anything else,' says Mr Mohamed Fezzani, general
manager and deputy chief executive. The Beirut operation is headed by
Meguerditch Bouldoukian, a former vice-governor of the Banque du Liban, the
central bank.
London-based Saudi International Bank (with Dollars 4.5m in assets in 1993),
50 per cent owned by the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency and 20 per cent by
Morgan Guarantee Trust Company, has undergone a significant transformation
in the last decade, gradually moving out of commercial banking and into
investment banking.
SIB's shareholders have been more than supportive - they rid the bank of a
dogging LDC problem by buying the LDC portfolio in two tranches in 1987 and
1989. A gradual phasing out of lending activity has now led to non-interest
income accounting for nearly half of total revenues, and derived in large
part from dealing profits. Buoyant markets last year thus pushed pre-tax
profits up more than 80 per cent.
The bank's niche is among institutional Saudi clients - total funds under
management now hover around Dollars 4.5bn. SIB attempts to bring to the
table sophisticated deals domestic banks may be reluctant to embark on. A
typical example is the Dollars 196m fund set up earlier this year with the
US's Morgan Stanley offering collateralised loan obligations, with the
collateral made up of high yield bonds.
United Bank of Kuwait, based in London, is one of the few Arab banks outside
the Arab world not to have been lured by the appeal of LDC debt  - 'that's
where the herd were going and we never found the risk appealing,' says Mr
Christopher Keen, UBK's general manager. But the bank, which chose instead
to channel Arab funds into financial instruments on world markets, suffered
a blow in the 1987 stock market collapse. It has since shifted gears and
refocused its business on fee-income from money management.
The strategy seems to have paid off. Last year, UBK, which has Dollars 2.8bn
in assets, saw profits increase by almost 40 per cent to Dollars 10.2m and
its individual IBCA rating raised. Fee income now makes up about 40 per cent
of revenues.
UBK, whose largest shareholder is Kuwait's Public Institution for Social
Security, now manages Dollars 2.5bn in funds and tailored portfolios. It has
channeled investments into a Dollars 125m high yield securities fund and
launched a fund based on the index of developing country debt with the
capital guaranteed.
On the lending side, the bank has sought diversification and has built a
sizeable business in property and aircraft finance.
In November 1992, UBK provided Dollars 26m to the lessor of a Boeing 757
operated by British Airways, and in March this year, extended a further
Dollars 24m on a second BA aircraft. Its total aircraft portfolio now stands
at Dollars 120m.
The bank is highly exposed to the property sector, which constitutes a good
chunk of its loan portfolio, though according to IBCA, the vast majority of
the loans are on completed and fully let buildings.
But UBK still harbours ambitions to play a larger role on international
markets. It is now attempting to take a giant leap forward by selling its
money management skills to US pension funds.
Last year, the bank set up Portman Asset Management, a new subsidiary that
will attempt to attract US pension fund investments into international
global government bond markets, where the largest component of UBK's funds
under management are invested.
'We think fund management is an area we can compete in with anybody,' says
Mr Keen. 'It would be a pity if we didn't extend our horizons further from
Gulf markets.'

The Financial Times


London Page 42

941215

