FT941-4231

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (11): Economic downturn catches
up - Brussels is suffering from the same problems that have afflicted other
European markets / Belgium


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Until recently, the resilience of the Brussels property market has made it
the envy of many of its recession-hit neighbours.
The European Union, which together with the Belgian government occupies some
60 per cent of Brussels' offices, appeared to insulate the Brussels market
from the effects of the European economic downturn.
No longer. Brussels is now suffering from the same problems of reduced
demand and rising vacancy rates that have afflicted other European markets.
The cost of renting space declined last year, marking the end of a period of
continuous rental growth since 1980.
The extent of this downturn took some observers by surprise. 'We had hoped
that Brussels would not be hit too much because of the EU's presence,' says
Mr Philippe Winssinger of DTZ Winssinger, property advisers. 'In fact, the
recession has been worse than we anticipated as a result of a lot of
domestic companies cutting back on their need for space and multinationals
reducing the size of their Brussels operation.'
Office vacancy rates stand at about 8 per cent, compared with a low of about
3 per cent in 1989. On the face of it, demand for office space remained at a
high level, with about 300,000 sq m being let or sold to occupiers. However,
a large proportion of that was accounted for by a single deal, namely
Belgacom's acquisition of the 110,000 sq m Tour Pleiad. In addition, the EU
accounted for about 15 per cent of the total take-up.
Many of the remaining occupiers have shed staff and reduced their
requirements for space. 'It is now far more common for demand for space to
originate from groups looking to move to smaller offices than those
contemplating an increase in their occupation,' says Richard Ellis,
chartered surveyors.
There are marked variations in the state of the letting market, according to
the location, quality and age of building.
The brunt of the increase in vacancy rates has affected the city centre and
Leopold district (the main EU and financial area), where rents have fallen
by 15-20 per cent.
By contrast, the office market in the periphery of Brussels has been more
stable. It has benefited from companies leaving the centre of Brussels to
escape traffic congestion and increased local taxes. A new office tax
introduced in Brussels in 1989 increased the tax burden on office occupiers
by about 20 per cent, which is enough to offset the benefits of lower rents.
A widening gap is also opening up between new and old offices, where the
rental differential is some 10-15 per cent. The decline in rents is likely
to stop in the near future in new buildings because they will be taken up in
preference to older buildings, in the view of Mr Michel Pilette of Jones
Lang Wootton. He estimates that three quarters of the new space, which
currently accounts for a third of the available stock, will be let by the
end of the year.
In older buildings, however, rents are likely to continue to decline,
particularly as investors are proving reluctant to spend money on
refurbishment.
Some factors, however, encourage confidence that the letting market will
revive. Although EU budgets are currently constrained, its requirement for
offices is likely to grow as it embraces new members.
Moreover, there is little new property coming onto the market. The current
speculative development programme will add just 137,000 sq m of space - less
than 2 per cent - to the total office stock, according to Richard Ellis. The
city's tight planning controls will ensure that the future supply of new
stock is constrained.
Despite the current travails of the letting market, there has been a marked
improvement in the investment market. This was stimulated by the decline in
interest rates, which pushed the cost of money below property yields in many
cases.
Total investment was close to a record of BFr28-30bn last year, compared
with BFr15-18bn in the previous year. Private Belgian investors have been
important players in the market, through securitisation, which offers tax
advantages. Two such Belgian Real Estate Certificates were sold last year:
one for 37,000 sq m in the Green Belt for BFr5.3bn on a yield of 7.5 per
cent and one in the Avenue Marcel Thiry for 10,000 sq m of offices for
BFr1.06bn, on a yield of 7.6 per cent.
At present, investors remain cautious as they confine their interest to
high-quality buildings which are less than 15 years old, with good leases.
But the return of investors to the market is likely to gather momentum,
believes Mr Winssinger. 'We are at a stage where the UK was a year ago, with
high yields, low rents and low cost of money. A year ago, there was a lot of
product but limited buyers. Now that has reversed,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940311

