FT943-12637

FT  23 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: What you can expect to pay


Nominee account charges can be confusing. The most common charging method is
a fixed fee for each stock held, payable on a quarterly or half-yearly
basis. This often covers the whole nominee service, but sometimes there are
additional charges.
These cover such things as transferring shares into or out of the nominee
account, collecting dividends, preparing valuations or tax certificates,
passing on annual reports or other company documents, arranging attendance
at annual general meetings, or benefiting from shareholder perks. Holding
overseas shares in a nominee account is usually more expensive.
A few brokers make no charge for the nominee service - but make sure this is
not balanced by higher dealing costs or other charges. Users of
execution-only services are more likely to be charged for nominees than
discretionary or advisory clients, who usually pay higher charges elsewhere.
Some brokers reserve the right to make a charge for company reports or AGM
attendance, but do not necessarily impose it.
Many of the mass-market share dealing services take an all-in approach to
nominee charges. Barclays Stockbrokers has different nominee charges
depending on whether you are an execution-only or advisory client, but
provides the same pooled nominee service for both.
This includes half-yearly valuations, composite tax voucher, company reports
and accounts, most shareholder perks and voting rights.
Advisory clients pay Pounds 1 a stock each quarter (minimum Pounds 25) for
the full service; execution-only clients pay 75p a stock each quarter
(minimum Pounds 9) for the same service. Dealing charges are identical.
Fidelity Brokerage, which has about 25,000 execution-only customers,
registers all purchases automatically into a designated nominee account but
makes no charge for the nominee, which includes the full range of services.
The one exception is a Pounds 20 charge for re-registering shares into
another name. Leeds-based Broadbridge does not charge for nominee accounts,
and dealing charges are the same whether or not a nominee is used.
At the other end of the scale, the more exclusive Williams de Broe includes
a nominee service in the annual fee for its discretionary and advisory
portfolio management service, but execution-only clients are charged Pounds
3 a stock held in the nominee account each quarter, plus an extra Pounds 3
per dividend collected, Pounds 5 for tax certificates, and other charges for
transfers out of the nominee.
James Capel charges advisory clients Pounds 15 a stock each quarter for its
nominee package, in addition to a Pounds 250 annual administration charge
for each portfolio.
Most brokers have not yet altered their nominee charging structures in
response to rolling settlement but some, which until now have not charged
for nominee accounts, may start once larger numbers have opted for the
service.
One is Albert E. Sharp, which says: 'We do not charge advisory dealing
clients for nominee accounts, but are reviewing this policy and may decide
to do so in due course.' Before you sign up, it is worth asking any broker
how long the charging structure is due to be in place.
Dealing charges are sometimes different, depending on whether you are using
a nominee account as well as whether you are dealing on an execution-only,
advisory or discretionary basis.
Dealing with in-house nominee accounts is usually easier administratively
for the broker, so not using a nominee could make dealing more expensive.
Butterfield Securities charges non-nominee customers an extra Pounds 10 a
deal, and James Capel has a Pounds 25 'delivery fee' for non-nominee
advisory clients.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940723

