FT944-2509

FT  16 DEC 94 / Calm hand at helm of uneasy coalition: The challenges facing
John Bruton as Ireland's new premier


   by JOHN MURRAY BROWN


Mr John Bruton was once described as 'John Unionist' by Mr Albert Reynolds,
the man he succeeded yesterday as Ireland's new prime minister.
It was an unfortunate slip of the tongue. Nonetheless, the inadvertent
allusion to Mr Bruton's views on Northern Ireland highlights one of the key
differences in government policy likely to emerge with his accession
yesterday as head of a three-party coalition between his Fine Gael party,
Labour and the small Democratic Left.
The feeling in Dublin last night was one of relief after a month of
deliberations and allegations, which had left Ireland in the hands of a
caretaker administration since the collapse of the Fianna Fail-Labour
coalition after a judicial appointment row.
The delay had cast an ill-timed shadow over the Northern Ireland peace
process, straining relations between Dublin and Sinn Fein, the IRA's
political wing, and halting negotiations on the joint framework document
which Ireland and the UK hope will form the basis for all-party talks on
Ulster's constitutional future.
Ireland still faces a hectic diplomatic agenda, with Dublin due to host the
European Union's 1996 intergovernmental conference. Some analysts yesterday
predicted the coalition might not survive that long.
The potential for discord within such a wide-ranging coalition is clear.
Fianna Fail, licking its wounds on the opposition benches, is in no mood to
be forgiving.
Mr Bruton's Fine Gael is a rural-based conservative party with largely
middle class support which has lost votes to Mr Dick Spring's more urban
Labour party. Meanwhile, Mr Proinsias De Rossa's Democratic Left is an
old-fashioned socialist party and the successor of the Official IRA, when
the Provisional IRA broke away to pursue the armed struggle in 1970.
Even at the last minute yesterday, Democratic Left looked set to pull out of
negotiations once it became clear the party, which has just six seats in the
Dail, was being offered a single cabinet portfolio. Last night the single
overriding preoccupation of all the parties seemed to be a determination to
see Fianna Fail consigned to the opposition.
In Mr Bruton, the government will have calm if uncharismatic leadership. A
former finance minister, he is a plain speaking barrister with 20 years in
the Dail and a wealth of ministerial experience. Politically he is said to
be close to the rural wing of the party, identified with Mr Liam Cosgrave, a
former prime minister.
In February Mr Bruton rode out a leadership challenge, and still could be
vulnerable to attack from the liberal wing of the party associated with
another former premier, Dr Garret Fitzgerald.
Mr Bruton likes to dub Fine Gael as 'part of the great European Christian
Democrat movement'. He campaigned in favour of divorce reform, where there
will be a meeting of minds with Labour and Democratic Left.
On the North, the strains may be difficult to hide. Fine Gael is
historically identified as the party which voted for the Anglo-Irish Treaty
of 1921, which created partition. As a believer in a more accommodating
stance towards the Unionists, Mr Bruton is likely to push for reform of
Articles 2 and 3 of the constitution, which enshrine Ireland's territorial
claim to Northern Ireland.
London in particular is keen to see that Fianna Fail, which has played a key
role in the peace process so far, should not now be isolated. The party, as
the voice of constitutional republicanism (Fianna Fail voted against the
Treaty) enjoys better relations with Sinn Fein than the other parties.
As a result, Fianna Fail's support could be critical if the coalition is to
steer through constitutional reform, which would have to be put to a
referendum.
On the economy, the coalition's problems are perhaps more acute. Mr Bruton
is sometimes described as Thatcherite on economic policy and he certainly
won a reputation for tight spending policies when in charge of finance in
1982 after the profligate years of Mr Charles Haughey's Fianna Fail
government.
Any attempt by Fine Gael to cut taxes and reduce public spending is likely
to be resisted by Labour and Democratic Left.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

