FT944-14609

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (18): Second-feature
bargain became the big picture - Serious Riches / Scheherazade Daneshkhu
meets a film mogul who is also regarded as an investment guru


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


What does the classic film The African Queen, with Humphrey Bogart and
Katherine Hepburn, have in common with Oliver] the musical? Or Room at the
Top, a piece of 1950s social realism, with the thrillers The Day of the
Jackal and The Odessa File?
Apart from being highly successful and award-winning, they were all produced
by Sir John Woolf, the low-profile chairman of British & American Film
Holdings plc, through his privately-owned production company, Romulus Films.
Last year, the National Film Theatre paid an evening of tribute to Sir John
followed by a week's season of his productions.
A career in films was natural for Sir John, given that his father, Charles
M. Woolf, was one of the pioneers of the British film industry. He headed
Gaumont-British Picture Corporation and was responsible for introducing Lord
Rank to the film industry. Sir John, who rejoined the company after war
service, returned to what had by then become The Rank Organisation but left
to set up Romulus Films in 1948 together with a distribution company to
finance and distribute other producers' films. His first big success was
with The African Queen, made in 1951 followed by Moulin Rouge in 1952, both
directed by John Houston.
'It was at the time of the UnAmerican Activities committee, and I realised
that there were a number of important American film directors who wouldn't
be able to continue to make films in America. We heard that John Houston was
having a bit of difficulty raising money in America for the African Queen,
for which he and Sam Spiegel were hoping to sign Bogart and Hepburn, so we
stepped in and organised the production in England.' His distribution
company also financed 50 per cent of four films produced by Sir Alexander
Korda, including Laurence Olivier's Richard III.
Sir John has not confined himself to the big screen but was also one of the
founders of Anglia Television, for which he established the company's drama
department. He was responsible for the highly-successful Tales of the
Unexpected series, which started as an adaptation of the novelist Roald
Dahl's short stories and which was sold to over 70 countries around the
world.
Apart from being acknowledged as a distinguished producer, Sir John is also
regarded as an investment guru. Four years ago, the monthly investment
magazine, Analyst, profiled him as a 'stock market legend'.
He does not claim to be an investment expert. However, his 'exceptional
business flair,' according to one former employee, has certainly played its
part in the fortunes of BAFH.
British & American Film Press, as it was called when Sir John purchased it
as a shell company with assets of Pounds 500,000 in 1968, has not been
involved in film-making for the past 20 years. He bought it to house the
profits from his successful productions and he has run it as an investment
holding company ever since.
The success of his investment philosophy has meant that revenues from film
productions now account for a proportionately smaller contribution to the
profits, as the size and income generated by the investment portfolio has
grown. The last set of accounts shows that, at the end of 1993, net assets
were Pounds 34m and pre-tax profits were Pounds 1.2m.
Romulus Films, along with another family-owned production company, Remus
Films, and Sir John's personal holdings, have a controlling interest in
BAFH. Two years ago Sir John was joined at BAFH by his son Jonathan, who had
been a divisional director of corporate finance at SG Warburg.
'I thought at the time that I didn't know enough about investment, and
decided that investment trusts which then stood at quite a considerable
discount and had the knowledge through experience of the trust managers
would be a good idea,' he explained. 'So I invested the profit from the
films, which was then quite considerable, in investment trusts and the big
insurance companies.'
Investment trusts' performance has been aided by the narrowing of the
discount in recent years. Investment trusts, which are listed on the stock
exchange, invest in the shares of other companies, but their share price
fluctuates according to market demand. When demand is low, they have tended
to trade at a discount to their net asset value.
'I went for trusts which had at least a 20 per cent discount and about 25
per cent in US shares,' said Sir John. 'The trusts also had to have a yield
of at least 5 per cent, and more usually of 7 or 8 per cent. They have
proved to be excellent investments over the years.'
He acknowledges that it would be harder to begin a portfolio with the same
philosophy today. The creation of split-capital trusts, which separate
classes of share according to income and capital growth, and an increase in
regular savings schemes, have increased demand and contributed to a
narrowing of the discount. The average discount fell to a 20-year low of
around 4 per cent in January, but in the late 1960s it stood at between
25-30 per cent.
'We continually add to the original holdings. We are interested in high
yields, so we have also invested in the income shares of split-capital
trusts and other high yield trusts. We can't look at the discount as a major
factor any more, but instead consider the track record of the fund managers.
'
The portfolio has also been helped by a sevenfold rise in its investment in
First Leisure, which was formed in 1982. 'I heard that Lord Delfont was
buying out the leisure interests of Trusthouse Forte, and went in with him
through BAFH as one of the founders of First Leisure. That has been a huge
success,' said Sir John. BAFH took a 2.7 per cent holding and Anglia
Television took 5.4 per cent in First Leisure, which came to the market in
1984.
BAFH's investment portfolio holds 55 per cent in investment trusts; one
quarter is invested in First Leisure, with the rest in financial and life
assurance companies, such as the Prudential. There is also a small holding
in Rothschild companies and trusts. The portfolio is characterised by low
turnover.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

941021

