FT944-2909

FT  15 DEC 94 / International Company News: GE Capital expands in Germany


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


GE Capital, the financial services subsidiary of General Electric of the US,
has made its first entry into consumer finance in Germany by taking control
of Service Bank, the finance arm of the Kaufhof store group.
GE Capital is thought to have paid about DM75m (Dollars 47.8m) for an 80 per
cent stake in Service Bank. The move is a further sign of growing
competition to provide financial products such as credit and debit cards
from non-German companies.
It will use the bank's network of 36 branches in Kaufhof stores and 200
automated teller machines to sell a range of financial products. Outside the
US, GE Capital's strongest consumer operations are in the UK and
Scandinavia.
German consumers have not used credit cards, but the finance market has
started evolving as Citibank, the US bank, has launched several initiatives
including linking its Visa cards to the railway network Bahncard.
National Westminster Bank last year set up a German company to offer
domestic retailers finance for in-store cards. GE Capital said it intended
to use Service Bank to offer other financial services outside the Kaufhof
stores.
GE Capital is thought to have paid about twice book value for its 80 per
cent stake. The remaining 20 per cent will be split equally between Kaufhof
Holding, and the Metro and Kaufhof Group, the largest European retailing
group.
Mr Christopher Mackenzie, president of GE Capital Europe, said the purchase
was 'a slightly different way' of competing with banks. 'It is not just a
card issuer, but a bank that has got outlets in stores, which is wonderful.'
Mr Mackenzie said GE Capital, which provides finance in the UK for cards in
stores such as Harrods, Debenhams and Burtons, was 'looking at expanding
into credit cards' and its outlets would not be confined to Kaufhof stores.
As well as signalling competition in German finance, the purchase is
evidence of pressures facing European banks from other financial services
providers. GE Capital processes 80m retail card accounts around the world.
Service Bank, which has assets of DM760m, issues the Yesss debit card of the
Metro group. Metro has more than 2,000 stores in 11 countries, and serves an
estimated 20m shoppers a day.
GE Capital has some leasing operations in Germany, running the Avis fleet
leasing company, and the Tip trailer leasing group.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

941215

