FT944-2628

FT  16 DEC 94 / When the party is often reluctant to come to aid: The tough
role of being responsible for assistance


   By PETER MONTAGNON and JAMES BLITZ


Being responsible for aid has long been a task that would daunt many a
British politician.
Aid spending comes low down on voters' priorities, so there is always a
battle to prise money out of the Treasury.
Then there is the need to keep all the various lobbies happy. Business wants
aid to be used to support trade. Many development experts want it to be
focused directly on alleviating poverty.
The Pergau dam case brought these tensions to a head. In its wake Lady
Chalker, now easily Britain's longest-serving aid minister, is left
struggling even more valiantly than before with the need to satisfy everyone
all at once.
Although she acknowledges that the Pergau case will 'undoubtedly have an
effect' on public support for the aid programme in general, she believes
that the ODA is increasingly providing value for money by every yard-stick.
Take the case of the aid and trade provision, which was at the root of the
Pergau case. The rules under which such projects are supported were
tightened last year so that the money goes only to the poorest countries
with a per capita income of less than Dollars 760 (Pounds 463.40).
'A lot of the fury has been as if it was just good for the Malaysian
government or for the Indonesian government or some other government. It
isn't that at all. What I've tried to do is devise a system - which I
believe we've now got - that's on a better basis than it was before.'
One example was the greater Dhaka power project in Bangladesh which is
providing electricity to an area where there was none before and helping
create 250,000 jobs in the recipient country.
It was not the case, as British companies had complained, that German
companies had won the contract to build the Shanghai metro because more aid
was available from their government.
'I don't think that has anything to do with the aid and trade system in
Germany. It has a lot to do with Chancellor Kohl and the sort of dealing
that people are so critical of Lady Thatcher for. Kohl was going to Beijing
and he had his people working on it. It met the (international) rules.'
Some developmentalists suggest Lady Chalker is trying to drum up support for
the aid programme by increasing the role of emergency relief. This raises
the ODA's profile and is the kind of service with which the public readily
identifies.
But the minister denied that this had been at the expense of longer term
development assistance. There had been a number of extraordinary calls for
energy relief such as Bosnia, Rwanda and maybe soon another drought in
southern Africa.
The aid budget has steadily increased in recent years, with a 7 per cent
increase in the overall total announced in last month's Budget. But a sense
of squeeze remains, not least because a greater proportion of the money - 45
per cent at last count - is earmarked for the growing demands of
multilateral agencies such as the European Union and World Bank.
The relative shrinkage of the bilateral aid budget is not necessarily a
matter for regret, she said, because Britain could wield more influence as
part of a group.
'People are actually working more in regional blocs so we have to make that
work better, and I think we can do it. We're getting some very good people
into the EU. The influence of Sweden and Finland on the aid side of the EU
will be extremely bene-ficial to the overall EU programme.'
'We have to get as good quality out of multilateral aid programmes as we can
get out of bilateral aid. Therefore I have turned my attention as to how we
improve the quality of multilateral aid.'
As for the battle with the Treasury to claw back the Pergau money: 'I have a
struggle every single year. If we get that money back it will to me be a
very good thing because I know we can use it. If I don't get it back I shall
regard it as sad but not a catastrophe.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941216

