FT943-12798

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Coca-Cola reshuffles top
managers


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Coca-Cola, the US soft drink group, yesterday announced a management
reshuffle that will be seen as anointing a probable successor to Mr Roberto
Goizueta, the chairman and chief executive.
He is Mr Douglas Ivester, 47, currently head of Coca-Cola's North American
operations. He has been appointed to the number two position at Coca-Cola as
president and chief operating officer - a role that has lain vacant since Mr
Donald Keough, the previous incumbent, left on reaching retirement age in
April last year.
Mr Goizueta has been chief executive of Coca-Cola for 13 years, and under
normal company policy would have stepped down on reaching his 65th birthday
in November 1996.
Last April, Coca-Cola's board announced that it had asked Mr Goizueta to
stay on beyond that date for an indefinite period, but this failed to dampen
speculation about who would eventually succeed him.
The two men most often cited as candidates had been Mr Ivester and Mr John
Hunter, 56, head of Coca-Cola's international operations. But under
yesterday's reorganisation Mr Hunter will be left reporting to Mr Ivester.
Coca-Cola yesterday played down the idea that the reshuffle settled the
succession. Mr Goizueta told the Financial Times: 'Those who are of that
view are uninformed individuals in the sense that the chief executive
officer and chief operating officer have two distinct jobs. This is not a
game of musical chairs in which you go from one to the other.'
Mr Goizueta said he had no idea when he would retire, and it was impossible
to look into the future and determine what the company would require of a
chief executive when that day arrived. 'So it would be presumptuous on my
part or anyone else's part to consider this the anointment of a successor.'
Even so, industry analysts such as Mr Andrew Conway at Salomon Brothers, the
Wall Street securities house, said Mr Ivester's experience made him well
qualified for the job. Mr Ivester has previously served as group chief
financial officer and head of Coca-Cola's European business as well as
running Coca-Cola North America.
Coca-Cola said Mr Jack Stahl, chief financial officer, would become head of
Coca-Cola USA, and Mr James Chestnut, vice-president and controller, would
succeed Mr Stahl.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940722

