FT942-16010

FT  12 APR 94 / McDonald's finds some burghers are riskier than others


   By RICHARD LAPPER


The Netherlands is one of the most dangerous places in the world, outside
the US, to eat a Big Mac, according to a survey.
McDonald's commissioned Tillinghast, the actuaries and consultants, to
collect data on their outlets and found that some 50 McDonald's restaurants
in Amsterdam and other Dutch towns and cities were nearly twice as likely to
suffer property damage and loss of profits through fire, flood, wind damage,
vandalism and theft than fast food outlets located in eight other Asian and
European countries.
The survey, which Tillinghast has called 'The Big Mac Cost of Risk' was
carried out in 1992 to help McDonald's set up its own Dublin-based 'captive'
insurance company, especially dedicated to insure the company's own risks.
'There does not appear to be any single explanation,' said Mr Mark Scully,
one of two Tillinghast consultants who worked on the project.
Heavy storm and flooding which affected the Netherlands during 1990 and 1991
may be part of the reason, he suggested, although there are some indications
that vandalism is becoming a bigger problem.
The survey found that McDonald's restaurants located in France have a record
only marginally better than those in the Netherlands and have lost more
money from theft. The rate of theft and accident losses in Germany and the
UK also rose sharply during 1990 and 1991.
It also discovered that McDonald's liability claims - which mainly result
resulting from legal action by disgruntled customers - were three-and-half
times higher in Ireland than in the UK and almost eight-times higher than in
any other location.
Mr Scully said the Irish figures were 'startling. It seems that the legal
system is more adversarial, much more like the United States.'
The survey also found that crime and accident trends are rising sharply in
the UK, Germany and Hong Kong and that liability costs are increasing apace
in the UK, France, the Netherlands and Hong Kong.
Taiwan has the worst record of the east Asian countries included in the
survey. The cost of claims for property damage, business interruption,
crime, and liability are significantly higher than in either Hong Kong or
Singapore.
The safest McDonald's in the countries covered in the survey are in
Switzerland and Singapore.
The company excluded some countries from the comparison on the grounds that
they have insufficient restaurants to make a comparison credible.

The Financial Times


International Page 6

940412

