FT942-14536

FT  20 APR 94 / CSO promises more data on regions


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


The government is to provide detailed regional breakdowns of economic data
such as the monthly retail sales and industrial production figures.
An official of the Central Statistical Office, the government agency which
collects and publishes economic and social data, acknowledged that there had
been 'an obvious gap in our statistical coverage as interest in
manufacturing industry has declined and the service sector has come more and
more into focus.
'There has also been a feeling for some time that Britain was quite
deficient in its regional accounts.'
He was unable to say when the more detailed breakdowns would be available.
In its first programme strategy - required under its new status as a
Whitehall executive agency - the CSO promised 'a significant shift in
priority towards service-sector statistics and an increased attention to
regional economic statistics'.
It also said it intended to reduce the workload it places on the people it
questions when compiling statistics, and to publish more quarterly rather
than annual data. It also promised that it would 'add more value' to its
statistics.
The move is the latest in a series of initiatives the CSO says will ensure
that official statistics provide the British citizen 'with both a picture of
society and a window on the work and performance of government'.
Last year the CSO issued a statement to define its purpose: 'Our mission is
to improve decision making, stimulate research and inform debate within
government and the wider community by providing a quality statistical
service.'
It also pledged itself to 'inform debate' by producing a new UK statistical
yearbook and collection of social statistics to 'give a picture of society
and of the trends in the way we live'.
The CSO said: 'We are listening more and more to the people from whom we
derive the statistics and who are also the ones who have need of them.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940420

