FT941-17057

FT  06 JAN 94 / Plan for 24 M-way service areas: Private sector developments
would close gaps in national network


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


Proposals for up to 24 more motorway service areas financed and built by the
private sector are due to be announced by the Department of Transport today.
If all gain planning permission and are built, they will represent a 50 per
cent increase on the existing network of 53 service areas. They would fill
many of the lengthy gaps that have been criticised by motorists and motoring
organisations.
The service areas are the first wave to win the approval of the department
after a government decision in August 1992 to remove controls on ownership.
Previously companies in the catering and petrol station sectors had to lease
sites from the government.
The new regime reduces the minimum distance between service areas from 30
miles to 15 and, it is hoped, will lead to a speeding up in the development
of new sites. In the past, motorways such as the M40 between London and
Birmingham and the M11 between London and Cambridge were opened without any
service areas.
With sites costing about Pounds 5m to develop depending on position and
ground conditions, companies such as Granada and Forte, the two leading
operators, can expect to spend at least Pounds 100m on developing the new
sites.
The Automobile Association said it welcomed opening the system of motorway
service areas to private developers. 'Additional service areas will give
tired drivers more opportunities to take a break, reducing the risk of
accidents,' it commented.
However, it warned against a 'mad scramble' for attractive sites, including
those where planning permission was easy to obtain, which would still leave
gaps in more difficult areas.
At least three sites are already under construction, including Cherwell
Valley, on the M40 near Oxford, which is being built by Granada. Forte is
building on sites on the M40 near Warwick and the M11 near Bishop's
Stortford.
A further four sites have obtained planning permission. These are at
Hapsford on the M56 near Chester, Field Farm on the M4 near Reading,
Westenhanger on the M20 near Folkestone and Bowburn on the A1(M) near
Darlington.
Further sites being considered include three on the M25 and two on the M40.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940106

