FT942-15767

FT  14 APR 94 / Polite differences in the rich country club: Martin Wolf and
David Buchan on a contest for the leadership, and future direction, of the
OECD


   By MARTIN WOLF and DAVID BUCHAN


If knowledge is power, then the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development must be one of the most powerful institutions in the world.
Unlike the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, it has no money to
lend. Unlike the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade it oversees few
agreements and offers no formal mechanism for settlement of international
disputes. Instead, it provides its 24 industrial country members - a club of
the world's most powerful economies - with a neutral civil service, a
meeting place and a wide-ranging publication programme.
Into this quiet and even grey world has been introduced an equally polite,
though determined, political battle to become the organisation's secretary
general - and a related contest over its future role in a much-changed world
economy.
In what has often been dismissed as a talking shop, the OECD's secretary
general, Mr Jean-Claude Paye, suddenly finds himself faced with three rivals
for the post he has held for the past 10 years.
Challenging the French incumbent are Mr Donald Johnston, a former Canadian
minister who is strongly backed by the US, and two other European candidates
 -Lord Lawson, the former UK chancellor of the exchequer, and Mr Lorenz
Schomerus, a senior German economics ministry official. The race will be
decided at, or before, the OECD's ministerial meeting in June.
Tucked into one of the nicest parts of Paris, the OECD began life as the
overseer of the post-war Marshall Plan aid. But, with European recovery
assured, it acquired its present wider character in 1961. Again, in the
much-changed international economy of today, the question for Mr Paye and
his rivals is how the organisation should develop.
A decision to keep Mr Paye on would be a vote for continuity, as would
selection of Mr Schomerus. The German official is little known outside OECD
circles, where, significantly, he chairs the same steering OECD body, known
as 'the executive committee in special session', as Mr Paye did when he was
chosen 10 years ago.
Neither of the outside candidates is preaching drastic change. Mr Johnston
talks of the need for 'evolution, rather than revolution', while Lord Lawson
acknowledges that Mr Paye 'has done a very competent job'.
Both men stress the OECD's need to play a more global role. The difference
is that Mr Johnston believes this should be done through more dialogue with,
and study of, non-OECD parts of the world, while Lord Lawson believes the
OECD should be better at broadcasting around the world its message of 'the
promotion of economic development through economic liberalism'.
Mr Johnston's contention that it is time to break the European monopoly on
the OECD's top post - particularly now that the Europeans increasingly
handle their own economic affairs through the European Union - clearly
appeals to non-European members. Japan, Australia and New Zealand are
believed to be leaning in his direction. By contrast, the only public
backing that the three European candidates have is from their own
governments.
The other difference lies in campaign tactics. Mr Paye is relying on the
advantages of incumbency, Mr Schomerus has been busy in Marrakesh this week
representing Germany in the Gatt, while Lord Lawson is slightly raising the
low profile of his campaign by visiting Canberra this week and lunching with
with OECD ambassadors in Paris next week.
By contrast, Mr Johnston is doggedly carrying his lobbying to the capitals
of all 24 members, including Iceland. So far the public sign that any of
this campaigning might actually have a sharp edge came last month when he
was quoted in Paris as saying the OECD was 'too bureaucratic' and did not
respond to its members' needs. He had found 'a great sense of frustration'
among members.
This contrasts with the consensual procedure by which OECD chiefs
traditionally emerge. Each member has an equal veto on the final choice.
The OECD is not a large organisation. With a budget of some FFr1bn (Pounds
120m) and 1,900 employees (600 of whom are professionals, mostly
economists), it is severely stretched. Its well-known publications - such as
the Economic Outlook and the economic surveys of individual countries - are
a small, albeit high profile, part of what the OECD does. Concealed behind
them is a never-ending round of meetings among senior national officials,
serviced by the secretariat.
These meetings help governments learn from one another. Equally important,
they help them understand one another. Failures in economic prediction,
shared by most forecasters, have undermined confidence in the OECD's own
economic output. But the forecasting does not matter that much. Reports
still remain valuable to outsiders as sources of analysis and data.
They are also useful for insiders, not least finance ministers wanting to
wave something with credibility in the faces of recalcitrant national
colleagues.
Mexico will today be formally invited to join the OECD as its first new
member for more than 20 years. South Korea would like to become its first
member from the Asian mainland next year, while several central European
countries are preparing their candidacies.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940414

