FT944-2571

FT  16 DEC 94 / Management: Keeping afloat - Anglian Water is undergoing a
radical overhaul in its drive for efficiency


   By JANE BIRD


Alan Smith, group managing director of Anglian Water (AW), works a 60-hour
week, including most Sundays and some Saturdays. Although he admits he's a
workaholic, he discourages his staff from over-working. 'It's a sign of
inefficiency,' he says.
Eliminating inefficiency has been the prime objective of an especially
controversial management change programme at AW during the past year. It has
involved 10,000 staff interviews, 900 redundancies and the elimination of
multiple layers of management. Some Pounds 60m of last year's Pounds 192.2m
pre-tax profits were set aside to pay for the exercise.
The scale of his task was illustrated this week when Ofwat, the UK water
industry regulator, singled out Anglian in its Levels of Service 1993-94
report as one of four companies 'where performance against one or more
measure falls short of what customers can reasonably expect' (on two of the
four criteria it scored well below average).
Nevertheless, Ofwat's observation that Anglian has 'reported significant
improvements already' will be an encouragement to Smith, who took over the
helm in 1990, the year after flotation. Drastic action has been necessary,
says Smith, because, despite its profitability, the company was still living
with big problems inherited from its public-sector days.
Smith was initially anxious to avoid upheaval but in 1992 he attended the
10-week Advanced Management Programme at the Harvard Business School. One of
the lessons he says he learned was the importance of radical change. 'You
don't create a winning business by nibbling away at the sides,' he says.
'That just leaves you with frayed edges.'
In 1993, he commissioned a study focused on the 2,700 white-collar staff. It
recommended that about one-third of them should go, and that the
hierarchical command-and-control style management should be eradicated in
favour of a flat structure based on coaching and empowerment.
Smith also canvassed his staff for their views on the company's management
style in an employee opinion survey.
The survey results were pretty bruising, he recalls. 'What came across was
an organisation based on bureaucracy, poor internal communications and too
much fear.'
Smith, who had long campaigned for a more open style of management, held a
series of employee presentations on the results of the opinion survey. It
was an embarrassing experience being openly criticised on subjects such as
his Pounds 163,000 salary, but he believes that attending the presentations
was a turning point for many employees. 'Until that moment many of them did
not believe the changes we had been talking about would happen.'
In getting rid of the 900 staff, Smith's main problem was to ensure that the
right people stayed. So instead of keeping only those staff whose jobs
remained, he decided all employees would have to re-apply for positions
under the new order. Part of their appraisal would be an occupational
personality questionnaire, designed to look for abilities that would be
needed by the new AW: conceptual thinking; innovation; team-working;
initiative; people-orientation; and flexibility.
The questionnaire became a focus of resentment among some staff who felt
they had been unfairly deprived of jobs. Some psychologists have also shed
doubts on the validity of the technique, arguing that what people say in
questionnaires may not bear much relationship to how they do their jobs. But
Smith, who also filled in a questionnaire, insists they are valuable as an
indicator of how somebody might be able to adapt to a new culture,
especially managers.
'If you want a brave new world, spending half an hour discussing what
someone has done for the past 10 years doesn't get you far ahead.' In any
case, the questionnaires were only part of the appraisal process, he says.
Another lesson he learned at Harvard was the role of Total Quality
Management. 'I knew it was important before I went, but I came away
understanding that it meant far more than I had realised.' One way that
Smith put this theory into practice was by upgrading the status of staff
working on water mains and sewers.
'They're our front-line people and if they were not properly
customer-focused all our efforts behind the scenes would fall apart.' Hence
his decision to bring all these staff into a customer services unit. By
October, all the appointments had been made, while at the same time the
number of management tiers between any individual and the top had been
reduced to three. Smith expects the changes to yield annual savings of
Pounds 20m within the next two years.
One of the main outstanding tasks is to select a computer system capable of
handling the streamlined flow of data across and up the organisation, in
addition to the downwards route.
'You don't do anything big without computers,' says Smith. 'That was the
third lesson I learnt at Harvard.' Part of the Pounds 60m provision will
help pay for new information technology systems.
Although most consumers feel they do not have a choice of water supplier
Smith says competition is real. He is keenly aware of Severn Trent Water and
Yorkshire Water pressing on his borders and of the possibility of smaller
independent operators moving in to siphon off the most lucrative parts of
the business.
Meanwhile, staff will have to be constantly vigilant to ensure they do not
slip back into their bad habits, he warns.
Cultural changes do not happen overnight, and many companies that embark on
ambitious programmes abandon them half-way through. 'But I'm conscious of
the long, hard road we've embarked on and am absolutely determined not to
give up.'
An article on psychometric tests will appear on Monday's management page.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

941216

