FT941-3588

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (14): Imperfect but improved -
The CEGB warned that supply security would be damaged if power generation
were to be separated from the national grid . . . but this was just one of
the many myths that were exposed / Privatisation


   By RAY DAFTER


A Study of the Privatisation of the Electricity Supply
Industry in England & Wales
by Alex Henney
EEE Ltd, 38, Swains Lane, London N6 6QR, Pounds 400
389 pages
Give or take the odd flicker, the lights have stayed on in Laddingford.
In the broad sweep of civilisation, this may seem to be of trifling
consequence. But I have always regarded my domestic supply - based as it is
on electricity dribbling from the end of a rural supply line in Kent - as a
fairly accurate indicator of the health of the electricity supply industry.
When, prior to privatisation, the Central Electricity Generating Board
warned that the security of supply would be seriously impaired if generation
was separated from the national distribution grid, I stocked up with
candles.
And yet this proved to be just one of the many myths and weaknesses exposed
by the privatisation of the industry - one of the most complicated and
ambitious attempted by any Government.
The CEGB, for instance, claimed its system was 'the envy of the world', and
yet, as Alex Henney shows time and time again, the board was inefficient,
complacent and downright misleading when it came to presenting the true cost
of nuclear power.
The industry was producer-dominated, with the area electricity boards having
little influence over (or, one suspects, little understanding of) its
wholesale price, the bulk supply tariff.
Management was patchy and over-influenced by trade unions, while the
Electricity Council, the central co-ordinating body, was largely
ineffectual.
It must be said that there was little malevolence in all of this. The
managers and staff did their best; indeed, their dedication to public
service (demonstrated admirably in the aftermath of the 1987 hurricane) has
often been undervalued.
It was the basic structure of the industry that was wrong. It was also
highly politicised.
For all of its shortcomings, privatisation has produced a considerable
improvement on the original system. The industry is much more commercially
aware; power and influence has been transferred to where it should always
have been - the distributor, or regional electricity companies (RECs).
This commercialism, this desire for a quick return, has inevitably put
strains on other strategically-important energy industries, however. It has
given rise to the dash for gas in generation; it has accelerated the run
down of the coal industry, while opening the import gates to foreign (often
subsidised) coal. It has also put a question mark over the longer-term
future of the currently aided nuclear industry. The lack of an energy policy
is all too evident.
A former chairman of the London Electricity Consultative Council, Alex
Henney has been a long-time critic of the supply industry. In this study he
has provided a comprehensive analysis of the financial and operational
processes of privatisation. Given the complexity of the subject - and it did
take an army of 600 experts to plan the process - he is to be commended for
mastering the detail.
Where this book disappoints is in its lack of personality. Little is
recorded of the tensions and arguments that punctuated, and in part shaped,
the privatisation debate. Why was it, for instance, that Sir Philip Jones,
chairman of the Electricity Council, was sidelined from events, in spite of
his substantial Whitehall experience and propensity for grappling with
complex issues?
What of Lord Marshall, former chairman of the CEGB and the world's most
colourful and controversial exponent of nuclear energy? When, in 1989, the
government decided to exclude all nuclear reactors from privatisation he was
'invited to resign'. That is all we are told.
And then there were the chairmen of the area boards. They were far from
united in the privatisation debate, displaying varying degrees of commercial
acumen, personal ambition, retribution, and plain old-fashioned public
service.
Most of them are still in place, now as leaders of the privatised RECs (and
doing very nicely, thank you). Alex Henney is a consultant, advising - among
others - electricity companies, which might explain why he has steered well
clear of the more colourful personal issues. This is a pity, for it was the
personalities, not statisticians, who shaped the new electricity supply
industry with all its market strengths and imperfections.
Ray Dafter, former resources editor of the Financial Times, was a central
director of the Electricity Council from 1983 to 1988. He is currently
director of corporate affairs at Enterprise Oil.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

940315

