FT943-12640

FT  23 JUL 94 / Markets: Soaring earnings fail to impress investors - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


These are frustrating times for many publicly-quoted US companies. They have
done what Wall Street wanted: cut costs, revamped their operations and
management structures, adopted new business strategies and delivered strong
earnings growth. Yet, still the stock market is un-satisfied.
Take Intel, for example. Earlier this week, the computer chip manufacturer
announced second-quarter profits of Dollars 640m achieved on 30 per cent
revenue growth. Although it was the company's second consecutive record
quarter, and it was bang in line with analysts' forecasts, the performance
failed to impress investors, who sold Intel's share price down almost
Dollars 2 to Dollars 57.
Compaq suffered a similar fate. Its share price fell Dollars 1 3/4 to
Dollars 31 1/2 on Wednesday even though the computer group reported a 53 per
cent surge in second-quarter sales and earnings that were double the
previous year's at Dollars 210m.
Another victim of the seemingly capricious market was the California
software developer Sybase, which watched its share price plunge Dollars 8
3/4 , or 18 per cent, to Dollars 39 3/4 following the announcement of
second-quarter earnings that were sharply higher than a year ago and above
analysts' expectations.
The selling was not confined to computer companies. Aerospace group United
Technologies reported a 32 per cent increase in profits that matched all but
the most optimistic of forecasts - but its shares fell almost Dollars 4 to
Dollars 62 1/2 .
There were other examples this week of stocks falling in spite of strong
quarterly results but, in almost each instance, the reason for the
apparently surprising decline was the same: while the second-quarter looked
good, investors did not like what they saw ahead.
In Intel's case, it was concern about long-term demand for personal
computers that brought the stock down, while Compaq's shares fell because
investors believed that an increase in inventories during the second quarter
was a warning that sales were beginning to slow down. Sybase shares tumbled
because the market was worried about a possible easing off in the sales
growth of its core database products, and United Technologies suffered from
signs of moderate sales weakness in two of its divisions.
Admittedly, there is nothing new in this type of reaction - the most basic
theory of investing says that earnings news is always old news, and that
share prices should be driven more by expectations of future, not
announcements of past, performance. But investors seem to have been
especially harsh on stocks in this reporting season.
The most likely explanation is a broader underlying current of concern about
the economy as a whole. Although it has been growing more rapidly than
expected this year, most Wall Street analysts believe it will slow down in
the second half and beyond as the impact of higher interest rates begins to
bite. And if economic growth is about to slow, that means sales of
computers, cars, washing machines, and much more, are likely to do the same,
spelling bad news for US companies.
Yet, the fear that economic growth is going to slacken does not necessarily
have to be an entirely negative influence on share prices. The stock market
has had a difficult 1994, mostly because of the sharp, and unanticipated,
rise in long-term interest rates since early February. Rates have been
climbing steadily from historic lows because the bond market is worried that
the rapidly-expanding economy will lead to higher inflation.
If, however, economic growth is about to slow down, anxiety about inflation
should begin to ease, allowing interest rates to come down and share prices
to go up.
The bullish stock market forecasters on Wall Street who are predicting
modest, low-inflation economic growth and a second-half rally in stocks
substantial enough to push the Dow Jones Industrial Average over 4,000 for
the first time, certainly believe in this rosy scenario. The only problem
is, their confidence is not shared by the person that matters most - Federal
Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan.
Giving his semi-annual Humphrey-Hawkins testimony before Congress this week,
Greenspan said he remained concerned about rising prices (particularly in
view of the recent decline in the dollar against the yen and D-mark), and
warned that further increases in short-term interest rates might be
required.
The warning was enough to knock almost a full point off the price of a
30-year Treasury bond and 20 points off the Dow. Greenspan's threat of
higher rates also is likely to keep a lid on share prices for the rest of
the summer, no matter how good quarterly earnings prove to be.
 --------------------------
Monday    3755.43 + 01.62
Tuesday   3748.31 - 07.12
Wednesday 3727.27 + 21.04
Thursday  3742.45 + 05.18
Friday    3735.04 + 2.59
 --------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

940723

