FT942-12779

FT  28 APR 94 / Mineworkers win assurances on pensions


   By RICHARD LAPPER


Two mineworkers' pension schemes have reached agreement with the government
about pension entitlements for past service after British Coal's expected
privatisation later this year.
Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister, said members would be able to leave their
entitlements in the schemes after British Coal is sold.
Trustees of the Mineworkers' Pension Scheme, which has 468,000 members, and
the British Coal Staff Superannuation Scheme, which has 96,000 members,
welcomed the new package.
'The trustees are now satisfied they have a deal which adequately safeguards
the interests of members now and in the future,' said Mr Paul Trickett,
joint secretary of the mineworkers' scheme, which has assets of about Pounds
7.5bn.
Members of the MPS have been targeted by life insurance sales agents who
have convinced them to take a personal pension on the grounds that the
government was unlikely to guarantee their pensions after privatisation.
Ms Rhoslyn Roberts, secretary of the staff scheme, whose assets have a
market value of Pounds 8bn, said the new package 'substantially met the
outstanding concerns of the trustees.
'Although post-privatisation improvements are not unconditionally guaranteed
in the same way as the basic pension and index-linked increases, the
likelihood of their not being continued is now very limited,' she said.
British Coal, which last year expressed concern about safeguards for
pensioners' interests, also welcomed the announcement. 'This is a very
important matter for all our people and I am pleased that our concerns have
now been substantially met,' said Mr Neil Clarke, chairman.
The proposals include a government 'solvency guarantee' which will ensure
that, after privatisation, pensions and deferred pensions - those due to
non-contributing members of the scheme who have not yet reached retirement
age - are increased annually in line with inflation.
The government will not guarantee any scheme surpluses declared after the
end of last month, but it will ensure that the value of pensions will not
fall in cash terms. Deficiencies here will be made good by payments from an
'investment reserve' comprising British Coal's unused shares from the
mineworkers' scheme surplus from September 1993 and the staff scheme surplus
from April 1992.
The government has also answered concerns about the future management and
control of both schemes.
Government-appointed trustees to the modified schemes will be appointed only
after consultation with existing trustees, and the minister's power to
introduce further changes will be restricted to two years.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940428

