FT944-10903

FT  09 NOV 94 / All quiet on White House front as US votes


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


It was a glorious autumn morning in Washington yesterday and the White House
seemed preternaturally calm in advance of the evening's mid-term election
storm.
Most visible inside the gates was a gaggle of Finnish journalists, there
because President Martti Ahtisaari was somewhere inside. They did not seem
to have many opinions on the day's voting for all 435 seats in the House of
representatives, 35 of the 100 Senate seats and 36 gubernatorial races.
Outside were four police cars, three motorcycles and the occasional
uniformed gentleman - minimal visible protection for a building which had 27
bullets pumped into it two Saturdays ago by a furniture upholsterer from
Colorado Springs.
Across Pennsylvania Avenue in Lafayette Park, the handful of little groups
bearing home-made placards was there as always. Several seemed to be living
rough, including Concepcion and W. Thomas whose sign proudly announced that
they were in the 14th year of their 'peace vigil'. But a closer reading did
not reveal they wanted an end to political wars of the sort just witnessed
in the mid-term election campaign.
Another sign said, cryptically: 'All decisions should be made with the
Seventh Generation in mind.' This may refer politically to the 18-year-olds
who were voting for the first time yesterday; on the other hand it may not.
The FT was over at the president's house for a session on politics with what
we discreetly call 'a White House official'. But it was postponed because Mr
Leon Panetta, the chief of staff, had called a meeting - presumably to work
out the line to be taken with the media as the night's results - with
Democratic losses likely to loom large - unfolded.
President Bill Clinton was up early, as usual, on the telephone to half a
dozen radio stations. He again said he was willing to work with a Republican
congressional majority if the worst push came to shove and if the opposition
proved reasonable, which he doubted. Naturally he suggested political
paralysis could be avoided by voting for Democratic candidates.
Senator Phil Gramm, the Republican from Texas, was also up early as the
opposition's designated hitter to respond to the president. His distinctive
chainsaw howl sounded on the verge of breaking more than Democratic dead
wood as he predicted 11 party gains in the Senate, including a few not
generally foreseen, and early passage of a balanced budget amendment.
Sizeable lines were reported in Washington and suburban polling stations,
tentative evidence that the most negative campaign in years had not turned
everybody off, unless they were all spoiling their ballot papers in
retaliation. But if turnout is much over one in three eligible voters it
will confound recent history.
Spiders, cookies and a lot of abuse, Page 5 Observer, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941109

