FT941-5445

FT  07 MAR 94 / Caracas still feeling Latino aftershocks: The backlash from
the Venezuelan bank's failure


   By JOSEPH MANN


One of the three bankers originally named by the Venezuelan government to
take over the failed Banco Latino, the country's second largest bank,
recently described how he and his colleagues were surprised late one night
to discover that Latino's computer link to the outside world was receiving
and transmitting data.
Virtually all of Latino's activities were supposed to have been halted after
the bank was closed on January 14, but it turned out that one of the former
shareholders still had access to the bank's main computer through a
satellite link from the US, and was working feverishly in its records.
The government-appointed intervention team subsequently secured the computer
and other records from tampering, but they will never be sure how many
important items were altered, eliminated or removed by Latino's
shareholders, executives or others working on their behalf.
This is but one of the anecdotes produced by the spectacular failure in
January of Banco Latino, a bank that grew vigorously under the shadow of
political protection of the government of President Carlos Andres Perez, who
was forced to step down last year on corruption charges.
A judge issued arrest warrants last week for 83 people, including executives
and shareholders of the bank, alleging the bank was used to commit massive
fraud with funds deposited by the general public, private companies of all
sizes, pension funds and even the government.
Bankers and government officials tell their friends - and sometimes the
media - how people connected with Latino allegedly carried off bags and
suitcases stuffed with US banknotes as it became clear that the bank was
close to going under. They have described how hundreds of millions of
dollars in loan proceeds, deposits and trust accounts apparently
'disappeared'.
They have noted how Latino board members had more corporate jets than much
larger companies and how the board of directors declared 1993 cash dividends
even as the bank was headed for disaster.
The demise of Latino, which the government hopes to re-open, continues to
generate shockwaves nationwide. Forced to close by the government after it
could not meet daily cheque-clearing payments, despite heavy official
assistance, the bank set off a crisis that hit other banks. Several other
institutions are now under de facto government control, although they have
continued to operate.
The weakness of the banking system was cited as a reason behind the
downgrading late on Friday of the government's Eurobonds by the US rating
agency Standard & Poor's.
Latino's collapse created a huge demand for US dollars that seriously hurt
Venezuela's international reserves and forced a deficit-ridden government to
produce up to Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.3bn) to assist Latino and the other
troubled banks.
It caused financial and personal difficulties for hundreds of thousands of
clients ranging from teenagers and low-income retired people to large
Venezuelan corporations, government entities and the military, which kept
part of their pension fund money with the bank.
One small city in western Venezuela - Puerto Cumarebo - was paralysed
financially after its only financial institution, a Banco Latino branch,
shut down. Latino also managed to place branches in key areas such as the US
Embassy in Caracas and the headquarters of the national oil company, PDVSA.
Even the government's Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund (Fogade) had 33 per cent
of its assets on deposit with Latino.
The arrest warrants were issued last Wednesday by a Venezuelan criminal
court judge working under heavy police protection. They cover members of the
bank's last board of directors, its senior executives and others, including
the Superintendent of Banks, who was charged with concealment. Other charges
covered falsification of financial statements, fraud and illegal
appropriation of funds.
The names include members of Venezuela's business elite, most prominently Mr
Ricardo Cisneros, one of two brothers who own one of the country's largest
business groups, Organizacion Diego Cisneros. They also own Spalding,
Evenflow and Pueblo Extra supermarkets in the US, and hold an important
stake in Univision, the largest Hispanic television network in America.
Even before the arrest orders were issued, the Cisneros brothers, Mr Gustavo
Gomez Lopez, a former president of the bank, and others were engaging in a
bitter exchange of public accusations and counter-claim over blame for
Latino's failure.
The Cisneros brothers deny any wrongdoing on their part or on the part of
their companies.
Venezuelans were surprised that the judge, Ms Diamora Ramirez de Simancas,
had ordered the arrest of wealthy and influential figures. Seldom in the
past have prominent Venezuelans been called to answer serious charges or
been held responsible for illegal activities.
What has not surprised them, however, is the fact that only one of the 83
has been arrested so far, and that many of the others are believed to have
left the country some time ago, despite government bans on international
travel.
President Rafael Caldera has promised to bring those responsible for the
disaster to justice, which would be immensely popular among a disaffected
population.
But whether a legal system implicated in corruption can deliver on the
promises of the president and a criminal judge remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940307

