FT941-12779

FT  28 JAN 94 / A blot on its reputation: Disputes at the UK standards body


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


The kite-mark, symbol of the British Standards Institution since the turn of
the century, is flying high. But on the ground all is not well.
British Standard 5750, a quality assurance standard which testifies that a
business's management systems are judged effective, has become a worldwide
best-seller and profits and turnover have soared. Yet just when the benefits
of all the work that went into BS5750 are starting to come through, BSI's
success has turned sour.
In the past six months a series of upsets has wrenched BSI off the pages of
the trade journals and into the national press. The problem has partly
resulted from dissatisfaction in industry with BS5750, and partly from the
strains imposed by an attempt to modernise BSI's venerable management
structures.
The constant stream of bad news about BSI has raised fears that its image
and ultimately its effectiveness could suffer. Damage to BSI, whose 29,000
member companies subscribe to its services and help write its standards,
would reduce Britain's ability to get its standards accepted internationally
with all the benefits that brings for UK companies.
For, in spite of Britain's manufacturing decline, BSI has maintained a
powerful position in the European and international forums where most
standards-setting now occurs. Britain leads just under a quarter of the
international committees which draw up specific standards, a similar
percentage to its German and French counterparts, DIN and Afnor.
And in spite of increasing competition in the traditional field of standard
writing and product testing, BSI has grown rapidly in recent years because
of the success of BS5750. Revenues from certifying companies to BS5750 and
the fees BSI charges for ensuring that companies are sticking to the rules,
accounted for 60 per cent of BSI's Pounds 78m turnover last year.
The first hints of difficulty arose in June when Dr Michael Sanderson, BSI's
chief executive for just 18 months, stepped down over what the institute
called 'a deep disagreement on important matters of policy and management'.
This was followed by a row between BSI and a committee which it had helped
set up to review the problems small companies face in implementing BS5750.
Organisations representing small companies have pressed BSI to simplify
BS5750. BSI withdrew funds from the committee and put pressure on it to
finish its deliberations.
At about the same time, the government announced a review of whether BSI
should continue to receive a subsidy for its standards-writing work.
Standards-writing is not lucrative but BSI's other activities - certifying
companies to BS5750 and monitoring them - have become increasingly
profitable in recent years. BSI made a profit of Pounds 7.5m in 1992 and
received a grant of Pounds 4.5m.
BSI's problems reached their climax in November when its members delivered a
humiliating snub to Mr Vivian Thomas, BSI chairman, and his board. The
members turned down plans to strengthen the powers of the directors and to
double directors' fees to Pounds 15,000 a year, and the chairman's fee to
Pounds 25,000.
As a result of this setback the board has been forced to delay all its
proposed changes and is now holding meetings with members to improve
relations. But in spite of what some members describe as encouraging
discussions in recent weeks members remain wary. There is no guarantee that
Mr Thomas's proposals will be acceptable if they are put to members again at
a resumed annual meeting on March 8.
Mr Thomas, a pugnacious former chief executive of BP Oil, is at the centre
of the present storm. Brought in as chairman two years ago, he was pushed
centre stage by the sudden departure of Dr Sanderson. Instead of immediately
seeking to appoint a new chief executive Mr Thomas created a small executive
board to run BSI and has since devoted himself practically full-time to
pushing through change.
'It would have taken us four months to find a chief executive,' he says. 'We
couldn't wait that long. We cannot return to the clubby atmosphere of the
past.'
Mr Thomas believes that a wholesale reorganisation of BSI is essential to
give it a more professional management suited to a business which this year
expects to achieve turnover of nearly Pounds 100m. 'You can't run a business
this size like a co-operative,' he says.
Mr Thomas has wasted no time, computerising many procedures, cutting out
layers of committees and shedding jobs.
But the pace of change worries some of BSI's members. There are no signs, as
yet, that the disaffected members are coming round to the board's point of
view. If anything, attitudes are hardening. The Federation of Environmental
Trade Associations has threatened to bypass BSI and to send its members to
the European and international groups which are writing a growing number of
standards.
The Mechanical and Metal Trades Confederation says it may withdraw its
members from BSI's standards-writing committees. 'The directors cannot
expect to benefit from BSI's commercial activities while expecting their
members to provide their services for free,' said Mr John Carruthers,
confederation director-general.
This feeling that the present board is tinkering with a system which has
stood the test of time is widespread. Mr Gordon Gaddes, director-general of
Beama, the Federation of British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers'
Association, is concerned that the abolition of what are known as standards
policy committees has removed a democratic control on the actions of the
board. 'There is a vacuum,' he says.
So where does BSI go from here? Mr Thomas says he is resigned to the
government grant being reduced and turned into a contract with payments tied
to the provision of specific services. This would allow the government to
judge more accurately BSI's value for money.
BSI has also started looking for a chief executive. It hopes the post will
be filled by April. Mr Thomas would then resume his original role of
part-time chairman.
Mr Thomas acknowledges failings in his approach. 'I have been in too much of
a hurry and we have not communicated externally as much as we should.'
However, he remains committed to the need for change. For all the criticism
of BSI, no one has accused it of not writing good standards or of not
delivering value for money, he says.
But the gulf between Mr Thomas and his members remains a large one. So
fundamental are the differences that it is by no means certain that they can
be bridged by the time of the resumed annual meeting in March.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940128

