FT944-10975

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (6): Rush to find
new opportunities - Global custody / A look at facilities in emerging
markets


   By NORMA COHEN


While there has been considerable interest in investment in Russian
securities recently, there is a small problem.
In Russia, it seems, if a broker wishes to buy shares on behalf of a client,
he has to visit the company whose shares he wants to buy.
When he returns to his office, another problem emerges: where can the
securities be kept? International investors have little confidence in the
ability of domestic institutions to safeguard securities.
'You fly in airplanes to get the securities and then you fly them out
again,' explained Robert Binney, business executive at Chase Manhattan
Bank's global securities division.
Chase is considering applying to become the first global custodian to
operate in Russia, a move which is likely to facilitate investment there
significantly.
The tale of Russia's non-existent global custody business illustrates the
extent to which investment is dependent upon the availability of information
reporting, securities safekeeping and payment systems in different markets
and instruments.
Those who doubt the extent to which international investment is dependent
upon an efficient custodial network need only look at India where, earlier
this year, frenetic foreign investment ground to a halt as local custodians
collapsed under the weight of paper.
In January, the three custodians servicing the Indian market called a halt
to their servicing of new clients and set limits on trading volumes of
existing clients as they struggled to catch up with a backlog of paper
generated by the surge of more than Dollars 1bn in 1993.
There, a largely paper-based system designed for the needs of retail
investors who buy as few as 10 or 100 shares at a time sagged under the
weight of institutional investors wanting to buy in lots of 100,000 shares
per bargain.
The Indian government has introduced the 'jumbo' share certificate to meet
the needs of professionals, but the system is still creaking. John Lee,
partner at Lee Schwartz Associates (LSA), consultants specialising in
custody arrangements, says that his figures show that as of the third
quarter of 1994, three out of four of all trades in India failed to settle
on time.
'Any custodian or fund manager with any sense of fiduciary duty towards his
clients should tell them not to invest in India right now,' he said.
Without a doubt, fund managers say, the availability of efficient, safe,
cost-effective custody services are essential to the ability to conduct
foreign investment. Custodians have been well aware of this need and are
rushing to find new markets where investors have yet to make their mark.
'Overseas investment is a growth business,' Mr Binney said. There will be
more, not less business for global custodians. We are going to see further
geographic expansion in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and
Africa as well as in places like Vietnam where US firms have been forbidden
to invest,' he predicted.
Broadly speaking, the custody business entails not only the traditional
'master trust' function of securities safekeeping, but also fund valuation
and performance measurement, foreign exchange dealing, cash management,
derivatives safekeeping and valuation, and, perhaps most significantly,
stock lending. It is this last core service which is proving the most
lucrative to custodians, particularly when the securities are loaned across
international borders. And in emerging markets where settlement delays are
most likely to arise, the demand for loaned securities is greatest.
This makes it likely that even though volumes in some emerging markets are
low relative to those in developed countries, the potential profits are
great.
'This business is really all about global asset servicing,' said Michael
Grass, head of Barclays' custody services in Europe and Africa. As investors
become more sophisticated, they are likely to make greater demands on their
custodians to deliver information and other services more quickly and
cheaply, he said.
Barclays, which has a significant presence in the UK market, is capitalising
on its presence in Africa, an emerging market where few other global banks
have any significant market share.
Consultants note that in many emerging markets, there are only one or two
principal providers of custody services and any investor who is not normally
a client of that custodial bank must enter into some sort of sub-custodial
arrangement. For instance, the Latin American market is dominated by
Citibank and by Bank of Boston while custodial services for Pacific Rim
markets are dominated by Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank.
Clients who are unhappy with the services of a monopoly provider have few
options to switch.
Meanwhile, Barclays' Mr Grass predicts, the requirement for investment in
information technology by custodians in each market is so great that instead
of competing with each other head-on, custodians are likely to form
alliances. 'They will say 'we'll provide one service in this country and you
provide another service and we will face the market together',' Mr Grass
said. Thus, institutional investors entering new markets are unlikely to
find that fierce competition will allow them to achieve services at
razor-thin margins as it has in the US and, increasingly, in the UK.
Another problem, custodians say, is that there is a very wide range of legal
arrangements between custodians and sub-custodians and between clients and
sub-custodians and there is a good deal of legal ambiguity about the
obligations of each.
Even worse, there are significant variations in the service that
sub-custodians provide for different clients, according to Richard Schwartz
of Lee Schwartz Associates. LSA, together with a US-based consultancy, GSCS,
produces performance indices for custodial and sub-custodial services in
important markets. Mr Schwartz notes that there are several factors which
could account for disparate performances among disparate client accounts,
including the ability of each client's counterparties to complete their own
paperwork on time.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

941108

