FT943-760

FT  28 SEP 94 / Slums and fear fuel plague: A look at India's public health
service concerns


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


The flight of 100 plague-stricken patients from hospital in the city of
Surat is a disturbing comment on public confidence in the Indian health
service.
After the patients ran away at the weekend because they felt they would be
better off with their families, the authorities surrounded the hospital with
paramilitary troops to prevent more escapes.
The outbreak of pneumonic plague, which has claimed at least 43 lives since
it broke out in Surat last week, has highlighted strengths and weaknesses in
India's health service. On the one hand, the authorities seemed by yesterday
to have brought the disease under control with no deaths reported since
Monday. The rapid distribution of a simple remedy  - the antibiotic
tetracycline - has ensured that few victims have died once under medical
care.
On the other hand, the sick in Surat ran away from hospital. Moreover,
between 300,000-500,000 residents, some of them doctors and nurses, fled the
city altogether rather than trust the health authorities to protect them.
Ignorance about plague is at the root of these fears. The last serious
outbreaks of plague in India 30 years ago are within living memory of many
Indians. They remember only the speed with which it strikes down victims,
not the effectiveness of tetracycline which was not then as freely available
as it is today.
Dr K. K. Aggarwal, president of the Indian Medical Association, says: 'There
is absolutely no reason to panic. But people do panic because they are
afraid they cannot get medicine and because they consult fellow laymen and
quacks. Even some doctors do not know how to treat plague because it is so
rare.'
But many doctors believe that inadequate public health services, which are
responsible for monitoring community health and preventive medicine,
contribute to popular ignorance and fear. Dr D. Banerji, professor emeritus
at the centre of social health and community medicine at Jawaharlal Nehru
University, says it took the health authorities too long to respond to the
Surat outbreak, so allowing panic to spread. 'The government was not alert
enough.'
Dr L. M. Nath, dean of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences and head
of its public health department, believes that the authorities should not be
criticised for their handling of the Surat outbreak. Their actions were
prompt, he says.
But he believes that India has under-invested in public health and points
out that the country has only one college of public health compared with 146
medical colleges. He hopes the Surat outbreak will prompt a review. 'Perhaps
this cloud will have a silver lining.'
But shortages of money will limit the scope for improvements in public
health. There is a severe squeeze on public finances, particularly of
India's states, which control healthcare. The proportion of gross domestic
product spent by the states on social services, including health, has fallen
from 5.3 per cent in 1990-91 to 4.8 per cent in the year to March 1994,
according to the World Bank.
These concerns need to be put in context. While India's population has risen
146 per cent since 1951, the number of doctors has soared 550 per cent and
the number of hospitals 300 per cent. Life expectancy at birth has almost
doubled from 32 years to 60.3 years. Smallpox has been eradicated and
leprosy and other killer diseases greatly reduced.
But the economic and social development which has made these gains possible
has created ever-higher expectations of improvements in healthcare. It has
also magnified problems, notably the spread of slums in large cities,
including Bombay, Calcutta and Delhi. Because slums are often developed
illegally by squatting on empty land, the authorities are unable to provide
sanitation or other civil services, even where they could afford to.
Dr K. K. Dutta, the director of the government's National Institute of
Communicable Diseases says: 'It's no secret that that the low levels of
health in slums are a threat to the overall gain India has made in health
standards.'
Since the population of the slums is still growing and is forecast to grow
further as the economy develops, the dangers to health will also multiply.
Dr Nath says there is no answer except to increase spending not just on
public health but also on services such as water and sanitation. But the
cost will be enormous. 'In India spending even one rupee a head is a a lot
of rupees.'
Editorial comment, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940928

