FT941-16871

FT  07 JAN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Question mark over threat of patent
case to multi-media industry


   From Mr JOHN R DAVIES


Sir, Having read the article, 'Strong feelings over patent dispute'
(Technology, December 2) by Tom Foremski and Louise Kehoe, I have kept a
close watch on developments relating to Compton's NewMedia's broad US patent
covering most multi-media products.
Just before Christmas two matters which arose could affect the impact of
this patent in the UK. First, in confirmation of the generally accepted view
that computer programs as such are not patentable under UK law, a report of
Raytheon Co's Application was published in the reports of patent cases. This
concerned a patent application for a computerised system for recognising the
outlines of ships. It was rejected by the English Patents Court as being a
program for a computer which simply performed an act which could otherwise
be performed mentally. The outcome of this case supports the view held by
most multi-media producers that Compton's NewMedia's patent is invalid since
it merely claims a computerised way of browsing through an inter-related set
of words and pictures, for instance an encyclopaedia.
Second, and perhaps more importantly, it was announced on December 16 by the
US Patent and Trade Marks Office that it would be 're-examining' Compton's
NewMedia's patent. Apparently, new material has been brought to the
attention of the US Patent Office which was not considered during the
original process of examination.
Additionally, I understand that the US Patent Office will be reconsidering
the obviousness of the invention. It appears that, unusually, the US Patent
Office has decided to initiate the re-examination on its own behalf as a
result of the storm of controversy caused by the grant of the patent.
Should the US Patent Office reject Compton's NewMedia's patent on
re-examination it may be that it will not represent the threat to the
multi-media industry that multi-media producers have feared. However, I
understand that there are a number of other similar patents in the process
of examination in the US and in Europe and that this will therefore
represent only a first skirmish in the battle for control and exploitation
of the multi-media industry in the 1990s.
John R Davies,
solicitor,
information technology group,
Bristows Cooke & Carpmael,
10 Lincoln's Inn Fields,
London WC2A 3BP

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940107

