FT941-3463

FT  16 MAR 94 / Arts: 'Etoiles' go for gold - Ballet in Paris


   By CLEMENT CRISP


The Paris Opera Ballet occasionally gives its brightest young dancers a run
of special performances in which to show their very considerable mettle. So,
at the weekend, the aspirant etoiles, feet as bright as their hopes,
technique as burnished as their confidence in their training, made a bid for
glory. It was, as always, an exhilarating spectacle. The Palais Garnier was
crowded and the atmosphere charged with that special French belief in
gloire. And on Saturday afternoon the young went for gold.
Chief ballet-master Patrice Bart centred this year's sessions around the
Romantic ballet. So there was Bournonville, looking - shall we say  - a bit
French-polished, and evocations of Marie Taglioni's roles; the enchanting
Vivandiere sextet which has survived for a century and a half thanks to
notation, and Petipa's Paquita trio. We saw golden gifts; we must hope for
golden futures and golden rewards. Certainly the performance demonstrated
the grace and security of French training - the Opera's ballet school
produces superb talent year after year - and the technical and artistic
assurance that the Opera engenders in its dancers.
The style is Franco-Italian, brilliant in beaten steps and turns, stylish
and sophisticated as to feet - the girls have virtues in point-work
undreamed of by British teaching. There is nothing unemphatic or unduly
modest about what we see, and no English Missery (I'm tempted to write
'English misery'). The young are there on stage because they want to
succeed; failings have to do with a desire for public approval: but
regardez-moi is not the worst of mottos. Lyricism is at a premium - a famous
dancer described it to me as 'dancing too slowly' - while that grandeur of
scale and phrasing we admire with Russian training is largely absent.
But in matter of polish, of physical wit and clarity - the language fast,
light, quickly accented - the Jeunes danseurs are a delight. I loved the
sextet from Napoli, done with southern vivacity, and was charmed by Sandrine
Henault's exquisite feet in the Flower Festival in Genzano duet: every step
was diamond-cut. Her partner was Eric Camillo, buoyant, beautifully sure,
and playing with real charm. Equally fine Bertrand Belem, who sizzled
through devilish solos in La Vivandiere, and Paquita, and Gil Isoart as
James in the second act of La Sylphide. Why, conscience asks, cannot our
young Royal Ballet aspirants do as well?
The Opera's other young virtuoso is Emmanuel Thibault. I reported on him
last year. Slight in build, he has a technique which dazzles by its easy
elegance as by its prowess. In the Napoli pas, and then in a fragment from
Le Papillon, he showed a phenomenal facility - a circuit of the stage
interspersing racing leaps with tight, clear pirouettes was astonishing. He
is teacher's pet, seemingly able to do with grace whatever he is asked, and
unspoiled and gentle in manner. He comes to life as he dances: curtain calls
suggest a young man almost shy of applause.
He was partnered in Le Papillon by Veronique Doisneau, ideally matched with
him in lightness, speed, and a sweet fragility, her dancing as effortless
and beguiling as his. Very pretty, too, the sylphide sketched by Miteki
Kudo, leading her James through the glens of Bournonville's second act, and
turning and posing with delicious innocence. Grandly soaring was Sandrine
Marache, who bounded proudly through a Vivandiere solo. My only complaint
about the performance is the fact that Anton Dolin's version of the Pas de
Quatre in which four divinities of London's ballet in 1845 were brought
together in a contest of charm and steely temperament, was lightly guyed.
The steps, like the Pugni score, are pretty, and need to be prettily danced.
The mock rivalries, and the mopping and mowing between Saturday's
participants, was all too roguey-poguey. Real-life tensions among ballerinas
who have incarnated their great predecessors have been more subtly masked
and far deadlier than this warfare of pink tulle and moues.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940316

