FT941-5497

FT  05 MAR 94 / Books: Homage to The Devils - Fiction


   By JDF JONES


THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG by J M Coetzee Secker & Warburg Pounds 14.99, 250
pages
John Coetzee is a Capetonian academic who writes slim novels of
extraordinary power. Dusklands, in 1974, was a touch experimental - two
linked novellas announced his fascination with what his next book was to
describe as 'the barbarous frontier'. That second book, In The Heart Of The
Country, drew strength from its remote South African setting and even relied
on a fair amount of Afrikaans dialogue.
The masterpiece arrived soon: Waiting For The Barbarians, his 1980 tale of
the sympathetic magistrate who governs a remote district between 'the
Empire' and the encroaching 'barbarians'. Life And Times Of Michael K, a
terrifying fable of a simple, hare-lipped gardener caught up in a South
African civil war won him the Booker Prize. Next came Age Of Iron - an
unforgettable story of a woman dying of cancer attended by an alcoholic
vagrant who becomes her angel of death - and Foe, a break with South Africa,
an ingenious re-telling of the story of 'Cruso', Friday and 'Daniel Defo'.
The Master Of Petersburg also proclaims its distance from South Africa
(though its theme of the great novelist harassed by the secret police can
hardly be accidental). It is, I suggest, a first faltering of a huge talent:
a disappointment. The narrator is Dostoyevsky, the year 1869, and the writer
has returned from exile to St Petersburg in response to the death - suicide?
murder? - of his beloved stepson.
The narrator discovers that the young man has been associated with a group
of anarchists led by a certain Sergei Nechayev. The police confiscate first
the stepson's papers, containing a list of assassination targets, and then
his father's passport. 'Dostoyevsky' becomes involved with his landlady, and
with her precocious girl-child Matryona, 'a conductor of souls'.
Evidently we are in the world of The Devils (sometimes called The
Possessed), which Dostoyevsky started to write in the same 1869. Nechayev
was indeed a young nihilist, a disciple of Bakunin and the probable model
for Peter Verkhovensky in The Devils. It is known that Dostoyevsky was aware
of the conspiracy of the 'Society of National Retribution' led by Nechayev -
he used it for the novel.
At this point Coetzee's re-writing of history becomes irritating, even
perverse. The fact is that the real-life stepson, Pavel, was not killed
either by the police or by his fellow conspirators - he was to survive his
real-life stepfather. Dostoyevsky never met Nechayev (although their
relationship is central to The Master Of Petersburg). He did not return to
Russia until 1871. He was not a inclined to paedophilia.
True, Coetzee gives us elements of a portrait of Dostoyevsky: references to
Poor Folk and Crime And Punishment; epileptic attacks; the Siberian exile;
the gambling obsession; 'fathers and sons: foes: foes to the death'; and
hints of some of the Russian writer's higher themes. There is also a sense
of Kafka-esque menace that has been a frequent feature of Coetzee's work.
Above all, this is a book about desperate tragedy and distress.
What is the point of this re-imagining, this re-arrangement, of
Dostoyevsky's life history? I suspect that there is a private sub-text which
it would be impertinent to investigate. Taken as a fiction, there is a
fascination in the portrait of a society in which one's fate is determined
by bureaucrats and policemen, in which extreme poverty co-exists with
autocracy and luxury, in which dedicated young political activists are
prepared to give their lives to change the social order. But it would have
seemed hard to imagine Coetzee writing a dull, inert book about Dostoyevsky.
Perhaps The Master Of Petersburg should best be seen as a fine writer's
hommage to The Devils.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940305

