FT942-16287

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (2): Fight to control
inflation - Colombia


   By SARITA KENDALL


Like other Latin American countries that have been through an intense
liberalisation process, Colombia is inclining towards greater social
spending as a way of mitigating the effects of opening up the economy.
President Cesar Gaviria's government has also veered in this direction and
the two leading candidates for the May presidential elections are speaking
of the lessons to be learned from events in Caracas and Chiapas.
The immediate concern is not so much where the money will come from but how
to keep inflation under control and avoid revaluing the peso. Over the past
three years the government has brought the annual inflation rate down from
33 per cent to 23 per cent and the 1994 target is 19 per cent.
However, independent economists say the rate is unlikely to drop below 22
per cent, particularly as inflation for the first two months of the year
reached 6.9 per cent. At the same time devaluation is only 10-11 per cent a
year and exporters are losing ground.
Mr Rudolf Hommes, minister of finance all through the Gaviria government,
says the administration will hand over a fiscal surplus of 2 per cent of
GDP, the result of improved tax collection and extra income from the sale of
state-controlled financial institutions and cellular telephone concessions.
The aim is to limit this year's growth in international reserves to
USDollars 450mn and use some of the surplus to prepay foreign debt. Modest
export growth and a further, though smaller, rise in imports are expected
for 1994.
In the eyes of foreign investors, the stability of Colombia's economy is to
some extent offsetting risks associated with guerrilla warfare and violence;
foreign investment (excluding oil) rose by about 35 per cent last year.
While the privatisation programme is not as exciting as some and the stock
market remains very small, more banks are due to be auctioned off and a
range of opportunities is opening up in the transport and energy sectors.
The signing of the first bilateral investment treaty with the UK in March
ensures equal treatment for foreign and local capital and is an important
step towards cementing confidence among investors; agreements with other
countries are expected to follow.
Although BP's Cusiana and Cupiagua oil discoveries transformed Colombia's
earnings outlook for the late 1990s, foreign companies have been unhappy
with the terms of the state petroleum company's association contracts for
some time. Ecopetrol will be putting some 28 blocks up for exploration in
mid-April and the new contracts are expected to be more flexible, taking
into account the profitability of different fields. The majority of the new
areas - many of which were previously reserved for Ecopetrol - are in the
eastern plains or llanos.
With economic growth rates consistently higher than population increase,
Colombia's income per capita has been rising steadily. Last year's economic
growth was 5.2 per cent and the government is forecasting 4.5 per cent to 5
per cent for 1994. Recent studies suggest that income distribution has also
been improving (though this point is controversial), while the gap between
urban and rural areas has broadened during the modernisation process.
Agriculture improved slightly in 1993 but the next government will have to
tackle serious economic and social problems in the countryside, including
those related to the guerrilla influence on how municipal budgets are spent.
The main rivals for the presidency - Ernesto Samper, the governing Liberal
party candidate, and Andres Pastrana of the Social Conservatives party -
have committed themselves to consolidating the opening up of the economy.
Both candidates have also promised improvements in infrastructure, which has
failed to keep up with business needs. However, Mr Pastrana is aiming for
higher growth rates and places greater emphasis on internationalisation,
while Mr Samper stresses jobs and training programmes. Mr Samper says he
will give priority to fighting crime in the cities, especially Bogota, as
well as violence in the countryside, not only with weapons but with the
persuasive power of social investment.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940411

