FT941-5456

FT  07 MAR 94 / Mercouri, fiery advocate of Greek heritage, dies


   By Our Foreign Staff


Ms Melina Mercouri, a former film star and fiery Socialist politician who
twice served as Greece's culture minister, died yesterday in New York after
a long battle with lung cancer.
Ms Mercouri, 73, a former actress, entered politics after being stripped of
her Greek citizenship while in exile during the 1967-74 military
dictatorship, joining the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) when
democracy was restored in Greece.
As minister of culture in Greece's first socialist government in the 1980s,
Ms Mercouri was a passionate advocate for Greece's heritage. Her most widely
publicised campaign was for the return of the Parthenon Marbles, some of
Greece's finest classical sculptures, taken in the 19th century from the
temple on the Acropolis overlooking Athens and held by the British Museum.
She survived 14 government reshuffles, and despite poor health was
re-appointed culture minister when Pasok returned to power last October,
vowing to renew her campaign for the return of the mar-bles.
Greek state television prefaced the announcement of Ms Mercouri's death with
sombre music, replacing the evening news bulletin with clips from her
speeches at political rallies and from some of her 50-odd films.
Ms Mercouri, the daughter of a prominent Athenian political family, started
her acting career with Greece's National Theatre in the 1940s, but preferred
contemporary to classical roles, marking her first success in Tennessee
Williams' 'Streetcar Named Desire'.
Her film career took off in 1955, when she won the Best Actress award at the
Cannes film festival for her performance in 'Stella'. She was nominated for
an Academy award for 'Never on Sunday' in 1960, the film that brought her
international fame.
'Never on Sunday' in which Ms Mercouri played a warm-hearted prostitute from
Piraeus pursued by an American tourist - played by her husband, Jules Dassin
 -was believed in Athens to have done more than any official promotion to
make Greece a popular tourist destinat ion.
She claimed that it was pride in her Greek heritage that took her into
politics at that time. 'I'd be selfish, lazy and cowardly if I didn't feel
so passionately about Greece,' she once told an interviewer.
Ms Mercouri died in hospital in New York of a respiratory infection
following surgery for lung cancer.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940307

