FT942-16247

FT  12 APR 94 / Ukrainian vote brings reform no closer: Elections have
failed to resolve the crisis


   By JOHN LLOYD and JILL BARSHAY


Ukrainian elections have produced a parliament torn between left-wing
pro-Russian forces, a smaller group of nationalist parties and a 'swamp' of
independent candidates - a result forecast to further delay reform of the
country's plunging economy and of its fractured politics.
Communists, socialists and their Peasant party allies seem likely to be the
strongest party bloc, last night claiming some 110 of the 337 seats where
candidates have been announced after a second round of voting. Of the
remaining seats in the 450-seat parliament, some have still to be announced
while others failed to produce the qualifying number of votes and will
require a third round of voting.
The centrist-reformist parties did very poorly, a bad sign for an economy in
which reforms have been constantly delayed by lack of agreement in
parliament. The Interregional Reform Bloc of Mr Leonid Kuchma, the former
prime minister who tried to make the case for economic transformation, has
only four seats so far.
To further deepen the crisis, voters in the Crimean peninsula - where the
dominant ethnic Russians are calling for semi-independence from Ukraine -
returned a local assembly dominated by pro-Russian and Communist deputies.
The 'Russia Bloc' took 54 of the 94 declared seats, with Communists taking
another 15, both groups advocating much closer ties with Russia.
Mr Leonid Hrach, the Crimean Communist leader, said that 'the Ukrainian
people have called for the idea of communism', adding that the solution to
Ukraine's problems was only possible by integrating its economy with other
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Mr Yuri Yekhanourov, the reformist-minded deputy economic minister, said
yesterday 'the new parliament will be unable to take any real decisions, and
there will also be a battle between it and the local authorities. The
results mean we will lose a further two years, and the economy will continue
its decline'.
The result, however, belied the predictions - some would say hopes - of
President Leonid Kravchuk that the turnout would generally fail to reach the
50 per cent figure required to make each deputy's election legal. The
overall average turnout was around 66 per cent, though the figure was lower
in the capital, Kiev, with a number of constituencies reporting turnout in
the 40 per cent band.
The only other bright spot was the return to parliament of several
reform-minded figures. Besides Mr Kuchma, prominent deputies in the new
parliament include Mr Victor Penzenik and Mr Volodymyr Lanovoi, both former
deputy premiers and Mr Roman Shpek, the outgoing economics minister.
At the same time, those elected to parliament cannot, under present law,
also serve in the government, reducing the field of ministerial talent in a
country where able reformers are few.
The new parliament inherits a constitutional tangle which appears certain to
set it at odds. Mr Kravchuk has said he will refuse to stand in presidential
elections scheduled for June 26 unless a law cancelling the appointment of
presidential representatives to the regions and giving full authority to the
regional authorities, is itself cancelled. At the same time, the basic
question of division of powers between the presidency and the parliament is
unclear, while a new constitution is not even in preparation.
The nationalists, whose main force remains the Rukh grouping which draws its
principal support from western Ukraine, yesterday claimed around 80 members
and supporters in the parliament, though Rukh itself had only 21 members in
the preliminary figures released by Interfax news agency last night. Mr
Vyacheslav Chornovil, Rukh's leader, said yesterday that 'economic collapse
is giving an opening to extremists'.
The numerical 'victors' were, on last night's figures, the 167 deputies who
claimed no party label - though some are close to the formal parties. The
struggle for their allegiance will dominate the politics of the new
parliament. Many are enterprise directors and officials likely to tend
towards the pro-integration Communists in the hope that closer links with
Russian and the other CIS economies boost trade and give them access to
lower-priced energy.
The extreme nationalists, who in their furthest right manifestations openly
espouse fascist and militaristic postures, gained a toehold in the new
parliament. The Ukrainian Nationalist Congress won four seats and the
UNA/UNSO bloc three. Mr Chornovil, who backs an unsteady strategy of
moderating the nationalist message of his party, dissociated himself from
them yesterday, saying they constituted one of the extremes which would
neuter the parliament.
The first test will come on Thursday, at a meeting in Moscow of the CIS
heads of state at which a new economic union will be discussed and Ukraine
will be pressed to define its hitherto ambiguous stand on closer ties.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940412

