FT943-13088

FT  21 JUL 94 / China ends phone monopoly: Beijing aims to boost lines from
30m to 120m by year 2000


   By ANDREW ADONIS


China has abolished its telephone monopoly, in a step towards allowing
western companies to participate in operating networks in the world's
largest telecoms market.
The state council has allowed a consortium of three other ministries to
build a national telecoms network in competition with the Ministry of Posts
and Telecommunications, despite strong efforts by the MPT to preserve its
monopoly.
The liberalisation is being driven by the government's ambitious aim of
increasing the number of phone lines in China from about 30m to 120m by
2000. Barely two in 100 Chinese have a phone line, compared with 49 per 100
in Hong Kong.
The three ministries - railways, electronic industries and electrical power
 -this week launched a joint venture called China United Telecommunications
(Unicom), backed by leading domestic investment groups. Unicom is licensed
to provide long-distance telecoms links, and may also have its own local
connections.
Nynex, the US regional Bell operator, has signed a memorandum of
understanding with one of the ministries, which may lead to a joint venture.
Mr Andrew Harrington, Salomon Brothers Asia-Pacific telecoms analyst, said:
'This signals an acceleration of the liberalisation process in China. It
could be only months before they allow western companies to form joint
ventures to operate networks.'
Unicom's launch follows three notable steps towards liberalisation in the
past year. In January the ministry of electronic industries was allowed to
compete with the MPT in data telecoms services. It set up an operation
called Ji Tong, which has formed a joint venture with Bell South, another US
regional operator.
Earlier this year the operating and regulatory divisions of the MPT were
separated, making it easier for new operators to establish themselves.
Last September the People's Liberation Army was allowed to use its radio
networks for commercial purposes after a protracted battle with MPT.
The market for telecommunications equipment has long been liberalised and
most leading western suppliers have production facilities in China.
In addition to rival ministries, local and regional leaders have also been
seeking to break the MPT's stranglehold on telecoms development. Last autumn
Mr Huang Ju, mayor of Shanghai, called for joint ventures with western
operators to accelerate the building of new lines.
Many of the leading western operators are anxious to exploit investment
opportunities in China. In addition to Nynex and Bell South, AT&T - the
largest US operator - is active in Beijing, while Cable & Wireless, the UK
group which holds a majority share of Hongkong Telecom, has been nominated
'preferred partner' by the MPT for future collaboration.
Lord Young, C&W chairman, held talks in Beijing in March with telecoms
officials and with Mr Jiang Zemin, China's president. He said C&W's first
Chinese joint ventures could be agreed by the end of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940721

