FT942-16289

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (3): Uncertainty about
growth prospects - Mexico


   By DAMIAN FRASER


The assassination of Luis Donaldo Colosio, presidential candidate of the
ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party party, could not have come at a
worse moment for Mexico's economy.
Last year the economy grew by just 0.4 per cent, and shrank in the second
half. Despite the low growth, Mexico ran a current account deficit of around
Dollars 20bn, making it acutely dependent on short-term capital inflows.
The rise in US interest rates had put further strain on the economy. Higher
US interest rates have hit the stock market, one source of foreign capital,
and forced Mexico to push its rates higher than it would otherwise have
liked, potentially hurting the economic recovery.
The political situation was highly tense even before Mr Colosio's
assassination. The new year uprising in the southern state of Chiapas
seriously shook the government, and raised doubts about sustainability of
the economic and political model followed over the past decade. It
indirectly came close to causing a renegade presidential bid of Mr Manuel
Camacho, the peace envoy in the state, that could have split the ruling
party.
The adverse economic and political environment had taken its toll on
financial markets. From February to the penultimate week of March, Mexico's
stock market fell by nearly 15 per cent. The peso lost 7 per cent of its
value against the dollar, and Mexican interest rates reversed their downward
trend.
While financial markets proved unexpectedly resilient in the aftermath of
the assassination of Mr Colosio, the killing led to a further increase in
interest rates. If more violence lies ahead, then the political uncertainty
may force the government to choose between still higher interest rates that
would choke the recovery or a faster rate of devaluation of the peso that
could cause an upsurge in inflation.
The recession of the second half of last year has also raised questions
about the efficiency of Mexico's economy and its long-term ability to
compete in world markets. Mexico's strong exchange rate and openness to
trade has forced thousands of unproductive companies out of business - in
sectors such as textiles, toys, paper and pulp, which all contracted sharply
last year.
In a recent report the World Bank says Mexico's low savings rate at a time
of slow growth has made its economy overly dependent on foreign capital. It
concludes that the high current account deficit and only modest improvements
in productivity in recent years 'raises concern about the sustainability of
economic growth'.
The World Bank attributes Mexico's low economic growth to the 'substitution
of foreign goods for domestically-produced goods'. It believes this is a
result of the low competitiveness of Mexican companies, partly because their
old technologies have become obsolete, and new investment has replaced
existing capital stock rather than adding to it.
The government prefers to blame the recession on short-term factors: its
goal of single-digit inflation that led to high real interest rates and a
budget surplus last year, the uncertainty over the US Congressional vote on
the North American Free Trade Agreement which damaged business and consumer
confidence last year, and the sharp slowdown in lending as recently
privatised banks sought to resolve problems of past due loans.
There is no doubt that short-term conditions this year look more propitious
for growth. Monetary and fiscal policy has been loosened. Interest rates
have fallen to around 9 per cent from 15 per cent in June last year. The
government announced a large increase in spending that will at a
conservative estimate turn last year's surplus into a balanced budget.
The banks have also started to lend money again, as they have sorted out
most of the problems of non-performing loans. The passage of Nafta should
lead to an increase in direct foreign investment in plant and machinery and
should boost business confidence. Inventories have also been run down during
the recession, and if demand picks up, an immediate increase in output is
expected.
Some signs of economic recovery were evident in November and December with
construction activity, investment in machinery, and durable goods sales
(such as cars) all growing. Just as a drop in the sales of durable goods
indicated the beginning of the recession, their recovery seemed to indicate
the end of it.
However, events in Chiapas and the assassination of Mr Colosio may make the
recovery less robust than hoped for. Consumer spending accounts for about 70
per cent of private demand, and unless this picks up economic growth will be
sluggish. Non durable goods sales - such as food - which went into the
recession last, continued to fall in November and December.
Even if economic growth reaches the target of 3 per cent this year, there is
little doubt that after nearly a decade of pro-market economic reform the
Mexican public was expecting more from the last year of the Salinas
presidency. Assuming the official forecast is met, national income will have
increased little more than the rise in population over the six years of the
term of President Salinas.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940411

