FT944-5918

FT  01 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Small steps


A Budget for jobs, perhaps, but very few of them. Mr Kenneth Clarke
demonstrated on Tuesday that he understands the UK unemployment problem
better than many of his predecessors. Regrettably, he appears only a little
more willing to do something about it.
Mr Clarke put his finger on most of the central problems facing the
country's unemployed workers in the several measures he announced: the
declining demand for low-skilled workers - especially when they have been
unemployed for some time - and the disincentives to work imposed by the
benefit system. But the effectiveness of a sniper depends on his fire-power
as well as his aim. On that score, Mr Clarke's Budget fares poorly.
As the chancellor noted, the long-term unemployed face a difficult battle
persuading employers to take them on. There is a strong case for tax breaks
targeted at these individuals. Mr Clarke followed this logic in introducing
a national insurance 'holiday' for companies which employ those who have not
worked in over two years. When it eventually comes into force, in April
1996, eligible individuals will be about 5 per cent cheaper to employers.
Welcome though this is, most employers think that human capital depreciates
rather more than this during a long period without work. Narrowly targeting
the measure to the very long-term jobless means that it will give one,
highly excluded, group a small advantage over those who have faced the same
barriers for a slightly shorter time. As with the small reduction in
employer national insurance contributions, it is difficult to believe that
many jobs will be created. At the very least, the holiday ought to have
applied to all those unemployed for over a year, and also have been
implemented sooner.
Many of the benefit changes are welcome. Preserving housing benefit for the
first four weeks after finding a job and speeding up receipt of family
credit may help lessen the financial uncertainties attached to taking
employment. But the 'fast track' procedure for receiving family credit will
never be instantaneous. Mr Clarke would have achieved rather more by
instituting a carry-over period for income support.
Fifteen per cent of non-pensioner households in the UK are out of work,
compared with 5 per cent 20 years ago. It would be unfair to say that Mr
Clarke did the least possible to help these people on Tuesday. He did at
least take several steps on the road towards bringing them back into the
workforce. He might have taken none at all. But with steps this small, it
will be a very long road.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941201

