FT943-788

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (15): Retrieving past
glories - City profile: Prague


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


Many towns like to promote themselves as lying at the heart - or, even
better, at the crossroads - of Europe. But Prague, the restored and
liberated capital of a Czech republic more or less co-terminous with the
territories of ancient Bohemia, really does deserve that description.
Prague is at the very centre of Mitteleuropa. It lies 200 kilometres west of
Vienna, half-way between the Baltic and the Adriatic seas; or between the
Atlantic and Russia on the east-west projection, which for so long has been
dominant in its fate.
Now that the cold war is over, however, Prague's greatest advantage is that
it is the beautiful capital of a politically stable country full of
hardworking, educated and skilled people able to produce high-quality items
at wage rates roughly 10 per cent of those ruling in neighbouring Germany
and Austria.
As such, it is the natural location for the local head offices of foreign
companies that are busy setting up manufacturing operations in the republic;
and also for the armies of accountants, consultants and professional
advisers, who flocked to help get the pioneering mass privatisation
programme off the ground and to re-train Czechs in the lost arts of
accounting and business administration.
In the interwar period, Czechoslovakia was the most economically successful
and politically stable of the successor states which emerged from the
disintegration of the the old Hapsburg empire. Technically, Czech industry,
situated mainly in Bohemia and Moravia and what used to be upper Silesia,
was on a par with that of Germany. Incomes and the general cultural level
were claimed to be higher than in Switzerland.
The Nazi invasion and disintegration of Czechoslovakia in 1938, accompanied
by the extermination of Czech and Slovak Jewry, dealt a cruel blow, both
economically and culturally. Further harsh blows were to fall in 1948, with
the communist Prague coup masterminded by Stalin and the subsequent
re-invasion by Soviet and other Warsaw Pact forces to crush the Prague
Spring 20 years later.
Miraculously, however, the gorgeous historic city of renaissance, baroque
and liberty-style architectural splendour from the early 20th century
survived these hammer blows virtually unscathed, at least to the casual eye.
A closer look reveals that, for over 50 years, when property stolen from its
legal owners was attributed to the state or local authorities, most of
historic Prague hardly received a coat of paint. Maintenance was minimal. In
far too many cases it amounted to patching up holes in roofs or building
makeshift protection against falling masonry.
Since the collapse of communism, however, the situation has been
transformed. The skyline is pierced by cranes, and the streets reverberate
to the sound of saws and hammers. After initial lengthy delays, caused by
the difficulty of establishing legal claims and restituting properties to
their rightful owners, long-neglected buildings are being gutted and
modernised inside and repainted externally.
Many fine old palaces are being converted to offices; and once-grand
buildings, which were turned into squalid communal flats by the communists,
with several families sharing rudimentary cooking and sanitary facilities,
are being restored to the former grandeur. They are being sold to property
developers or let by their restored owners to the local new rich or
foreigners, often with the ground floors converted into shops, banks or
restaurants.
The grand old hotels on or around Wenceslaw Square and along the Voltava
river are also being refurbished, and a slew of shiny new hotels, such as
the Atrium and the Diplomat, have sprung up to help cope with a flood of
tourists. The main problem to date has been a truly terrible telephone
service, but heavy investment is under way to ease the frustration of
blocked lines and broken connections.
Given the attractions of the old city and the high cost of refurbishing,
rental values initially soared. But James Woolf, of Flow East, one of the
most active private property developers, says that the sharply rising supply
of refurbished flats and offices has seen prices and rents stabilise over
the past two years.
With foreign capital now flowing into the Czech republic on an ever
increasing scale and domestic entrepreneurs busy building up their private
companies, the city is well on its way to recovering its past glory.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940927

