FT941-4235

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (6): Business mood has settled
down - Supply is easing into a rough balance with demand. The new buzzword
is 'equilibrium' / Hungary


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


Budapest property analysts, when they reach for a description of the local
market for office space, have to work their tongues around an unfamiliar
word: 'equilibrium.'
The international companies which crammed into hastily converted apartments
at the start of the decade are now generally installed, more or less
contentedly, in modern offices. The business mood, after swinging first to
euphoria and then to disappointment, has settled down  - and with it the
take-up for new rental space, steady at about 45,000 sq m a year.
Development, too, has come through its own, lagging, cycle. Budapest had a
dearth of office stock until 1991. 'There was not a single good building
since the second world war. Look around: they are all terrible,' says Mr
Christopher Bennett, head of Price Waterhouse's property department in
Budapest.
Then came a surplus as projects begun in the glory days belatedly reached
the end of the development pipeline. But now supply is easing into rough
balance with demand. Debenham Thorpe Zadelhoff, the property advisers,
estimates that 126,000 sq m of space is under construction or likely to be
built over the next three years.
Rents for prime space reflect this balance: after leaping to DM55 a sq m at
the start of 1992, rates have stabilised at around DM45-DM50. Forecasts for
rates in 1994 range from flat to a slight firming in the second half of the
year.
Budapest's relative sobriety owes less, however, to clear thinking on the
part of developers and more to the practical difficulties in obtaining
appropriate sites and getting projects off the ground.
Prices for sites have been sticky, rather than stable, because their
Hungarian owners often have a rather rigid view of value. Wide divergence
between asking and offer prices remains common. Mr Bennett knows of one
building where the asking price is three times the Price Waterhouse
valuation.
Nor will equilibrium necessarily endure. Domestic companies only occupy a
tenth of Budapest's office area and their financial recovery would overwhelm
existing provision. Hungary's capital is the largest city between Germany
and the former Soviet Union with 2m inhabitants but has the office stock -
225,000 sq m - of a Bristol.
Imperfect and immature it may be, but Budapest's property market at least
functions. Quality and location, for example, now have an impact on rents
which used to be more or less standard across the city. Maculan's
development on Vaci road, leading north out of Budapest, is letting at a
discount - at about DM35 a sq m.
An investment market is coming into existence. Long-term funds are beginning
to buy developments off the banks, mainly Austrian, which financed them. The
process has been slow and yields remain high at about 13-14 per cent. 'They
(the investors) are all sheep and it is very difficult to get the first
sheep into the dip,' says Mr Bennett. But three important transactions took
place in 1993 and Price Waterhouse forecasts a further 10 this year.
Convergence of yields with west European levels offers the promise of a
one-off capital gain for early buyers.
The impending sale of the East-West Centre, Budapest's most successful
development, will set a benchmark. The property, developed by Skanska of
Sweden, is on the market at DM108m, implying a yield of about 11 per cent,
and expected to go to a German or Dutch fund.
Geography enhances Budapest's attractions to a property investor. Budapest,
in contrast with Berlin and Warsaw, has a clear centre around Deak Square,
defined by the river and transport intersections. Analysts believe
properties in this prime area will always command firm rents and provide a
secure return for investors.
Fotex, Hungary's largest home-grown private business, has developed a
building at the foot of the residential Buda hills. But the most ambitious
project to shift Budapest's centre of gravity, the 1996 Expo, has failed
dismally to attract interest from developers.
While Budapest's market for offices is taking shape, that for retail and
distribution space remains disappointingly formless to observers. The
'berleti jog,' a unique Hungarian institution, something between an endless
lease and a rental agreement, stifles the retail market.
Western retailers have often gone into joint ventures with existing tenants
rather than buying them out, because a change in occupancy is cause for the
owner, usually the local authority, to raise the rent. Rents have in
practice remained low but the lack of clear rules about renegotiation makes
the value of a berleti jog very subjective.
Less easy to explain is the lack of warehouse space. As continuity of supply
becomes more important, so does depth of stock, and the availability of
modern, well-located warehouse space. But there is precious little.
Mr Durrant, blaming obstinate local authorities, says: 'It is impossible to
find a decent-sized concrete box anywhere around Budapest.' A customer for
an office, not a shed, might have made that comment five years ago. That is
the measure of Budapest's progress.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

940311

