FT942-12197

FT  30 APR 94 / DRUGS: Nicholas Woodsworth stumbles into the world of
international trafficking in Bolivia and meets two people whose lives it has
wrecked


It is not often in the peregrinations of a travel writer that, independent
of his own will, events simply walk up and take over. If a bag of mine
containing documents and money had not been snatched within a day of my
arrival in Bolivia, I might have wandered blithely on my way and ended up
with a different tale to tell - a rural idyll, perhaps, of precarious and
bumpy Andean bus rides, Indian villages and irascible llamas.
As it was, events decided their own peculiar course, and I return with two
decidedly less idyllic stories from Bolivia's cocaine wars. One is intimate,
and concerns the private life of a young Bolivian woman drawn unwittingly
into the shady world of international drug trafficking and enforcement. The
other is public, and involves an increasingly violent contest between
American-trained para-military patrols and machete-swinging coca-growers in
the jungles of lowland Bolivia. Together, they have shown me more of the
bumps and precariousness of life in Bolivia than a dozen Andean bus rides.
Even to the casual wanderer, Bolivia is an odd kind of place. Flying into La
Paz is like falling into the bright, illustrated pages of a Tintin story -
suddenly everything becomes a gross Latin American caricature of itself.
At least so it seemed to me. In wrap-around sunglasses and Brilliantined
hair, the customs man at the airport could not have looked dodgier if he had
tried. On the way into town the taxi driver's short-change trick was more
blatant than taxi drivers' tricks elsewhere. The city's street kids looked
more ragged and snot-nosed than other street kids. Bolivian army officers
wore higher-peaked hats, broader pasteboard epaulettes and more yards of
gold braid than officers in other third-world armies.
And everywhere, under strange little bowler hats and ear-flapped toques,
were the dark, stolid faces of Bolivia's Indians, as impassive and
unchanging as the surrounding Andean peaks. The whole city, shimmering in
thin, clear air 12,000 feet above sea level, seemed to me slightly fevered
and unreal, a South America we dream.
What would you do, in such a place, if you suddenly found yourself bereft of
papers and money the day after you arrived? One moment I was contentedly
eating lunch in a crowded terrace restaurant. The next, my bag snatched from
the chair beside me, I was a man without an identity. With no more than a
dozen words of Spanish, I did what I imagine most people would. I panicked.
I threw myself on the mercies of the only English speaker I knew - the
newly-hired receptionist at the small pension where I was staying - and
pleaded for help.
There are better ways, perhaps, of meeting attractive young women in odd
corners of Latin America. But in retrospect it seems to me appropriate that
I should have met Maria del Carmen Lopez de Shaw in a moment of high emotion
and crisis - it is the stuff of which her own life appears principally to be
made.
Looking back, I have tried to make sense of Carmen's confusing world of
deception, intrigue and violence. I cannot. Her life seems as extravagant
and fanciful as her name. Was her smooth-talking husband, Peter Shaw,
telling me the truth about his dual life as narco-trafficker and undercover
agent for the British and US governments? Perhaps he was; what absorbs me in
the end is not individual facts but the disarray the drugs trade brings to
entire lives, and ultimately, to entire countries.
The wiring of emergency funds, the replacement of credit cards, the purchase
of traveller's cheques, the making of police reports - such tasks are
dreadful even in the west. In Bolivia, without Carmen's skilled
intercession, they would have been a nightmare.
In each office we visited she knew just who to brow-beat, who to sweet-talk,
who to hurry along with small - I shall not call them bribes - remunerative
incentives. She was not even daunted by the awful Criminalistica, a warren
of foul-smelling hallways where queues of La Paz's victimised poor inch
forward in the dim hope of attaining justice. Watching Carmen jockeying an
investigating officer into taking my statement, I was full of admiration for
this surprising and self-confident young woman.
But in the taxi on our way to place a newspaper reward for my passport,
Carmen suddenly grew serious.
'Would you mind if we made a detour?' she said. 'I decided this morning to
leave my husband - I am afraid of him - and your little problem has delayed
me. I must get my children before he comes home.'
La Paz is one of the few cities in the world where the normal preferences of
the rich are reversed: they live snugly in La Paz's valley bottom and have
abandoned the city's spectacular heights - and its bone-chilling Andean
winds - to the poor. High up the steep valleyside we wound to Vino Tinto, a
poor area of scavenging dogs and wandering drunks and jerry-built houses of
rough brick and adobe.
I was perplexed. Carmen's home did not match the image I had of the bright,
enterprising, go-ahead person who was helping to pull me out of a mess.
There was just one room with four iron-framed beds ranged along a wall.
Three small children, almost as dark-skinned as Carmen, played on the floor
at the feet of an elderly grey-haired woman. In one corner, under a naked
light bulb, were a small cooking ring and tub of dish-water. There was a
toilet down the stairs. The whole place was pinched and poor and hopeless.
Carmen saw my gaze. 'It's complicated,' she said with a tired shake of her
head. 'It's been like this for years. I've had enough. Perhaps tomorrow I
will explain.' We bundled Carmen's children and mother into the taxi. They
took a room at the pension.
That evening Carmen made a call from the lobby telephone. I could not help
listening. She was seeking advice on the possibility of having her husband,
Peter Shaw, arrested and deported from Bolivia on the grounds of illegal
entry. In the end she was persuaded not to call Interpol - it was Friday, a
day the police needed money for weekend entertainment, and Shaw might have
bought his way out of prison. I did not sleep well, but lay awake wondering
what it was all about, and what Carmen was afraid of.
                          *      *      *
The following day brought more Bolivian strangeness. There was a call from a
prisoner in La Paz's San Pedro jail; a friend on the outside, he said, had
brought my papers to him. We could meet him in the prison with the Dollars
100 reward announced in the paper.
Carmen did not like it - she suspected some sort of set-up. Instead she sent
a Bolivian friend, more street-wise than I, to investigate. No sooner had he
left than a second call - a genuine one this time, came in. My discarded bag
 -cash gone but all documents intact - had been found. Off we rushed to the
ghastly San Pedro to rescue Carmen's friend, and my money, from a certainly
unpleasant fate.
To celebrate, we went that evening to Juliano's, a smart Italian place
opposite the offices of an international agency I had never heard of before,
the United Nations Drug Control Programme. Again I was struck by the
contrast between Carmen's familiar ease in this sophisticated place and her
slum life in Vino Tinto.
Carmen's manner, though, grew less easy as dinner progressed and she tried
to explain her life. It came out tearfully, a ragged and disjointed series
of episodes revolving around the extraordinary career of the man she was now
hoping to see the last of.
Peter Shaw was over 50 when Carmen, not yet in her 20s, met him in a cafe in
the Bolivian lowland city of Santa Cruz. She had just returned from 10 years
in Brazil, where in the last few years she had done everything from
modelling to real estate management. But jobs in Bolivia were hard to find.
Shaw was a commercial pilot, personable, good-looking, with plenty of money.
He offered her security and a chance in life. They married.
But Shaw, it turned out, was no ordinary pilot. He had spent most of his
life ferrying illegal drug consignments around the world - hashish from
Afghanistan, heroin from Pakistan, cocaine from Latin America. At the same
time, though, in a deal worked out in 1982 while serving a sentence in a
British prison, he agreed to work covertly for the US Drug Enforcement
Agency. Later he undertook a similar agreement with British Customs' drugs
intelligence authorities. Their children notwithstanding, his marriage to
Carmen was part of an elaborate cover for a complex but profitable life of
dealing and double-dealing.
At first Carmen could only make guesses about his business during the year
they spent in five-star hotels in Rio de Janeiro; about Shaw's irregular
flights between Brazil and Bolivia; about the suitcases that disappeared
from their hotel rooms as mysteriously as they arrived; and about Shaw's
association with Ronnie Biggs, the great train robber she had never heard of
before but who, given her husband's growing antipathy and secretiveness,
became her confidant.
But by 1991 there was no hiding the fact that things had gone badly wrong.
Based back in Santa Cruz now, Shaw became increasingly paranoid. He
repeatedly accused Carmen of informing on him, and more than once threatened
her violently with weapons. Then came the day when he appeared, his ankle
broken after a rooftop chase across the city, saying men were trying to kill
him.
And the money stopped coming. Shaw, it seemed, had been dumped by both his
drug-dealing associates and his government employers. Without resources, in
early 1992 he asked the British embassy for repatriation for himself and his
family. It was granted, and then at the last minute refused by the Foreign
Office. Shaw, said Carmen, believes there is a deliberate attempt to maroon
him in Bolivia - for the last two years they have been living in penury,
dependent for their survival on church charity.
Carmen moved her family into my hotel. We took the children to amusement
parks, on day trips to Lake Titicaca. We dined out, went dancing, took
walks; the more Carmen talked the more I found myself engrossed by these
strange lives. Finally, I asked to meet Peter Shaw. It was not difficult -
he had been shadowing Carmen for days.
I liked Shaw: there was little of the arch-criminal about his intelligent,
sociable manner. But the story of his demise, even in the the bright sun of
the hotel courtyard where we sat, was chilling.
Things had gone wrong, he said, when he was contracted by the DEA to set up
a 'sting', luring two of America's most-wanted drugs smugglers into a deal
to purchase 300kg of Bolivian cocaine. Such entrapment operations are
illegal under both US and British law; nonetheless, Shaw claims, they are
often undertaken using criminals like himself as operatives. He says he
spent all the money he had setting the sting up, counting on reimbursement
later.
But he told me that, at the same time, he himself became the victim of a
50kg entrapment operation set up by one of his own contacts, also a drugs
trafficker, under pressure from British officials. Shaw believes they had
learned too much about his own private drugs dealings to want to continue
employing him.
How had they learned this, I asked. Shaw is convinced that former friend
Ronnie Biggs has become an important police informer, is in constant touch
with British drugs intelligence officers, and used his friendship with
Carmen to collect information on him.
Shaw suspected his contact of a double cross, and after having arranged the
transport of drugs from Bolivia to Sao Paulo, refused to pick it up for him.
The operation having turned sour, he says, British drugs intelligence agents
were afraid that he might go public on illegal British sting operations and
their valuable underworld information source, Ronnie Biggs. Not only did
British authorities persuade the Americans to break their contract with him
on the grounds he was using DEA cover for his own private operations, but,
he alleges, they also tried to kill him.
Peter Shaw says his life, and that of Carmen's, is still in danger from the
powerful drug dealers he set up under DEA direction. All he dreams of now is
getting enough money to travel to the US, where he wants financial
restitution for his broken DEA contract, and a new identity under the
Witness Protection Program. He wants Carmen in the witness box with him.
Carmen can think of nothing worse.
Such is the confusion and complexity of lives I stumbled across in Bolivia.
There are countless others in this country where the shady business of
cocaine is more profitable than all other export businesses combined.
But I remembered the UN Drug Control Programme Offices I had noticed from
Juliano's. I had seen part of the little picture. Now I wanted to see
something of the big one. Two days later, I was headed to the steamy lowland
jungles of Chapare, primary production centre of the Bolivian cocaine trade.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940430

