FT941-5468

FT  07 MAR 94 / EU may seek faster integration of east bloc: Fear of Russian
nationalism prompts shift in stance


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


The European Union is fundamentally reassessing policy towards the former
communist countries of eastern Europe, with Germany pressing for their
faster integration with the west and future EU membership.
The reassessment, strongly supported by the US, is being driven by fears
about Russian nationalism and the risk that Moscow might seek to reclaim its
sphere of influence in eastern Europe, according to senior diplomats in
Brussels.
Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, is also moving
towards the concept of a 'wider Europe,' modifying his emphasis on deepening
integration among the 12.
The results of the policy review will emerge over the next few months,
particularly when Germany takes over the rotating EU presidency from Greece
in July. But the broad outlines are already apparent.
European foreign ministers in Brussels will today consider an Anglo-Italian
plan allowing formal co-operation at international conferences and 'joint
foreign policy actions' between the EU and the six 'associate' EU member
states - Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Bulgaria and
Romania.
The Anglo-Italian plan is likely to be followed by selective offers of
associate membership of the Western European Union, the EU's emerging
defence arm.
Brussels is watching closely to see how Russia will respond in the light of
its rejection of Nato membership for Poland and other former communist
satellites.
The European Commission is also conducting a wide-ranging review of trade,
aid, competition policy and the operation of the Common Agricultural Policy
in relation to eastern Europe.
Mr Delors will chair a Commission brainstorming session on March 23, with
several new ideas under review. They include:
An end to export subsidies for EU farmers sending produce into eastern
Europe. In a little-noticed action, the Commission agreed temporarily to
stop export restitutions for apples entering the Czech Republic this year.
But officials say more needs to be done to prevent highly competitive
western farmers wiping out east European agriculture. An overhaul of the
Phare aid programme, which has pumped around Ecu1bn (Pounds 750m) of
technical aid into eastern Europe over the past four years. Officials say
aid needs to be channelled into infrastructure spending, more on the lines
of the EU's own 'structural funds' budget.
A drive to persuade the former communist countries to copy EU competition
law and harmonise regulations. A new 'competition area' could defuse
disputes over state aid in eastern Europe, reducing the risk of the EU
invoking anti-dumping actions.
Although welcome, these moves may not satisfy the east Europeans,
particularly Poland and Hungary. Hungary last week signalled that it intends
to apply for formal membership next month with the goal of opening
negotiations in 1996-97.
Brussels battles to find fish formula, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940307

