FT942-15359

FT  15 APR 94 / Finger points at banks after Procter's gamble: Tracy
Corrigan looks at the impact of a threat to sue over swap losses


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


A new dimension has been added to the range of risks associated with trading
derivative instruments, already the source of sleepless nights for
regulators, intermediaries and their clients.
Earlier this week, Procter & Gamble, the US consumer products group,
threatened to take legal action against Bankers Trust over losses it
incurred on interest rate swaps marketed by the bank. In the wake of a
Dollars 100m (Pounds 68m) after-tax charge in the company's first-quarter
results, this has prompted concern among banks that they could be vulnerable
to a new type of legal risk: litigation by companies which have lost money
on complex derivative instruments such as swaps and options.
The grounds for such an action are unclear, however, and Procter & Gamble
has declined to expand on its chairman's statement that: 'We are seriously
considering our legal options relative to Bankers Trust.'
One American lawyer said: 'The obvious difficulty for P&G is that in theory
they are a sophisticated user, not a widow or orphan. But it may be that
certain representations were made by Bankers Trust, perhaps some kind of
undertaking to help manage the risk.'
Bankers Trust, however, claims it 'formally recommended that Procter &
Gamble limit its risk by unwinding all or part of the transactions. Senior
officials rejected these recommendations.'
But one corporate treasurer said he was puzzled by P&G's use of 'geared'
swaps, which are more risky than normal swaps. 'Why did Bankers Trust sell
them this sort of product?' he wondered, noting that it was an unusual type
of instrument for a company to use.
Whether or not any action goes ahead, the incident has raised the issue of
how much hand-holding a bank should do.
'They are obliged to inform companies of the effect of changing market
conditions, but not obliged to reveal complex formulae, because that is
proprietary information,' according to Ms Maureen Erasmus, a partner of
Cooper & Lybrand's global risk management practice.
She points out that many companies have lost money on derivatives because
they have failed to take account of the tax implications. While this may not
seem to be a bank's responsibility, some derivatives are specifically
marketed for tax purposes.
The fact is that law on derivatives is a rather grey area, precisely because
the rapid growth of the market has outstripped the development of a legal
framework.
'I would have not have thought there was any basis to sue where
sophisticated grown- up companies are involved,' said Mr Alan Newton,
partner and head of derivatives at Freshfields, a London law firm. 'I think
it would be a very difficult argument to get off the ground, unless the
financial institution had some sort of advisory role. It wouldn't normally
be the case that the intermediary has any obligation to explain risk.'
However, in the US, where companies tend to be more litigious a number of
cases have been brought. City Colleges of Chicago has filed a suit against
National Western Life Insurance's broker-dealer unit, alleging it wrongfully
sold the college system Dollars 100m of collateralised mortgage obligations
(CMOS), risky securities which it alleges were unsuitable for its investment
portfolio. And Marion Merrell Dow, this week filed a lawsuit against fund
manager David Askin, alleging improper handling of its investments.
However, in these cases the claimants can invoke federal securities law,
which does not cover swaps because they are privately negotiated contracts.
The Procter & Gamble move has awakened painful memories for London bankers
of the UK local authorities swaps debacle in the 1980s, which left banks
facing losses of Pounds 600m when councils were found to have acted outside
their powers in using these instruments. Some banks were also criticised for
encouraging councils to take highly speculative positions.
Mr Geoffrey Isaac, chairman of MTM Partnership, which advises international
companies on treasury management, says as a result, 'there has been a lot of
tightening in the way these things are marketed'.
Whether or not Bankers Trust is sued, the crux of the matter - as in
virtually every case of large corporate losses, from Allied Lyons' Pounds
150m to Metallgesellschaft's roughly Dollars 1bn - is that internal controls
were broken. Procter & Gamble has already admitted that the policies and
procedures governing the control of swaps 'simply weren't followed in these
two isolated swaps'.
While this admission may be enough to scupper any potential action, it could
still spark further attempts to gain redress for what can be painful losses.
'It certainly has the potential to become a growing area of litigation
because of the size of the losses and the reliance that clients may be
putting on the expertise of financial intermediaries,' said Mr Thomas
Siebens, a partner at Milbank Tweed Hadley and McCloy, the US law firm.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940415

