FT942-15946

FT  13 APR 94 / Germans close in on Lancer Boss


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Jungheinrich, the Hamburg-based lift-truck producer at the centre of the row
over the Lancer Boss receivership, said yesterday it wanted to buy both the
British and German parts of its smaller Bedfordshire-based rival.
In a statement clarifying the company's position, Jungheinrich said it was
reiterating its interest in the British part of the Lancer Boss Group and
would shortly hold discussions with Grant Thornton, the UK receivers.
The latest twist in the saga puts the German company in a strong position to
buy the last big UK-owned producer of lift trucks.
It could also defuse the row over the alleged 'stitch-up' of Lancer Boss by
German banks, as the rump of the UK group would be preserved. Jungheinrich
has already made contact with the administrator of Steinbock Boss, from
which German banks withdrew their support last week, prompting the UK
receivership.
Mr Klaus Schenk, managing director of Manchester-based Jungheinrich (GB),
said it was 'very much likely' that manufacturing at Lancer Boss's Leighton
Buzzard sites would be preserved if it bought Lancer Boss. He said the
German company had been negotiating a takeover of the entire Lancer Boss
group for months. But the German banking group for Steinbock Boss lost
patience with the slow progress of negotiations, he said, and withdrew
banking facilities from the German unit.
Mr Schenk would not say why the negotiations became bogged down, but
observers believe Sir Neville Bowman-Shaw, joint-owner and former chairman
of the UK company, may have been holding out for too high a price.
Mr Schenk admitted that Jungheinrich's statement on Monday, in which it
referred only to negotiations over the future of Steinbock Boss, may have
created 'slightly the wrong impression'. In fact, he said, Jungheinrich only
considered a bid for Steinbock Boss alone after the Moosburg-based company
was put into administration on Friday.
Jungheinrich will restart negotiations over the UK side of Lancer Boss
shortly, and Mr Allan Griffiths - the Grant Thornton partner who with his
colleague Mr Scott Barnes is administrative receiver for Lancer Boss in the
UK - was in contact with the Hamburg company last night.
Jungheinrich will effectively be conducting twin negotiations with the
German administrator and the UK receivers. Such an arrangement could prove
attractive for Grant Thornton, as Mr Griffiths said on Monday that Lancer
Boss was worth more if the UK and German sides were sold together, and is
hoping to co-operate with the German administrator to achieve this.
Editorial Comment, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940413

