FT941-5510

FT  05 MAR 94 / Fashion: Art of wearing very little - In our series on dress
codes around the world, FT writers go to the beach and find beautiful
Americans, freezing Germans and lumpy Brits


   By FT writers


TOKYO
MICHIYO NAKAMOTO
On the beach, young Japanese feel they have a freer hand in creating their
own image than they do elsewhere.
On Japanese beaches, and in Hawaii, young Japanese men and women can be seen
in swimwear of all styles and colours. Anything goes, from tight, black,
macho-man trunks to loose-fitting cut-offs in bright colours, for the men.
But increasingly, younger Japanese men are developing a clear taste for
loose-fitting clothes in bright colours that are the trademark of
Californian skateboarders. Surfer culture is also a strong influence on
young Japanese who can often be seen in mid-winter bobbing up and down on
the miserable waves like penguins trying to reach the shore.
The style favoured by many attached to the beach consists of a T-shirt about
five times too large, and very baggy cut-off shorts, often in a loud,
psychedelic design. Socks must also be longish, loose and, more often than
not, in shocking pink or fluorescent orange.
Footwear tends towards the heavy-duty trainer or mountain-climbing shoe.
Bangles, earrings and other accessories reminiscent of the hippy style in
the 1960s are also in vogue.
The popularity of Brazilian footballers playing in Japanese professional
teams has started a fad for colourfully woven wristbands called 'missanga'
or promise rings.
Fashion on the beach is just as varied and adventurous for the women, who
wear everything from leotards, cut to mid-hip, to swimsuits complete with
frilly skirt and bathing cap. G-strings and nudity, however, are definitely
out.
Japanese women do not seem to feel the same need to advertise designers on
the beach as they do in town.
The only names that speak loudly on the beach are Elle, after the French
fashion magazine, which can be seen on everything from bathing suits to
towels to thongs, and, usually much more discreetly, Moschino.
FRANKFURT
CHRISTOPHER PARKES
In our series on dress codes around the world, FT writers go to the beach
and find beautiful Americans, freezing Germans and lumpy Brits
The pictures on German fashion pages suggest that a slender young man
Nureyev-ing through the surf in an up-to-the-minute version of a Betty
Grable swimming costume is the apogee of unisexiness. The reality on the
windswept beaches of the Baltic, where the sea is very cold, is less
impressive. As a consequence, high-fashion swimwear is not at all common.
In spite of their well-deserved international reputation as beachwear
fashion snobs, this is a place where many Germans go and leave their peacock
tendencies at home with the cat. The beaches are fine and spacious, dotted
with clumps of windbreaks, and populated in the main by people intent on
having a bracing, healthy time.
They are places for extremists. For many, a Baltic holiday is preferably
spent bundled up in woollies, contemplating supper while patrolling the
shallows in bare legs and knobbly rubber bathroom shoes.
In spite of the chill breezes others eschew any bodily covering apart from
neatly trimmed hairy bits. They warm up by burrowing into shared foxholes
where they lie low, out of the wind, tanning parts other holidays cannot
reach. The observer or the voyeur can often detect their hidey-holes from
afar by the presence of a plume of smoke from a fire or barbecue.
Otherwise look out for the most extravagant of beach accessories: an
all-terrain buggy or Jeep. It will be draped with garish wet suits and
sailboards, and parked next to a makeshift rig of two poles set 20ft apart
and joined at the tops by string.
This is a clear warning for the squeamish to keep at a safe distance. Beach
volleyball played by teams dressed only in dabs of thick white sun-screen is
not a pretty sight.
PARIS
ALICE RAWSTHORN
In our series on dress codes around the world, FT writers go to the beach
and find beautiful Americans, freezing Germans and lumpy Brits
Anyone who wants to know how the French dress on the beach need look no
further than the fun-filled pages of Paris-Match magazine and the inevitable
pictures of the Monaco princesses, the elegant Caroline and her wayward
little sister, Stephanie.
Caroline, the uncrowned queen of the bon chic bon genre set, embodies the
chic side of Gallic beach style. Her trademarks are a series of sporty but
stylish swimsuits in black or white, a light tan, a hint of discreet gold
jewellery and little gold-rimmed shades, the 1990s successors to the Ray-Ban
Wayfarers she sported in the 1980s.
Then there is her entourage - her three exceptionally cute children, plus
assorted, but equally decorative, hangers-on, and Vincent Lindon, the
attractive actor she usually has in tow.
The children are as nattily dressed as their mother. The two boys race
around in bright bermuda shorts. Charlotte, the little girl, favours a
series of pastel pink swimsuits with co-ordinating water-wings. Lindon
completes the scene in an adult version of the boys' bermudas and little
gold-rimmed glasses, just like Caroline's.
Stephanie paints a very different picture - on and off the beach. She
typifies the other side of Cote d'Azur style, as the epitome of the
Eurotrash look.
If Stephanie wears anything at all on the beach, it will be a
brightly-coloured, badly cut swimsuit that shows too much flesh, or a little
bikini emblazoned with fluorescent swirls. Daniel, her former bodyguard and
now the father of her baby son, struts around in tight-fitting trunks of a
similarly lurid hue.
He and his girlfriend even share the same taste in beach accessories. Excess
is the name of their game.
They like lots of jewellery - gold chains for Stephanie, a medallion for her
man - together with deep-fried tans and his 'n' her's Ray-Ban Wayfarers: the
sort of shades that Stephanie's elegant elder sister discarded years ago.
NEW YORK
PATRICK HARVERSON
In our series on dress codes around the world, FT writers go to the beach
and find beautiful Americans, freezing Germans and lumpy Brits
New Yorkers love the nearby beaches of Long Island, New Jersey and
Connecticut, but not just because they offer a welcome respite from car
fumes, crowded streets and humid summer days of 90-degrees heat.
Beaches are also popular because they offer a rare opportunity to disrobe
and display. Off come shirts, blouses, skirts and trousers and out come flat
stomachs, trim thighs, firm pecs and tight bums. All that time spent on the
stairmaster at the Health & Racquet or the Atrium, or under a Park Avenue
plastic surgeon's knife, has to pay off somewhere. Where better than on the
beach.
Thus, when it comes to beach wear, body-conscious New Yorkers prefer
fashions that show off their gorgeous physiques to best effect. Less,
however, is not necessarily best in this respect. The shoelace-thin thong so
beloved of Californian or Mediterranean beaches is definitely not for New
Yorkers.
For women, swimsuits are preferable to two-pieces, unless it is something
retro such as a bronze bandeau-topped Calvin Klein bikini or a ruffle white
bikini by Norma Kamali - you know, the Hollywood starlet look. For
swimsuits, anything by Ralph Lauren is popular, as are the more eccentric
designs by the likes of Gottex and Trulo.
Life is less complicated for men who want to flash their flesh, and
thankfully New Yorkers are extremely unfussy in this department - monotone
white, black and blue trunks look best with the Johnny Weismuller body. For
the truly cool, however, the idea is to look as active and sporty as
possible, which is why so many men prance about on the beach in bike pants
worn under basketball shorts.
For those of us less Adonis-like in form, there is refuge to be found in the
perennially popular baggy shorts and T-shirt. It doesn't matter who designed
it, it just has to be wide, long and very, very loose - perfect cover for
the imperfect form.
LONDON
BRENDA POLAN
In our series on dress codes around the world, FT writers go to the beach
and find beautiful Americans, freezing Germans and lumpy Brits
Quite justifiably, most Britons do not believe in beachwear. They may have
moved on from the picture postcard cliche of rolled up trouser legs and
corner-knotted hanky, skirt bunched into knickers and blouse untucked, but
not by much.
Even the smartest and most hedonistic of young Britons are as puritanical as
their pragmatic elders in this respect. For an annual holiday of two weeks,
special clothes are hardly a sound investment.
Certainly, should it ever be made, it is not an investment which can be
repeated too often. Thus a British couple is instantly identifiable on any
of the beaches of the world. She is the one who has managed to defeat
DuPont. Victim of salt water, sun, detergent and age, the Lycra in her
10-year-old bikini has long since given up its claim to elasticity.
Unlike the Italians under the next umbrella whose brightly coloured,
ever-changing wardrobe of matching pareos, shorts, shirts, robes, leggings
and sculpted swimsuits, she deems flashy and ridiculous, she arrives at the
beach each morning in the same faded denim skirt or wrinkled leggings, the
same baggy, once-glittery T-shirt or limp singlet. She wants to be sure her
nice new clothes, the ones she is going to wear to do the market or hit the
disco, do not smell of sun tan oil.
Her consort is even warier. He is wearing his favourite baggy chinos, the
ones in which he gets under the car every Sunday morning, topped by his
favourite shapeless, colourless T-shirt, the one with the grease stain which
won't quite come out.
When he strips, he reveals saggy knee-length swimmers luridly patterned in
shades of purple, lime green and orange and secured perilously low on his
hips by a washing-machine-abused whitish cord. He is proud of the figure he
cuts in these low-crotched drawers. He actually gave up his ancient posing
pouch back in 1989 when everyone in Marbella was wearing long shorts and a
Swedish girl he met remarked on how sexy the holidaying Frenchmen looked in
them.
Both wear cheap, witty straw hats from the local market above their RayBans.
They will take them home to join the dozens already cluttering the hall
cupboard but they won't pack them for their next holiday. They like buying
new ones too much.
The same goes for footwear. He, of course, would be quite happy to wear his
trainers but the plastic jelly sandals in the market were too silly and too
cheap to resist. She, of course, always brings an extra carry-all to
accommodate her inevitable street-market purchase of 18 or so pairs of
brightly coloured shoes which look such fun in the sun and so tatty by grey
northern light.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940305

