FT941-3497

FT  16 MAR 94 / Mail order boosts retail sales


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


Large supermarkets and mail order companies were the principal beneficiaries
of February's growth in retail sales, the Confederation of British Industry
said yesterday.
Its distributive trades survey showed that retailers with only one shop
reported a small annual decline in volumes. The survey reports the views of
companies as a balance of those reporting favourable conditions against
those reporting unfavourable conditions. It also compiles a balance of
expectations of conditions three months ahead.
Growth was particularly strong for mail order companies. A balance of 70 per
cent reported that sales were up on a year ago, compared with a balance of 4
per cent in January. Apart from mail order companies, shops of all sizes
reported that sales were well below normal for the time of year.
Motor traders continued to do particularly well. Their sales increased at
the strongest rate since August 1988, with the exception of January. As
stocks have been run down, orders placed with suppliers grew at their
fastest rate for over five years. But in line with the rapid sales growth,
prices increased more markedly than at any time since May 1991.
On the retail side, the survey indicated that sales were still well up on a
year before for grocers including supermarkets. But butchers, bakers and
greengrocers reported a drop in volumes compared with a year before.
Sales of furniture, carpets, clothing, hardware and DIY goods grew
moderately compared with a year before, while chemists reported their first
year-on-year fall in sales since March last year.
The survey, conducted between February 15 and March 2, covered 15,000
outlets including wholesalers, retailers and motor traders. It showed that
wholesalers' sales volumes increased in the year to February at the highest
rate since last October. Orders placed with suppliers also rose on an annual
basis in February, but at the slowest rate for six months.
On the jobs front, the survey showed that the trend towards part-time
employment in retailing continues, with these jobs being created at the
fastest rate for over three years. Full-time employment, meanwhile,
continues to fall. Business optimism about the next three months was up in
February for the fifth successive survey. But the increase was the smallest
for a year.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940316

