FT942-16253

FT  12 APR 94 / German tangle may delay sale of Lancer Boss


   By ANDREW BAXTER and ANDREW JACK


The receiver of Lancer Boss, the last leading UK-owned producer of lift
trucks, warned yesterday that efforts to sell the group as a going concern
might be delayed if he could not get control of the company's important
German operations.
Mr Allan Griffiths, a partner in Grant Thornton, the accountants, said two
prospective UK purchasers of Lancer Boss had contacted him, but expressed
his concern that Steinbock Boss, the UK company's struggling German unit,
was in the hands of a German administrator.
Mr Griffiths and Mr Scott Barnes, his colleague, were appointed
administrative receivers for Lancer Boss Group, the UK holding company, and
certain UK subsidiaries on Friday.
Grant Thornton is now urgently seeking to establish links with the Munich
lawyer who has been named as German administrator to establish what powers
he has to sell Steinbock Boss. Mr Peter Fletcher, of Grant Thornton, was due
to fly out last night to meet the lawyer. The UK receivers are keen to
co-operate with their German counterpart because Mr Griffiths believes the
group is worth more if the UK and German operations are sold as one unit. He
is expecting inquiries from prospective foreign purchasers.
He admitted that it was an 'extremely unusual' situation for a UK receiver
not to have full control of a company.
It emerged yesterday that the German banking group had withdrawn support
from Steinbock Boss after the company's directors vetoed a deal under which
Jungheinrich, the Hamburg-based lift truck producer, would have bought the
Moosburg-based company.
It is understood that the German banks strongly backed the deal, which would
have provided a domestic solution to Steinbock Bock's troubles and created a
new force in the industry. Jungheinrich, which claims to be the world's
third-largest lift truck maker and the European leader in battery-powered
vehicles, said it had been negotiating with Lancer Boss over Steinbock for
some time.
In an usually forthright statement for a German company, it said it was
'astonished' that the British group had not responded to its proposals and
that the insolvency of Steinbock had been 'accepted'.
Jungheinrich indicated that it hoped to reach an agreement for the
acquisition of Steinbock Boss from the liquidators some time this week. That
would thwart Mr Griffiths' plan to sell the group in one piece.
The German company was also interested in an Austrian subsidiary.
Receiver's legal tangle, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940412

