FT944-11066

FT  08 NOV 94 / The competency count


   By JOE ROGALY


Several competent ministers serve in Mr John Major's cabinet. One or two
would be classed in any administration as, shall we say, not bad. We should
acknowledge these hidden pearls. Better that than focus yet again on
dispiriting accounts of internal squabbles in the Conservative party, or
zoom in once more on tales of malfeasance.
From time to time those of us whose task it is to hurl brickbats and squashy
tomatoes at the administration should take a breather, contemplate the half
of the glass that is full, consider the parts of the egg that are good,
temper outrage with a sense of proportion, savour the unfamiliar experience
of recognising that a surprising number of departments of state are properly
managed.
Two such are the Foreign Office and the Treasury. The weight added to Mr
Major's team by the presence within it of Mr Douglas Hurd will be measured
by the loss felt when he departs. I am not about to predict the foreign
secretary's resignation, either imminently or, as is widely supposed, next
July. Others have made such a forecast in the midst of each of the last four
summers. Let us take him to be there until we learn otherwise. We are
well-served while he is in place.
This is not to say that Mr Hurd is without flaw. I do not agree with every
detail of his policies, least of all in Bosnia, but then I do not have
responsibility for soldiers' lives. Again, he and the chancellor have
initialled the prime minister's intra-party concordat on the European Union.
This sticking-plaster agreement owes more to fear of Tory Eurosceptics than
it does to adherence to heart-of-Europe principles. Thus it may be said that
Mr Hurd has contributed more gravitas than strategic vision to the
government's handling of European affairs. Yet, warts and all, the foreign
secretary is an undoubted asset.
So is the chancellor. Mr Kenneth Clarke has had the humility, and the sense,
to place monetary policy under the watchful eye of the governor of the Bank
of England. By publishing the minutes of their meetings he has given Mr
Eddie George the quasi-independent power to move interest rates. It is now
virtually impossible for the prime minister to override advice given by the
chancellor and the governor in combination.
As to fiscal policy, Mr Clarke's control over public spending is tighter
than was Mr Major's when the latter was chancellor, while Mr Clarke's taxes
are even higher than were Mr Norman Lamont's. The Clarke strategy is more
likely than any other to restore public confidence in the Conservatives as
the party of 'sound money'. It just might put the chancellor in a position
to cut taxes before the next election; failing that he can announce
reductions that he proposes to phase in after the voting is over.
A perhaps more surprising candidate for our necessarily brief order-of-merit
list is Mr Peter Lilley. He is famous for being a right-winger, a
Eurosceptic who spoke foolishly about foreigners at the 1993 party
conference and a purveyor of embarrassingly bad verse. Yet Mr Lilley is a
remarkably successful departmental minister. He acknowledges that social
security, for which he is responsible, is here to stay and seeks merely to
ensure that its cost - some Pounds 85bn a year - does not grow more rapidly
than the national income. He has made a series of changes the more radical
of which will not take effect until well into the next century.
Thus invalidity benefit, the cost of which was growing rapidly, has been
replaced by the tightly-defined incapacity benefit, and statutory sick pay
by an obligation on employers. Pensions legislation due to be announced in
the Queen's speech next week will equalise the pensionable age for men and
women at 65, although the full effect will not be felt for a quarter of a
century. The new Job Seekers' allowance, an item in the same speech, moves
Britain a step further towards US-style workfare.
Whatever Labour may say about harshness, these measures are in the spirit of
the recent report of the left's social justice commission. No future
government is likely to reverse them. Mr Lilley's calculation is that little
will be saved immediately, but that the social security budget will be
reduced by the equivalent of some Pounds 3bn in today's money by the year
2000 and four times that by 2050. The social security secretary does not
radiate pure sunshine. He has not discovered how to reprogram the troubled
child support agency. His promised legislation on rights for the disabled, a
substitute for a private bill the government infamously killed off, has yet
to appear. Yet his principal sins are of omission; what he has done has been
done well.
The same may be said of the new secretary for education, Mrs Gillian
Shephard, although she has not been long enough in the post for a proper
assessment to be made. Her task is to calm the teachers down, following six
turbulent years during which the reforms envisaged in the 1988 education act
have met with increasingly stiff resistance from the teaching unions.
She has made a good start. A former schools inspector and local education
committee chairman, Mrs Shephard is an engaging, down-to-earth minister who
deploys charm and sympathy with practised ease.
Everything she has said so far has been positive. She has accepted, in full,
Sir Ron Dearing's revision of the national curriculum, spoken of
'specialist' rather than 'selective' schools, cancelled her predecessor's
plans to bombard parents with government propaganda leaflets, set in train a
review of higher education, and demanded that children be taught the correct
use of written and spoken English.
I suspect that she is less than wholly enthusiastic about state schools
opting out from local authority control. Her barrage of common-sense is now
being trained on the National Union of Teachers, which has yet to call off
its obstruction of testing in schools.
Finally, note Sir Patrick Mayhew, a successful secretary for Northern
Ireland. His strategy was determined for him by others, notably Mr Major and
his Irish counterpart, but that does not detract from Sir Patrick's own
record. He was there when the shooting stopped. He has not botched his job.
He deserves the credit.
There is no space for the rest of the government. That is not to be taken as
an indictment of all of it. Perish the thought.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

941108

