FT942-16146

FT  12 APR 94 / Arts: My Night with Reg - Theatre


   By DAVID MURRAY


The title of Kevin Elyot's new play at the Royal Court's Theatre Upstairs is
a barbed joke, for as it turns out almost everybody here has had a night
with Reg (and enjoyed it thoroughly). Reg has been putting himself about
more than his globe-hopping art-dealer lover Daniel ever twigged. But we
never meet him: he misses Guy's re-decoration party in scene 1, and by scene
2 he is dead (Aids, of course). Guy's gaggle of gay friends gather there
again for Reg's wake, some with related worries in their minds.
Two years on, the third and last scene is sadder still; but Elyot's dialogue
never goes flabby, always keeps its cool focus and sympathetic wit. This
dark comedy is humane, skilfully economical. Except for young Eric from
Lancashire, barman at the local gay pub, Elyot's characters are all some way
into middle age, unharried and quite well settled, if variably
well-preserved.
As gay plays go, that makes My Night with Reg seem uncommonly fresh. I
strove dutifully to apply the standard test: if all the relationships were
heterosexual instead, would it deliver anything like the same frissons? The
test was useless, because Elyot's people are too thoroughly rooted in their
sexual milieu to be transposable. These are sensible, independent grown-ups
with real-life jobs. They don't go in for luvvie-talk, bitchery or campery;
they inhabit no pretend 'special' world that would set them apart.
That is what provides the frisson. Only their effusive hugs and kisses when
saying hello or goodbye, and their avid gossip about each other's love
lives, stretch the norms of ordinary male conviviality. Even nice,
houseproud, frustrated Guy, who is something in advertising, counts as a
camp 'stereotype' - exquisitely self-deprecating as rendered by David Bamber
 -merely in the sense that there really are a lot of Guys about.
As promiscuous old chums who dazzled him at university, John Sessions plays
a flamboyant Daniel and Anthony Calf a plausible public-school hero. Not
only does he wield a terrific golden-boy smile, but he sustains it through
the entire first scene with superhuman stamina.
They both come into their own near the end, with an intimate grief which
they prefer not to admit sharing.
For cross-class contrast, we have the odd couple of Bernie (Roger Frost) -
prissy, unattractive and deeply boring - and his grizzled partner Bennie
(Kenneth Macdonald), a randy bus-driver. The maturing of young Eric (Joe
Duttine) scene by scene, from hired handyman to welcome guest to ambitious
gay publican, makes a bright thread, not least because all these new friends
strike him as irretrievably old. About such discomfiting facts of life
Elyot's play is unblinkingly fair and very funny.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940412

