FT943-12838

FT  22 JUL 94 / British & Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - The
pyramid structure that got out of control / Atlantic's rise


   By SIMON DAVIES


John Gunn built British & Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
The most extraordinary feature of the collapse of Atlantic Computers was
that it did not happen earlier.
Founded in 1975 by two computer industry colleagues, it grew into a Pounds
500m business within 12 years, but the commercial core of the business was
fundamentally rotten from the start.
By the time British & Commonwealth bought into Atlantic for Pounds 408m in
1988, Mr Vernon Davies had long lost interest in the business and the more
aggressive Mr John Foulston had been killed in a motor racing crash.
But the pyramid sale structure was out of control and could only be propped
up by some highly questionable accounting policies, and an obsessive
emphasis on increasing the level of sales, at any cost.
One of the more disturbing details to emerge from yesterday's report is the
extent to which profits were propped up by 'imprudent' accounting between
1983 and 1988, the inspectors conclude.
Atlantic reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 127.6m. If prudent policies had
been followed, it would not have been able to report 'any significant
profits during that period'.
Atlantic was formed after Mr Foulston and Mr Davies spotted a niche in what
was the boom sector of the latter half of the 1970s - computer leasing.
The two men had worked together at Memorex UK for four years, and initially
set up a consultancy and peripherals supplier, but then moved into leasing.
At the time, lessors of substantial computing systems were faced with the
choice of long-term leases, which provided cheap finance, but offered no
ability to upgrade during a period of rapid technological change. The
alternative was a far more expensive short-term lease.
Atlantic devised the Flexlease. As the report states: 'the raison d'etre of
Flexlease was the aversion of both lessors and lessees to the risks inherent
in residual investments in computers, and the apparent success of Flexlease
lay in the fact that Atlantic was prepared to assume those risks.'
The flaw to this equation was that, whether or not it was actually aware of
the level of its risks, it certainly never revealed them, and its
liabilities snowballed.
The man in control of the group was undoubtedly Mr Foulston. He was
nominally in charge of the sales side of the business, but he increasingly
dominated its entire strategy.
Mr Len Jagger and Mr Ian Skipper, the businessmen who took a 60 per cent
stake in Atlantic in June 1982, told the inspectors that their main
consideration was 'the energy, ambition and determination' of Mr Foulston.
Mr Davies handled company finances, despite having a sales rather than
accounting background, but despite being in the shadow of his powerful
partner, the report concludes that both men kept a tight control over the
business.
On the face of it, they were immensely successful. The company made profits
of Pounds 1.2m, rising to more than Pounds 5m by 1983. The two men cashed in
Pounds 2m from the share sale to Messrs Jagger and Skipper in 1982, and
retained extremely valuable stakes in the company.
In reality, however, the business was profitable only in so far as it
reported its maximum potential profits without recognising any of its
substantial liabilities.
When Atlantic leased out a computer system, it booked a profit on the
difference between the cost of the system and the sale price to the finance
company that lent the money.
There was no acknowledgement of the liabilities inherent in the Flexlease,
which enabled lessors either to swap the leased computer system for another
after three years (a flex), or to terminate the lease after five years (a
walk), or both.
The report estimates that the company's 'Walk' liabilities amounted to
Pounds 160m by early 1989.
The extent of its problems was not entirely hidden at the time. Competitors
had pointed out the flaws, and a report by Price Waterhouse at the time of
the 1982 buy-out by Mr Skipper and Mr Jagger raised numerous concerns over
the nature of the leases.
One year later, the company was launching a full London flotation valuing it
at Pounds 55.2m. The offer was 1.9 times subscribed.
The prospectus was extremely misleading. The inspectors claim that Mr Davies
and Mr Foulston 'deliberately deceived' the financial advisers as to the
prevalence of 'Walk' options.
They claimed these covered about 5 per cent of Atlantic's leases, when the
actual figure is estimated at between 60 and 90 per cent. The balance sheet
contained no provisions for any of its break-options.
In addition, Atlantic had introduced a critical, but highly questionable,
accounting policy towards these leases.
At the end of the lease period, Atlantic had an option to take the computer
equipment for a nominal sum.
It attached a net present value to that option, based on current estimates,
and not only wrote that value into its balance sheet at the time the lease
was signed, but recognised it as a profit.
The unpredictability of computer resale values should not have surprised
Atlantic, since it had taken a Pounds 966,000 provision against stock
write-downs on obsolete IBM models - this was taken in its 1980 results, and
helped emphasise a trend of rising profits.
The recognising of the residual value on these leasing deals was of
fundamental importance to Atlantic's balance sheet. It accounted for 60 per
cent of 1981 profits and 74 per cent of those in 1982, building an earnings
base on very uncertain foundations.
The nature of Atlantic's potential liabilities, from the Flex and Walk
elements of its leases, put immense pressure on Atlantic to increase sales,
and encouraged by Mr Foulston, sales staff took increasing risks to secure a
deal.
Mr Davies had sold Pounds 3.9m of his shares in the flotation, and he
eventually sold out of the business in May 1986 for a further Pounds 13m.
Mr Foulston became increasingly dominant, but in a more competitive market,
staff were offering deals that were described as suicidal in terms of their
potential liabilities, but which propped up short-term earnings.
However, by 1987, Mr Foulston's interest in motor racing was taking up more
of his time - he owned 70 per cent of Brands Hatch Leisure, which operated
the racing track.
When he died in a motor racing accident in September that year, there was no
management team in place that could replace him. It was only a matter of
time before the inherent flaw in his Flexlease destroyed the company.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940722

