FT942-14542

FT  20 APR 94 / Blair urges action to curb crime


   By DAVID OWEN


Labour yesterday called for urgent action to develop a national crime
prevention strategy as the party tried to take some credit for the first
fall for five years in the recorded crime statistics for England and Wales.
With crime providing the main battleground for yesterday's local election
campaigning, Mr Tony Blair, shadow home secretary, said one explanation for
the fall was the new approach to crime prevention being pioneered by some
police services and local authorities.
Mr Blair gave examples of startling reductions in the level of crime in a
number of Labour-controlled areas where the new approach had been tried and
he urged ministers to 'get behind this strategy and enable it to be spread
across the country'.
Under the new approach, the police became 'not just a law enforcement
agency, but a key element of prevention,' he said.
Mr Blair joined Mr David Maclean, Home Office minister, in emphasising that
yesterday's 1 per cent fall in recorded crime levels was no cause for
complacency.
The crime figures remained unacceptably high, Mr Blair said. The true level
of crime was at least three times that of recorded crime. The increase in
violent crime and robberies was especially alarming.
Yesterday's figures showed that the number of notifiable offences recorded
last year by police in England and Wales fell to 5.53m from 5.59m in 1992.
This followed increases of 16 per cent in 1991 and 6 per cent in 1992 and an
average annual rate of increase over the past decade of 5.5 per cent.
The overall figure masked a 4 per cent increase in violent crime and a rise
of 2 per cent in violence against the person.
The largest fall - 3.4 per cent - was in theft and handling of stolen goods.
Smaller reductions were recorded in fraud and forgery offences and car
crime.
Mr Maclean said the message from yesterday's figures was that there was hope
and that people were not condemned to see crime continually rising.
They showed the measures the government was taking were absolutely vital. He
was absolutely convinced the figures would have gone up rather than down if
additional police officers had not been recruited and other recent
law-and-order measures had not been implemented.
But Mr Maclean took pains to emphasise that ministers were still not
satisfied that enough had been done to deal with crime and criminals.
Mr Robert Maclennan, the Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman, welcomed
the fall but underlined the need to increase community policing 'in order to
turn this year's blip into next year's trend'.
Mr Blair urged the government to drop the 'disastrous' plans for
centralising policing contained in the police and magistrates' court bill.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940420

