FT942-15758

FT  14 APR 94 / Serbs promise end to Gorazde onslaught


   By BRUCE CLARK


Mr Vitaly Churkin, Russia's chief negotiator in fomer Yugoslavia, said
yesterday he had won a promise from the Bosnian Serbs that they would not
resume their onslaught against the Moslem enclave of Gorazde.
The pledge, made by Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, offered a
glimmer of hope that negotiations on the republic's future can now resume,
despite Serb fury over the recent air strikes by Nato.
However Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, maintained a hard-line
stance, saying that talks on Bosnia's future could not resume until
international sanctions against Serbia were lifted.
The West has been counting on Mr Milosevic, under intense pressure because
of the ruinous effect of sanctions on his country's economy, to use his
influence on his kinsmen in Bosnia to soften their stance.
In Bosnia, the Serbs continued to block the movement of United Nations
personnel, both civilian and military, and they renewed accusations that the
UN had sided with the Moslems by ordering air strikes last Sunday and
Monday.
However Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the UK defence secretary, said in New York last
night that despite the air strikes, the UN had not taken sides in Bosnia and
must not do so.
He appeared to acknowledge a danger that persistent recourse to air power
would put Nato in the position of a warring party, when he said:
'We must be alert to the consequences of air strikes, we must think through
where this activity is likely to lead and us, and prepared to manage our
future responses so that we get where we want to go.'
Mr Rifkind criticised the United States for failing to support the request
of General Sir Michael Rose, the UN commander in Bosnia, for extra
peace-keeping troops, and urged Washington to reconsider.
'We must not put ourselves in the situation where we lack the tools to carry
out the job,' Mr Rifkind said, calling the current US position 'difficult to
understand'. Mr Churkin, a deputy Russia foreign minister who helped to
mastermind last month's deal between the Croats and Moslems, is the now the
only international negotiator of any standing with whom the Serbs are
prepared to deal.
His renewed prominence suggest that for the second timethis year, Western
efforts to put pressure on the Serbs have perversely increased the
prominence of Russia, Serbia's traditional protector.
In Moscow, the foreign ministry called on all sides to desist from
provocative action around Gorazde, which was reported to be quiet yesterday
after two weeks of fighting which have claimed at least 200 lives.
Western officials said they believed the Serbs may have satisfied their
ambitions in Gorazde, having penetrated the town's southern outskirts and
captured Gradina mountain which overlooks the town.
The Serbs were now in a position of partial control over the town, similar
the position they occupied in Sarajevo.
However there is concern that even if the Serbs can be tempted back to the
negotiating table, the Moslems may resist peace talks unless the Serbs
withdraw.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940414

