FT943-12922

FT  22 JUL 94 / Gurus assess the master of soundbite


   By DIANE SUMMERS


Mr Tony Blair, say his close associates, is naturally telegenic - a quality
referred to frequently during his leadership campaign. While they deny he
has been tutored by the image consultants, the style counsellors themselves
have been watching his every move.
Ms Mary Spillane, European managing director of CMB Image Consultants, gives
Mr Blair high overall marks for presentation, although there are one or two
areas where he needs to brush up.
First, the plus points. Mr Blair is good at direct eye contact and has
'nice, friendly facial expressions,' she said.
Then there are several points which are also good and set him apart from
other politicians. For example, he does not have a double chin. 'He looks
fit and alive and young and vibrant,' said Ms Spillane.
He wears clothes that 'aren't an issue'. They are modern enough not to look
boring, she said, 'but they're not 'look at me, I'm a wild, crazy young
guy'.' The ties 'aren't full of too much personality. They don't take over
the interview.' She thinks Labour fell into the dazzling tie trap during the
last election campaign.
His appeal to women is not too overt. 'There's a twinkle in Blair's eye that
is flirtatious. However, he doesn't play that card so offensively that it
turns off your average macho bloke down the pub,' she added.
What she would like Mr Blair to do is get his teeth fixed - not serious
orthodontic work but some judicious filing to straighten them up.
He needs to 'clean up the hair between his eyebrows - he looks a little
grubby there,' and get his hair restyled to 'frame his face a bit better'.
His voice is good, although he can start to sound strident when he gets
excited.
Officials at Conservative Central Office have also been scrutinising Mr
Blair's performance. They see two clear weaknesses which they aim to
exploit.
First, Mr Blair is acknowledged by his opponents as the master of the
soundbite, giving him a clear advantage when it comes to the early evening
news bulletins. But they consider he will show a weakness on detail in
longer interviews and in sustained debate.
Second, his youth is seen as a double-edged sword. Certainly his opponents
recognise his vigour - but say he also looks a bit wet behind the ears. His
associates acknowledge the problem but say nature, exposure and the demands
of the job will take their toll. 'If he looks young and fresh now, in a
year's time he won't'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940722

