FT942-14927

FT  18 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Other Markets


ZURICH
A busy week is in prospect for the pharmaceutical sector. Ciba unveils
first-quarter sales figures today and Roche full-year results tomorrow.
Goldman Sachs expects 1993 net profits will be towards the top end of market
expectations, which are for a 18 - 30 per cent rise. It adds that its own
estimate of SFr2.39bn, which would represent a 24.6 per cent increase, may
well be exceeded by SFr50 - 60m. On Wednesday, Sandoz details 1993 figures
and announces first-quarter sales for the current year.
PARIS
Peugeot Citroen announces 1993 results on Thursday. Kleinwort Benson
forecasts a loss of about FFr1.6bn. But it expects the group to report
earnings of FFr1.57bn in 1994 as a result of its restructuring measures, the
success of its new models, notably the Xantia and the 306, and the slight
improvement expected in the French economy. It also expects the group to
continue to outperform the market in coming months.
The Euro Disney banks expect to finalise their FFr13bn rescue package to
salvage the troubled leisure group by the end of the week.
AMSTERDAM
Nedlloyd, the Dutch shipping and road haulage group which has been one of
the Dutch stock market's best performers in recent months,
reports full-year figures on Thursday. The group, which suffered a Fl 116m
loss at the half-way stage, said then that there would be a clear
improvement in the second half, although the figures would remain negative.
MILAN
Extension of the pre-opening session on the Milan bourse to 10.30am from the
current 10.00am takes effect from today, along with other measures agreed
last week in an attempt to ease pressure on the computer system, which has
struggled to cope with the recent flood of orders. The new regime includes
alterations to accepted bid/sell ranges for shares and rules on grouping of
share orders.
TOKYO
Concern over the political situation continues, although the view is growing
that there will be no great change in economic policy, whoever becomes the
next prime minister. Investors are more likely to focus on the yen and
fluctuating global markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940418

