FT941-3534

FT  16 MAR 94 / Small business role in job creation questioned


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


Small businesses have for years commanded the profound obeisance of
politicians and economists as the most fertile source of new jobs, and
ministers gathered in Detroit this week continued to pay homage.
But economists working under the aegis of the US Commerce Department's
Census Bureau have taken a swipe at the idea that small businesses create
more jobs than larger ones, in a new study examining the performance of
manufacturing industry from 1972 to 1988.
Economists Steven Davis, John Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh found that
although smaller companies created new jobs at a much faster rate than did
larger employers, they also destroyed jobs much more quickly.
Companies with fewer than 20 employees added an average of 16.5 per cent to
their workforces each year, the study showed, but they also destroyed an
average of 18.8 per cent of their jobs.
At the same time, companies with more than 50,000 employees created new jobs
averaging 6.3 per cent of their total workforces each year and destroyed 8
per cent on average.
'In a nutshell, net job creation behaviour in the US manufacturing sector
exhibits no strong or simple relationship to employer size,' the study says.
The Census Bureau economists also note that newly created jobs at small
manufacturing plants are much less likely to survive than new jobs at large
plants.
They complain of fallacious statistical presentations of the data on job
creation, suggesting that if a company drops in size below the cut-off point
for small businesses it can seem to increase employment in the small
business sector, even if it really represents a loss of jobs.
Since large companies account for most of manufacturing employment, they
also account for most of job creation and destruction. Small businesses, the
study shows, account for less than one fifth of job creation.
But from Mr Kenneth Clarke, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, to Mr
Paul Martin, Canadian finance minister, delegates in Detroit this week
hailed small businesses as the engine of job creation.
'There's an enormous amount of creative destruction in small business. I
think there's job loss in small business but there's also a lot of job
creation,' Mr Martin said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940316

