FT944-2827

FT  15 DEC 94 / Rebel Chechens face last stand: Capital's inhabitants
confront the military might of Moscow


   By JOHN LLOYD and STEVE LEVINE


   GROZNY


Time was running out for the beleaguered rebels of Chechnya yesterday as
Russian forces closed in on the outskirts of their capital.
As General Dzhokar Dudayev, the Chechen president, issued a defiant 'fight
to the death' appeal to his people in a pre-dawn televised address, the
inhabitants of Grozny found themselves caught up in the Russian advance.
Tamisha Mashidova heard the broadcast in the military hospital, where she
works as a ward sister and as an organiser of a movement called the National
Patriotic Society of Mothers and Sisters.
Later, as she went to collect other nurses from Pervomaisk, a Grozny suburb,
in a hospital minibus she saw lines of Russian tanks on a ridge above the
town. Two fighters circled overhead, then dived towards the minibus, firing
rockets, she said. Gilani Chasigov, a reporter from the local TV station,
and a Chechen fighter were hit, the fighter badly. As Ms Mashidova and her
colleagues loaded them into the bus to transfer them to the hospital, the
bombardment began.
On the main road out of Grozny to the west, at one of the many points where
Chechen men gather with nothing more than automatic rifles, a member of the
Confederation of Causasian Peoples said that he heard Gen Dudayev's appeal
as he went to his post.
Withholding his name but giving his rank as lieutenant, he said he was from
Dagestan, the neighbouring republic to Chechnya's east.
'I came in a week ago,' said the volunteer. 'Why? because I believe that the
Caucasian people live in one home. I already fought in Abkhazia against the
Georgians, I will fight here against the Russians. This is our common war.'
If the Russians enter Grozny then they will face a partisan war. 'A war for
the Caucusus,' he added.
Shirwani Bisultanov heard the president's broadcast because he could not
sleep. An advancing Russian column is just 30 km away from his village of
Alkhan Yurt, west of the capital.
He had spent the last few hours torn between his village and the frontline.
With two grenades tucked into his belt, he shouted his challenge to the
Russians: 'I never think of the future, Allah takes care of that. We have
been fighting the Russians for 300 years and here we go again.'

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941215

