FT943-13222

FT  20 JUL 94 / London Stock Exchange: Firmer close after an uncertain
trading session - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The UK stock market made a determined run at the Footsie 3,100 hurdle
yesterday but was restrained by caution in the British government bond
market ahead of the announcement of details of the impending auction of
gilt-edged securities. Confidence was helped by the latest retail business
survey from members of the Confederation of British Industry, which provided
an optimistic curtain-raiser to the official retail sales statistics for
June, due out this morning.
The FT-SE 100 Index closed a net 9.3 up at 3,091.3, having swayed between
3,096.2 and 3,072.6 during the course of an uncertain session. It was left
to the September futures contract on the Footsie to trade convincingly above
3,100 in the second half of the session.
Although the size and maturity of the gilt-edged stocks to be auctioned
satisfied the market, traders agreed that the chief focus remains the
prospects for testimony to Congress today by Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of
the Federal Reserve Board, and, probably more sharply, the meeting of the
Bundesbank policy council tomorrow.
There was little response from UK equities to the news that growth in German
M3 money supply had slowed down in June, although this news raised
confidence that interest rates in Germany will be allowed to continue to
fall.
Equities opened firmly and were then taken ahead strongly in the wake of
early gains in the stock index futures market. However, the market peaked
quickly, with investors preferring to take profits when Footsie 3,100 came
in view. Selling pressure was moderate, however, and traders pointed out
that, with the UK equity account system now consigned to history, there was
less reason to let share profits run ahead of this week's important
developments in Germany and the US. Most fund managers have achieved
significant trading profits over the past week and were content to take some
of them yesterday morning.
Shares fell back smartly but soon rallied and traded fairly evenly until
mid-afternoon. Firmness in the dollar, partly reflecting a narrowing in the
US-Japanese trade deficit and a steadier trend in UK gilts on the auction
announcement, helped share prices to edge ahead towards the close. The Dow
Industrial Average put on about three points in UK trading hours.
Second line stocks continued to make progress, indicating a firm underlying
tone in the stock market. At 3,574.4, the FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which
incorporates a range of second line and Footsie 100 issues, closed a further
14.1 higher on the day.
Trading volume increased to 691.4m shares from the 518m of the previous
session, with only about 54 per cent of the business taking place in
non-Footsie issues. On Monday, retail business in equities was worth Pounds
1.13bn, comfortably in line with the recovery in trading seen over the past
fortnight.
Dealers expressed satisfaction with the stock market's continued progress
this week, commenting that only the more sluggish trend in bonds appeared to
have curbed the advance in the Footsie. Trading statements, in particular
from the retail sector, bore out the indications from the CBI survey, which
reported the strongest monthly growth in retail sales recorded so far this
year, that economic recovery is making its presence felt at consumer level.
While opinions on the chances of a cut in key rates this week by the
Bundesbank remained mixed, worries that rates might be forced higher in the
UK have receded a little further into the future.
BZW, the UK investment bank, reiterated its reminder to clients of the
benefits for UK exporters of sterling's 8 per cent decline from its January
highs against the German currency.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

940720

