FT941-17058

FT  06 JAN 94 / Furore over Italy's new drugs regime may prompt changes


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


The Italian cabinet was meeting urgently last night to consider freezing or
substantially changing new rules on medicine sales that have caused
nationwide confusion.
Pharmaceutical companies welcomed the possibility that the legislation might
be altered. The companies have warned that the new rules, introduced at the
weekend, could have devastating effects on some manufacturers. Pharmacists
have also called for immediate action.
Under the original legislation the government's list of free or subsidised
medicines has been revised to cut spiralling medical costs as part of the
1994 budget. Hundreds of previously free drugs have been reclassified and
must now be paid for by customers.
There were angry scenes across the country at chemists' shops, hospitals and
surgeries, after the introduction of the rules on drugs sales.
Many companies, claiming that the changes were pushed through without
adequate consultation by the health ministry, have taken legal action.
The reclassification coincided with the introduction of much tougher
penalties on pharmacists dispensing drugs without prescriptions. Although
Italian law technically requires prescriptions for a wide range of drugs,
many can in fact be bought over the counter in pharmacies without a doctor's
authorisation.
The new rules are designed to bring Italian practice into line with European
Union regulations. The upshot, however, has been to create long queues at
chemists' shops, where patients unaware of the new rules have been turned
away. The Italian pharmacists' association has called for at least a
temporary freeze on the new penalties to allow patients and doctors more
time to adjust to the need for prescriptions.
Pharmacists have urged the government to authorise the use of faxed
prescriptions to reduce the need for return visits to doctors' surgeries.
They have also recommended that patients with chronic illnesses, such as
diabetes, should be given special identification cards, eliminating the need
for repeat prescriptions.
Government officials said yesterday that the new legislation gave drugs
companies the right to appeal, and the new list of approved medicines would
be re-examined if necessary.
On prescriptions, officials said revised rules would be issued soon
extending the range of medicines that could be bought without a doctor's
consent.
Italians choke on drugs regime Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940106

