FT944-6111

FT  30 NOV 94 / International Bonds: Strong retail demand for Dollars 300m
Walt Disney deal


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


Walt Disney made a rare and successful appearance in a busy eurobond market
yesterday, launching a Dollars 300m offering of three-year bonds which met
strong demand from European retail investors.
The issue, which was increased from Dollars 250m, was priced to yield 25
basis points over US Treasuries and offered a coupon of 8 per cent.
Lead manager Merrill Lynch said the bonds were bought by Benelux and Swiss
banks in particular and by some European institutional investors. However,
syndicate officials said they expected the bonds to end up in the hands of
European retail investors.
'It is the 8 per cent coupon that is driving the strength of retail demand
on this deal, even though the spread is aggressive,' an official at Merrill
Lynch said.
'The success of this issue shows that the retail market is currently in a
very healthy state,' he added.
Walt Disney launched a Y30bn offering in the Samurai market earlier this
year, he added.
With the sterling market in effect closed for the UK Budget, most eurobond
issuance yesterday was in dollar-denominated bonds.
The Republic of Austria launched a Dollars 400m offering of 10-year bonds
priced to yield 25 basis points over US Treasuries. Lead manager JP Morgan
said the issue met demand from institutional investors in Asia, the Middle
East and Europe.
Retail investors provided some demand, 'although they are still focused on
the two to five-year area,' a syndicate official said.
'Since the (US Federal Reserve) raised interest rates, there has been a
better bid in the 10-year sector,' a trader said. 'The rise was seen to be
anti-inflationary, which boosted the long-end of the euromarket. There is
now much more institutional money coming back into the 10-year area.'
Also in the dollar sector, the European Investment Bank launched its
expected two-tranche offering of five- and 10-year bonds.
The Dollars 300m tranche of five-year paper was priced to yield 7 basis
points over US Treasuries; the spread on the Dollars 300m tranche of 10-year
paper was 15 basis points over US Treasuries.
Lead manager Morgan Stanley said volatility in the US Treasury market
hampered initial placement of the bonds but it expected the offering to be
placed with investors over the coming days.
The five-year tranche was likely to be placed with retail investors in
Switzerland, Belgium and Asia, while the 10-year tranche would go to
institutional investors in the UK and Japan, Morgan Stanley said.

The Financial Times


London Page 56

941130

