FT942-15395

FT  15 APR 94 / People: Went joins Coutts


David Went, chief executive of National Westminster Bank's Ulster Bank
subsidiary, has been given the job of turning Coutts, the frock-coated
bankers to Britain's royal family, into a 'truly global private bank' which
can compete on a par with the private banking arms of US banking giants such
as J P Morgan and Citicorp.
Went, a 47-year-old Ulsterman who trained with Citibank, has been appointed
to the new post of chief executive of Coutts Group, parent of Coutts & Co in
the UK and Coutts International Private Banking.
Although the 300-year-old Coutts has been a NatWest subsidiary for many
years, it has been allowed to operate independently. Analysts have felt that
NatWest has failed to exploit one of the best known brand names in private
banking.
Just over two years ago NatWest installed one of its own managers, Ian
Farnsworth, as managing director of Coutts & Co. Since then its profits have
recovered strongly and Bernard Horn, NatWest's international chief, says
that Went's appointment is the next stage in the plan to build a 'world
class private banking operation'.
Horn denied yesterday that this would involve taking Coutts down market and
said that the changes had nothing to do with last September's retirement of
Sir David Money-Coutts, who had worked for Coutts for 40 years and been
chairman since 1976. Horn added that what Coutts needed was not more capital
but more customer relationship officers and new products. Went will be based
in London but it remains unclear whether he will sit in Coutts Strand
headquarters.
Apart from NatWest veteran Ian Farnsworth, 56, the other member of the new
management team is Jean-Pierre Cuoni, 56, chief executive of Coutts
International Private Banking. Cuoni, a Swiss citizen, spent 22 years with
Citibank before joining Coutts & Co in Zurich in 1988.
Went, who joined Ulster Bank in 1976, takes over on June 1 and will be
replaced as chief executive of Ulster Bank by Ronnie Kells, 55, who has been
with the bank since 1964.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940415

