FT944-14576

FT  22 OCT 94 / Wonder lightbulb saves energy


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


US energy department officials are beaming over a new sulphur light bulb
they have helped develop which could prove 'a major technological
breakthrough in lighting'.
The new bulb, invented by Fusion Lighting, a Maryland company, and developed
under a government contract, is being tested at the energy department's
Washington headquarters, and could be commercially available next year.
It is suitable for lighting large areas, both indoors and out, can save
large amounts of energy, and delivers more and better quality light.
The light works by heating a small quantity of sulphur inside a quartz
sphere smaller than a golf ball with the same sort of energy produced by a
microwave oven. This produces as much light as 250 100-watt household bulbs.
In its test the energy department has replaced 240 mercury lamps at its
entrance with just two of the new sulphur bulbs, shining into opposite ends
of a 240-foot long 'light pipe'. The light is reflected down the tube,
escaping through holes at regular intervals to produce four times as much
illumination while cutting energy use by two-thirds.
Another test at the National Air and Space Museum shows substantial, though
less dramatic cost savings. It also produces much less ultraviolet light or
heat, both of which damage the museum's exhibits, than conventional lamps.
Because the sulphur bulb has no electrodes, its developers expect it to have
a longer life than conventional lighting, although other experts want to see
this confirmed in the tests.
'Light output does not diminish over time and the life of the sulphur bulb
is potentially limitless,' the energy department said.
The sulphur bulb also produces a white light containing all the colours of
the rainbow, closely simulating sunlight, unlike the harsh colours produced
by other electrode-less lamps generally used for street lighting, such as
sodium vapour or mercury lamps. The absence of highly toxic mercury also
makes a spent bulb much easier to dispose of.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941022

