FT943-12692

FT  23 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Novopharm sues Glaxo in dispute over drug
formula


   By DANIEL GREEN


Glaxo, Europe's biggest drugs company, was sued yesterday for Dollars 300m
(Pounds 194m) in potential lost sales and punitive damages by Novopharm, a
Canadian company. Glaxo shares fell 14p to 574p.
Novopharm's action was an immediate response to a Glaxo suit alleging patent
infringement by the Canadian company.
At stake are the Dollars 1.9bn a year US sales of the world's biggest
selling drug, Glaxo's ulcer treatment, Zantac.
The dispute centres on the fact that Zantac is protected by two patents, one
that expires in the US at the end of 1995 and the other in 2002.
The two patents refer to slightly different forms of Zantac's active
ingredient, forms one and two. The Zantac Glaxo sells is based on form two.
Novopharm wants to sell form one after 1995, but Glaxo says that the
Novopharm product infringes form two patents.
By taking patent action under US law, Glaxo will delay the launch of
Novopharm's drug by 30 months, well past the expiry of the form one patent.
This would have the effect of extending the period during which Zantac is
protected from competition and led yesterday to the statement by Mr Leslie
Dan, Novopharm's chief executive, that 'the action by Glaxo is totally
frivolous'.
Novopharm's countersuit 'claims huge damages based on any potential loss of
sales if the product is delayed in its marketing beyond December 1995,' said
Mr Dan.
Glaxo said that the countersuit 'was not unexpected' and reiterated its
belief that it had a good case.
Two months ago, Glaxo took similar patent action against a subsidiary of
Ciba, the Swiss drugs company which, like Novopharm, said it wanted to sell
form one from 1996. Ciba did not counter sue.
Glaxo added yesterday that it had 'discovered' that form one tablets were on
sale in Denmark and New Zealand where the patents protecting Zantac are
weaker. It is studying samples and looking for ways to invoke patent laws.
It said it continued to believe that it was not possible yet to make form
one without infringing form two patents.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940723

