FT944-11118

FT  08 NOV 94 / Robust growth seen for industrial output


   By PETER NORMAN


Britain is experiencing robust and broadly based growth of industrial
production, according to official statistics published yesterday.
The Central Statistical Office said output of the production industries and
manufacturing grew in September at seasonally adjusted year-on-year rates of
6.6 per cent and 5.4 per cent respectively. It reported substantial upward
revisions of earlier data.
Production industry output, which includes manufacturing, mining and
quarrying with oil and gas extraction, and the electricity, gas and water
supply industries, is thought to have risen 0.1 per cent in August compared
with July and 0.6 per cent in July compared with June. This compares with
last month's report of a 0.1 per cent decline in August and a 0.1 per cent
gain in July.
The office believes output rose at year-on-year rates of 5.5 per cent in the
two months compared with the earlier report of 4.6 per cent growth in August
and 4.8 per cent in July. Figures for manufacturing, which makes up 84.4 per
cent of the production industry, tell a similar story.
Taking three months' figures, production industry output increased 1.2 per
cent in the latest three months compared with the preceding quarter, as did
manufacturing production.
Mining and quarrying, including oil and gas extraction, increased output by
0.8 per cent and the output of the electricity, gas and water supply sectors
rose 1.6 per cent. Oil and gas production reached an all-time high in the
latest quarter.
Nearly all manufacturing sectors increased output between the second and
third quarters. All except the leather and leather-products industry raised
output compared with last year's third quarter.
In the latest three months production of computers rose 32.9 per cent from
the previous year while output of the quaintly named 'telegraph and
telephone apparatus' sector was 36.8 per cent higher. This strong growth of
computers and telecommunications equipment output helped production of the
electrical-goods branch of the investment-goods industry to a record high in
Sep-tember.
Output of the engineering and allied industries grew an-above average 2.3
per cent between the second and third quarters, with the transport equipment
industry increasing production by 3.5 per cent. Food, drink and tobacco
production rose 2 per cent in the latest quarter and reached a record level
in September.
Among broad manufacturing sectors only textiles, leather and clothing, and
the coke, mineral oil refining and nuclear fuel industries registered
falling output between the second and third quarters, of 0.6 per cent and
5.5 per cent respectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941108

