FT941-17071

FT  06 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Bank of France on its own


The independence of the Bank of France, promoted by both the conservative
Paris government and its Socialist predecessor, was enshrined in law towards
the end of last year. It will take time for the financial markets to accept
that French ministers really have handed control over interest rates to the
bank's nine-strong monetary committee, the six outside members of which were
named yesterday. It may take longer still for the perceived advantages of
central banking independence - establishment of conditions for low-inflation
growth - to become fully apparent to the French public. However,
independence marks an important further step strengthening French economic
policies after the summer debacle in the exchange rate mechanism.
No central bank can run policies totally free of constraints set by the
society in which it operates. The independent Bundesbank has provided a
model for some of the legislation enacted in Paris. Yet the German central
bank has relied in its anti-inflation efforts far less on its legal
protection from political influence than on the strong German consensus in
favour of price stability. This consensus is tested above all at times of
crisis. The Bundesbank has frequently made decisions which have contributed
to the unpopularity of the government in power, and, on occasion, to its
downfall.
By bringing to the Bank of France council qualified outsiders from diverse
backgrounds, the government has increased the chances that its actions will
be both wise and respected. However, in the long run, the bank's statutes
will prove effective only if the French people remain convinced of the
merits of anti-inflation policies. Despite the summer setbacks, cross-party
support in Paris for the strong franc strategy practised for 10 years
remains intact. In view of recession and rising unemployment, backing for a
firm franc may, however, fade as eyes start to fix on the 1995 presidential
elections.
The Bundesbank built up its reputation for toughness during a 10-year period
after 1948 when the D-Mark was not fully convertible and foreigners had low
expectations of German monetary policy. The conditions under which the Bank
of France has to defend its new status are in some ways much more testing.
In particular, the bank must confront an uncomfortable paradox. To maintain
policy credibility - and to try to inch French interest rates below German
ones - the French government and central bank have to maintain a public
display of agreement. The best opportunity for the Bank of France to make a
convincing demonstration of its independence would be offered by a monetary
crisis. But this is a development that the French authorities are
understandably anxious to avoid. A significant reason for the move to make
the Bank of France independent is to lower the influence over French
interest rates at present exercised by the Bundesbank. The goal is worth
fighting for. But the struggle has only just begun.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940106

