FT943-12895

FT  22 JUL 94 / Management: The search for universal ethics - The launch of
a new set of business principles


   By TIM DICKSON


An international ethics code - stressing the need for moral values in
business decision making - will be formally launched in Switzerland this
weekend.
The Caux Round Table's seven-point Principles for Business contains nothing
which will surprise enlightened companies. However, it is thought to be the
first time a document of this kind has attracted influential supporters from
Europe, Japan and the US.
Signatories include Ryuzaburo Kaku, chairman of Japan's Canon, John
Charlton, managing director of New York's Chase Manhattan Bank, and a group
of senior executives from the twin cities of Minneapolis/St Paul.
The aim of the CRT initiative is to set 'a world standard against which
business behaviour can be measured', a benchmark which will help more
individual companies devise their own codes. 'We seek to begin a process
that identifies shared values, reconciles differing values, and thereby
develops a shared perspective on business behaviour acceptable to and
honoured by all,' say the authors in their introduction.
CRT, which meets annually in the Swiss village of Caux-sur-Montreux, was
formed in 1986 by Frederik Philips, former President of Philips of
Eindhoven, and Olivier Giscard D'Estaing, vice-chairman of the Insead
business school at Fontainebleau, France, as an attempt to reduce then
escalating trade tensions with Japan. The group is concerned with 'the
development of constructive economic and social relationships between the
participants' countries and with their joint responsibilities towards the
rest of the world'.
The Principles are said to be drawn from two ethical traditions: the
Japanese philosophy of kyosei described by Canon's Kaku as 'living and
working together for the common good of mankind' and 'human dignity' which
refers to the sacredness or value of each person as an end, not simply as a
means to the fulfilment of others' purposes or even majority prescription.
'What we didn't know at the beginning,' explains Neville Cooper, chairman of
the Top Management Partnership, a former executive director of STC and a
founder of the UK's Institute of Business Ethics, 'was whether we could
reconcile the three different approaches. The Americans tend to emphasise
company rather than state responsibility for community affairs, the Japanese
place more importance on the team rather than on the individual, while in
Europe there is a strong tradition of individual rights'.
The CRT document, which owes a debt to The Minnesota Principles, a statement
of business behaviour developed by the Minnesota Centre for corporate
responsibility, comprises seven general principles and a number of
'stakeholder' principles.
It affirms the responsibilities of business towards a range of stakeholders
(for example, customers and employees as well as shareholders) and to the
countries in which they operate. Suppliers and competitors should expect
businesses 'to honour their obligations in a spirit of honesty and
fairness'.
Business behaviour should be governed by a spirit of trust which goes beyond
the letter of the law, while domestic and international rules should be
respected. Other principles require companies to promote 'the progressive
and judicious' liberalisation of trade, 'to protect and, where possible,
improve the environment' and to avoid illicit operations.
Cooper believes the case for corporate ethics is much more widely accepted
than it was seven years ago and reckons, for instance, that one in three
leading UK companies now has its own code. 'People say an ethics code can't
make you ethical but then it's only a tool, just as a hammer doesn't build
you a house.'
He insists that statements of practice are an important way to clear up
ambiguities for the 'junior people' in an organisation.
Copies of the Principles for Business can be obtained from Caux Round Table
Secretariat, Amaliastraat 10, 2514JC The Hague, The Netherlands. Tel: (070)
360-5260, Fax: (070) 361-7209.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940722

