FT942-14908

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (6): Open door creates wealth -
Singapore's industrial strategy


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


For more than two decades, Singapore has proudly offered itself to the
developing world as living proof that multinational companies, far from
exploiting vulnerable host countries, can be exceedingly good for their
wealth.
Indeed, the country's spectacular economic growth and high standard of
living are the direct results of a policy of assiduously courting foreign
corporations which, until a few years ago, were shunned as pariahs in many
other parts of Asia.
Mr Philip Yeo, chairman of the Economic Development Board (EDB), the
government's main instrument of industrial strategy, defends the policy as
hard-nosed pragmatism.
'Who creates the jobs is what matters. Ownership is irrelevant,' he says.
'The day we became nationalistic, GDP growth would fall, for sure.'
Today, Singapore plays host to the operations of about 4,000 multinational
companies, 800 of them in manufacturing. They employ more than 200,000
people, more than half the total labour force, and their exports are
equivalent to about half the country's gross domestic product.
And they keep coming. Last year, inward direct investment in manufacturing
rose 12 per cent to a record SDollars 3.9 bn. More than a third was from the
US, and roughly a fifth each from Japan and Europe.
Part of Singapore's success is due to the energetic efforts of the EDB,
which combines professional marketing with an ability for keeping red tape
to a minimum. The EDB also has an attractive package to sell, which combines
political stability, a skilled labour force, generally liberal economic
policies and modern communications.
However, the nature of Singapore's attractions has altered since the days
when western and Japanese multinational companies viewed the country
principally as a cheap off-shore base from which to export products back to
their home markets.
Today, fiercer competition and expanding opportunities in south-east Asia
are prompting many multinationals to treat Singapore as a regional nerve
centre, equipped to respond rapidly to changes in neighbouring markets.
As Mr Wilson Tan, general manager of Apple Computer, puts it: 'In the early
1980s, corporate location was very much cost-driven. Now, time-to-market is
a much more important consideration.'
Mr Jeff Dryjanski, regional director of Motorola, says Singapore's rising
costs have been more than offset by its efficient business infrastructure.
'A lot of our costs are machinery. You can't just buy machinery and expect
it to run. Automation doesn't just happen by accident.'
On this score, Singapore is rated highly compared to many neighbours -
'Malaysia has quite a good commercial infrastructure and is starting to
develop a sense of business urgency,' says another western businessman. 'But
try talking about those things in Indonesia or the Philippines, and it just
doesn't click.'
The EDB continues to scour the world for inward manufacturing investment.
However, it has recently started expanding industrial strategy in two
directions which capitalise on what it sees as Singapore's intrinsic
advantages.
One is to widen the the scope of multinational activities by attracting more
regional headquarters and make the country the base for more
information-based services. It is well on the way to achieving the former
objective. But prospects for the latter appear more doubtful.
Many foreign businessmen point out that the country's tight controls on the
media, including censorship of foreign newspapers and a ban on direct
satellite dishes, are unlikely to attract businesses which depend for their
life blood on free information flows.
The controls look even more anomalous in the light of the EDB's other
initiative, intended to expose indigenous businesses more directly to
international influences by encouraging them to expand abroad.
This so-called 'second wing' policy has several origins:
The well-publicised belief of Mr Lee Kuan Yew, the Senior Minister, that
Singaporean companies had grown accustomed to too easy a life at home and
needed to become more adventurous.
The government's desire to diversify its massive reserves, mostly invested
in foreign securities, by channelling money into opportunities offering more
direct benefit to the real economy.
Growing awareness of physical constraints on further domestic growth. In the
words of Mr Sim Kee Boon, chairman of the group Keppel group and an elder
statesman of Singaporean business: 'Our costs are going up and commercial
opportunities are being exhausted. We need to look outwards.'
In its first incarnation, in the late 1980s, international expansion looked
mainly to west. However, the thrust was blunted after investments by a
number of Singaporean companies turned sour.
The idea now is that Singapore should export not just capital, but also
technology, experience and skills, and focus its attention more tightly on
other parts of Asia.
In practice, this has so far taken the form mainly of involvement in the
development and construction of industrial estates and holiday resorts.
Several dozen such projects have been announced, notably in Indonesia, China
and more recently in India.
It is too early to judge the likely returns on these projects, the viability
of some of which depends on persuading multinational companies located in
Singapore to take space in the newly-developed industrial estates abroad.
'This may all be great for Singapore Inc.,' says a foreign broker. 'But I'm
much less sure what it means for quoted Singaporean companies.' However, the
risks in many cases are likely to be limited by support from the government,
which has said it is ready to invest up to one third of its foreign exchange
reserves in promoting the 'second wing'.
It is not certain that the government's hopes of using the initiative to
strengthen indigenous industrial suppliers will bear fruit.
In the electronics industry, (see facing page) most bigger manufacturers
located in Singapore say they buy most of their components from other
multinationals, relying on local suppliers mainly for lower-value items such
as plastic mouldings and formed metal.
For the foreseeable future, it seems likely that Singapore's wider
international ambitions will rely as heavily as its domestic economy on the
muscle power of foreign-owned corporate guests.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940418

