FT942-16115

FT  12 APR 94 / UK Company News: A primary target for the 1990s - The
growing number of companies focusing on Asia


   By SIMON DAVIES


There may be an element of companies offering a relative bright spot amid
the Occidental economic gloom, but one of the most notable themes of the
recent UK reporting season has been the focus on investment and trade in
Asia.
Hanson is to set up in Hong Kong, Virgin Megastores will appear in Hong Kong
and China, and a host of UK companies have identified the fastest growing
economic zones of the 1980s as their primary target for the 1990s.
British exports to Asia (excluding the Middle East and Australasia) rose 29
per cent to Pounds 12.8bn last year, while the book value of direct
investment increased by 30 per cent to Pounds 11.5bn in 1992 - the latest
figures available.
Some British companies have long histories in Asia, but as Mr Peter Godwin,
chairman of the Asia Pacific Advisory group, says, this has tended to focus
on the old colonies of India, Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong. These four
markets accounted for 44 per cent of exports to Asia last year.
There are many more which have not been struck by the Asia Syndrome, of
multiplying sales by this untapped half of the world's population.
Mr Charles MacKay, chief executive of Inchcape, a company with centuries of
experience in Asia, said: 'The big companies have been in Asia for some
time, but many of the small and medium-sized British companies have
concentrated on Europe. Now, with the fall-back in Europe, they are saying
that they must do something to develop Asian markets.'
On his visit to Japan and Malaysia last September, Mr John Major, the prime
minister, outlined the government's determination 'to give Asia a new place
in our priorities'. Corporate Britain is responding.
Mr John Fletcher, chairman of Trafalgar House Corporate Development, said:
'It is disappointing that there isn't more British involvement in Asia. In
some major markets, like Taiwan, you don't see any other major British
engineering or construction companies.'
Trafalgar House has completed the twin 190m high towers that will support
Hong Kong's Tsing Ma suspension bridge. It will be the second longest in the
world and a monument to British engineering skill - but Trafalgar admits
that it remains a relatively isolated example.
Trafalgar's involvement in Asia began in 1983, when it bought 50 per cent of
Jardine Matheson's construction arm, Gammon Construction. By September 1993,
Trafalgar had Pounds 605m of contracts in hand in the Asia Pacific, or 54
per cent of its total. Mr Fletcher said: 'We need to be in areas where there
are big populations and expanding economies. I would like Asia to account
for one third of turnover from construction and engineering (its two core
businesses) within the next few years.'
Tarmac opened an office in Hong Kong last year and other construction
companies are following, but Mr Fletcher said competition was predominantly
with Japanese, German and local companies, not the British.
Mr Clive Weedon, research director at regional brokers Asia Equity, argues:
'British companies are coming a little late. They also don't seem to be
coming with the same level of commitment as the US companies, and they can't
build up the same relationships as other Asian companies.'
In many cases, however, the timing is excusable. Given the distances
involved, companies could be forgiven for avoiding a complex and fragmented
marketplace, until it has built up critical mass in terms of spending power.
According to Mr John Robinson, chief executive at Smith and Nephew, the
healthcare company, the time has now come. 'In the healthcare sector, we
require markets with a certain level of GNP. Most of these south-east Asian
economies are only just getting there,' he said.
In 1993, Smith and Nephew's sales to east Asia, including Japan, grew by 30
per cent to Pounds 50m, representing 5 per cent of its Pounds 949m turnover.
Mr Robinson anticipates that it will hit 30 per cent of the total within the
next decade.
'The Chinese healthcare market is already the fifth largest in the world,
and we don't think it is developed. I would have thought it will be worth
between Pounds 35m and Pounds 50m to us by the end of the decade and it will
take off thereafter. At the moment we are selling virtually nothing there.'
Smith and Nephew plans to expand by setting up a network of wholly owned
sales and marketing offices, rather than taking on joint venture partners.
It will also manufacture some basic products. This was its strategy for
continental Europe in the 1980s and that market now accounts for 20 per cent
of sales.
Other companies have opted to team up with distribution companies.
Inchcape - which derives around half its operating profits from Asia - has
franchises to manufacture and sell an enormous variety of western brand name
products. Mr MacKay said there had been a marked increase in British
companies wanting to sell into Asia.
'British companies have become a lot more competitive in recent years. Four
or five years ago, we were selling a handful of Rovers in Hong Kong. Today,
it has become a very successful franchise,' he said.
He argued that the Asian economies would achieve average annual growth of
about 6 per cent over the next six years, and some, like China, would be
much greater. Even in a strong upswing, the western economies were unlikely
to achieve half that.
This has been a big motivation. British Petroleum is a substantial investor
in oil exploration in Vietnam, Imperial Chemical Industries has opened
chemical plants in Japan and China, and GEC, through its joint venture with
Alsthom, has become a force in power and engineering throughout the region.
Recent threats of discrimination against UK companies by the governments of
Malaysia and China have raised some concern over the downside of investment
in Asia. Thus far the only casualties are likely to be high profile
engineering projects, not British brand name product sales.
Trafalgar is set to lose contracts under tender in Malaysia, but existing
contracts should stretch on for another four to five years. Mr Fletcher said
its John Brown subsidiary is working on a Pounds 1.5bn contract to build a
petrochemicals complex for Petronas, the state oil company.
In China, Trafalgar's 25 per cent ownership by Hong Kong Land - a member of
arguably China's least favourite group of companies, Jardine Matheson -
might be expected to hamper business. However, it has just picked up another
Dollars 50m (Pounds 34m) contract for the steel industry.
Mr Godwin claims there is no evidence of British companies facing
discrimination in China and political stances appear to be softening.
Analysts said that British companies with a technological edge or strong
brand names can generally eke out higher profit margins than in the UK,
despite the logistical costs of dealing with a distant continent. This
should compensate for short-term problems.
As one Hong Kong businessman said: 'In Asia, one doesn't tend to have
enemies for too long, and one has to take a long-term view of the markets.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940412

