FT942-15968

FT  13 APR 94 / Asia set in economic fast lane: Recession in west unlikely
to dampen eastern boom, says bank


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


Asia's economic boom is set to continue over the next two years although
China remains at risk from overheating and India needs to enact further
far-reaching reforms, the Asian Development Bank said yesterday.
The annual Asian Development Outlook published by the Manila-based
institution forecast robust growth for Asia even though recovery in the
industrialised world, the market for many Asian exports, was expected to be
slow.
Growth was expected to be strong in all the main east and south-east Asian
economies outside Japan. Even the Philippines, the laggard of recent years,
is forecast to accelerate substantially. South Asia is also likely to see
healthy though unspectacular expansion.
Overall, Asia's developing countries are expected to grow 7.2 per cent in
each of 1994 and 1995 - compared with the bank's estimate for world growth
of 1.8 per cent this year and 3 per cent in 1995. Last year the figures were
7.4 per cent for Asia and 0.6 per cent for the world.
China, which has seen 13 per cent growth in each of the past two years, is
forecast to slow to 10 per cent this year and 9 per cent in 1995. But the
ADB warned: 'For the next two years, money supply and bank credit should be
tightly controlled to help prevent economic overheating.' Failure to prevent
overheating could seriously undermine financial sector reforms now under
way, it said.
The ADB saw potential for rapid growth in India, which has also undertaken
sweeping economic reform. However, it called for faster progress on tax and
subsidies, restructuring of the public sector and policy on closure of
lossmaking companies.
'The prospects for the Indian economy will depend on its success in
accomplishing a range of far-reaching and politically sensitive changes,' it
said.
The bank forecast a resurgence of growth in South Korea and Taiwan and
sustained rapid expansion in south-east Asia.
However, the bank noted that poverty remained a serious problem in many
Asian countries.
It also warned that Aids was a growing threat to the region, with India and
Thailand each feared likely to have 1m people infected with the HIV virus by
the end of the century.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940413

