FT941-4083

FT  12 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Putting people first - Cripps
Harries Hall, seventh in a series on fee-based advisers


   By JOANNA SLAUGHTER


Lawyers may not be everyone's idea of sympathetic independent financial
advisers but David Lough, once a merchant banker, argues that solicitor
firms can bring special qualities to investment and financial management.
Lough's own experience appears to support this view. In 1988, he set up the
finance and investment services division of Cripps Harries Hall, a solicitor
based in Tunbridge Wells, Kent. It now has 21 staff, 600 investment clients
and Pounds 76m under managment.
Lough, a client of Cripps Harries Hall before he joined the staff, says he
'saw an opening for a firm that could draw together all the strands of a
person's affairs.' His division - which provides pension, mortgage and
insurance services as well as investment and cash management - is staffed
entirely by financial and investment specialists. None is a solicitor.
According to Lough, the operation aims at 'stewardship of a family's money,'
and he feels solicitor firms are ideal for providing this. They start from
the right ethical platform, having always disclosed commissions; they handle
client money, but their regulatory armour is all but bullet-proof; and they
can integrate a client's legal and tax affairs with his financial planning.
Lough went to Cripps Harries Hall from County NatWest, where he was managing
director throughout the deregulation dramas of the 1986 Big Bang. 'I didn't
really enjoy it that much,' he says, 'although it was a real crucible of
learning. But, at the end of the day, you were dealing with basis points for
institutions. It is more fun dealing with things that matter for people.'
His private clients are a diverse bunch; they include investment bankers and
the directors of top 100 companies as well as retired bank managers and
teachers. There is no minimum investment requirement although, if people
have less than around Pounds 50,000 in investable assets, they are advised
to opt for a series of four or five investment trusts. He says: 'We explain
that they are paying the investment trusts to manage the assets for them.'
Charges normally are on a fixed scale. Three-quarters of the clients opt for
discretionary investment management, the fee for which is 0.6 per cent a
year on the first Pounds 400,000, 0.25 per cent on the next Pounds 400,000,
and 0.125 per cent after that. Minimum charge is Pounds 595.
Each client has an individual portfolio, even for personal equity plans.
When they receive their twice-yearly valuations, the performance achieved on
their behalf is measured against a composite benchmark, which is matched to
their investment aims.
Lough is cautious about investing. He says: 'We are not right for someone
who wants trading-based service and who wants to be in and out of the
account. Our emphasis is very much on the long term. And our clients quite
like the fact that we are naturally prudent, conservative investment
managers. If they had an enormous risk appetite, they probably wouldn't come
to us.'
Unsurprisingly, therefore, the investment management successes have been
with solid companies such as BAA, Marks and Spencer and Shell. House-builder
Berkeley also has produced 'wonderful results' for CHH clients with large
portfolios. On the other hand, British Steel has proved a disappointment.
Lough says: 'I have come to the conclusion that it is just too political an
industry.'
He adds: 'Private clients judge you by a subtle series of values, such as
whether you are efficient in your administration; whether you have taken the
trouble to understand their position; and whether staff are helpful on the
telephone. You can lose your client's trust very quickly if you make
mistakes. They will think you are a shoddy operation and they are quite
right.'
He encourages clients to visit Tunbridge Wells for a first meeting 'so they
can see the set-up and the people. This is very much a team approach.' By no
means everyone arrives with their affairs in order, though. Sometimes,
detective work is needed to establish a new client's capital gains tax
position. One even arrived with a suitcase stuffed with share certificates.
'He had no idea what they were worth,' says Lough. 'Actually, it was more
than Pounds 500,000.'
Cripps Harries Hall cites provision of comprehensive financial and
investment services as a major point of difference between itself and many
other solicitor firms. But Lough believes the time is coming when solicitors
generally 'will have to decide whether they are willing for stockbrokers to
take over a client's investment affairs, or whether they are going to go
full tilt at it themselves. So far, it has been firms in large provincial
towns and cities, with big retired populations, that have acted.'
There are undoubted signs that the role of solicitor firms as investment
managers for private clients has revived in recent years; indeed, Lough
chairs the Association of Solicitor Investment Managers, which was founded
in July 1993 as a forum for such firms. To date, the association's directory
lists 17 members which, collectively, manage more than Pounds 600m of
private client money. Apparently, others are queueing to join.
Lough says: 'We formed the association because we felt there was very little
public awareness of solicitors' investment and financial services for
clients. The ethical base of solicitor firms has always been excellent. And
we believe that the firms which belong to the association add a skills base,
too.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Name of financial adviser:    Cripps Harries Hall
Address of head office:       Seymour House, 11-13 Mount Ephraim Road,
                              Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN1 1EN
Date firm was established:    1852
Regulator:                    The Law Society
Funds under management:       Pounds 76m
Number of clients:            600 investment clients
Number of offices:            Three
Minimum investment accepted:  No minimum
Services offered:             Investment management services; pensions;
                              tax planning and insurances
Fees:                         0.6 per cent pa for discretionary service
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940312

