FT943-13093

FT  21 JUL 94 / Japanese frugality comes under threat: Finance ministry
officials are trying to prevent an explosion of state debt


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Japan's finance ministry is struggling to prevent the new government from
detonating what officials fear may become an explosion of state debt.
The new three-party coalition's populist plan to cut income taxes and
further drive up spending has created alarm among the finance ministry's
mandarins, reluctant to abandon the fiscal frugality which they see as a
vital feature of Japan's economic strength.
After strenuous persuasion by the ministry, the previous coalition had
agreed that an income tax cut must be decided at the same time as a
subsequent rise in the 3 per cent sales tax, possibly to 7 per cent. A
decision was being prepared for late June, until the new government, with
its lax tax policy, staged its parliamentary coup three weeks ago.
The sales tax rise would not only fund the income tax cut, but also start to
compensate for a decline in the income tax base which will be caused by a
sharp growth in the number of pensioners. This is needed because Japan's
present tax structure prepares it badly for the coming grey wave. A fifth of
government income comes from sales tax, well below the average of 30 per
cent for Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries,
and around two-thirds of state revenue is derived from income tax, with the
balance from property and capital gains taxes.
Mr Tomiichi Murayama, the socialist prime minister, and his Liberal
Democratic party partners now wish to leave any planned rise in the
politically unpopular sales tax vague. Finance ministry officials now have
no idea when or whether they will obtain their cherished tax reform, a
poison chalice that may be passed to a future government.
In the meantime, coalition leaders want to fund the tax cuts they plan to
make - around Y6,000bn (Pounds 38bn) annually - with a mixture of cuts in
government spending and the issuance of deficit bonds. This is heresy to a
finance ministry deeply scarred by its mid-1970s experience of struggling to
control a rising budget deficit, a consequence of a rise in public spending
to stimulate the economy after the first oil shock.
Most Japanese state debt is in the form of construction bonds, so called
because they finance infrastructure projects, so adding to the nation's
physical wealth. The finance ministry has no objection to these, but does
object to increasing its dependence on deficit bonds to cover future
pensions and other non-infrastructure spending.
The ministry agreed to four economic stimulus packages, totalling Y45,000bn
over the past two years, only on condition that it would not have to issue
deficit bonds to fund them. In the event, it was forced this year to issue
deficit bonds for the first time since 1989, to cover just over 4 per cent
of spending. Officials fear it will be hard to resist issuing more.
This may be 'unavoidable', warns Mr Yoshiro Mori, secretary general of the
LDP.
Just as worrying, the new government has pledged abundant cash hand-outs
during its short time in office, to do more to stimulate the economy, but
also to satisfy politically important groups such as farmers.
The latest government largesse includes a Y40,000bn plan to install a
national fibre optic cable network next year, and there is talk of adding
Y170,000bn to an existing Y430,000bn public works programme, covering the
decade to 2000. This week's cabinet meeting was deluged with ministerial
requests for 'exceptional treatment' for pet projects in next year's budget.
Government finances are far weaker than politicians realise, argues the
ministry. Applying the standard international measure, Japan's general
government deficit stands at 1.9 per cent of gross domestic product,
apparently far healthier than the US, at 2.6 per cent, according to the
OECD.
This is a misleading guide, say the bureaucrats. Japan's budget deficit
includes a 3.8 per cent of GDP surplus on its social security budget, more
than three times the average social security surplus for the Group of Seven
leading industrial nations. Exclude social security, and the government
deficit shoots up to a worrisome 5.7 per cent of GDP, well ahead of the US
at 3.5 per cent.
Japan's social security surplus is artificially large because its social
security system is much younger than those of its partners. That means it is
flush with contributions but not yet depleted by pay-outs. It will quickly
turn into a deficit as the proportion of people aged over 65 climbs from
around 12 per cent - among the lowest in the OECD - in 1990, to 25.5 per
cent, expected to be among the highest in the industrialised world, by 2020.
The finance ministry is unwilling to plunder the social security budget for
general spending on the grounds that the cash belongs to future pensioners
and may in any case be inadequate to meet obligations. It does already lend
from the social security budget to other state bodies, such as the Japan
Development Bank, to fund their own projects, so the surplus is not idle.
Japan looks surprisingly indebted by another measure - its interest bill.
The cost of servicing its accumulated Y200,000bn debt reached 15.7 per cent
of GDP last year, the highest among the world's five top economies,
according to the OECD. That will rise. The government borrowed to finance 14
per cent of its spending last year, climbing to nearly 19 per cent this
year.
The mandarins believe they can probably count on the support of former
finance ministers in the LDP, the largest member of the coalition, as well
as centre-right opposition parties. But for the time being, the provident
are in a minority. Japan's new government is in a mood to ignore the finance
ministry and borrow its way out of trouble.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940721

