FT942-15387

FT  15 APR 94 / Arts: Alfred Brendel - Recital


   By JOHN ALLISON


London heard the fourth instalment of Alfred Brendel's latest Beethoven
series on Tuesday night. Complete cycles of the composer's 32 piano sonatas
ought always to be enlightening events - for the Brendel fans who packed the
Royal Festival Hall, this recital plainly was - but it seems that this
legendary pianist has lost the instinctive, inspiring powers of his earlier
self.
Brendel has, of course, performed complete Beethoven cycles umpteen times.
This widely-spaced series is different: seven programmes spread over
three-and-a-half years (it is not due to finish until summer 1995), each
repeated in various European and North American cities. Brendel is more than
halfway through, but since his approach is not chronological, we heard four
early sonatas (numbers 8-11) and the later Lebewohl op. 81a.
Though Brendel brought no special insights on Tuesday, there were good
things, mostly in the second half. The soaring, turbulent op. 22 was tightly
argued; its Allegretto finale had clarity and elegance. Brendel's Lebewohl
had a radiant conclusion, reminding one - for the only time during the
evening - of Beethoven's life-afirming qualities.
The 'simpler', more direct works were less successful. At best they were
unremarkable, but often the music sounded mannered and inflated. In op. 14
no. 1 Brendel pulled the almost-Mozartian scales and arpeggios around, and
no. 2 in the set was even more heavy-handed - his antics distorted
grotesquely the miniature variations that make up its middle movement (they
drew spontaneous applause). The Sonata Pathetique lacked dramatic breadth,
and detail was smothered in the breathless outer movements.
Much of Brendel's playing now sounds cantankerous. His intellectualism
stifles the music. One of the visionary musicians of our time is in danger
of becoming a monument to himself.
The programme is repeated in San Francisco (April 22), Los Angeles (April
26), Toronto (May 7), Princeton (May 9), and New York (May 12).

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940415

