FT941-12834

FT  28 JAN 94 / Critics poised to defeat forest privatisation


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


Ministers responsible for the Forestry Commission are expected to recommend
soon that its plantations and woodlands should not be privatised.
A review group reporting to Mrs Gillian Shephard, the agriculture secretary,
Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, and Mr John Redwood, the Welsh
secretary, is believed to recommend dividing the commission's woodlands
between commercial forests and those for recreation whose value is primarily
as part of Britain's natural heritage.
It is expected to propose creating an executive agency within the commission
to manage the commercial forests with greater financial transparency.
It is also likely to recommend greater involvement of the private sector in
Forest Enterprise's activities, for example in providing more woodland
chalets and recreational facilities. Forestry Enterprise is a division of
the commission.
Ministers have long recognised that the idea of privatising the commission's
woodlands, which cover 5 per cent of Britain, is unpopular with the public
and especially with many backbench Conservative MPs, who have been bombarded
with letters by constituents. The changes to the commission proposed by the
review group could have the advantage for the govern-ment of not requiring
legis-lation.
The group, set up last March, is likely to submit its report to ministers in
the next few weeks. It has been advised on the options by the merchant bank
Samuel Montagu and the land agents John Clegg.
The three ministers will decide what policy to adopt and issue a
consultation document, probably not before early summer.
The review group will also report on the effectiveness of government
incentives for private tree planting, which are criticised in the forestry
industry as leading to the planting of too few commercially useful trees.
The group may recommend better targeting of incentives but has been told by
the Treasury that no extra money is available.
At present all Britain's state forests are managed by Forest Enterprise. It
manages its forests on a multi-purpose basis, combining profitability with
environmental and recreational aims, and maintaining heritage forests such
as the New Forest.
Separating out purely commercial forests and managing them as an executive
agency, which might present accounts on a commercial basis instead of the
present civil service system, could counter arguments that Forest
Enterprise's objectives are confused and its accounts incomprehensible.
But many forests fall into both commercial and recreational categories,
which could cause problems in dividing them.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940128

