FT942-15589

FT  14 APR 94 / UK Company News: Likely Pounds 40m tag for Hamleys -
Necessary to prove the Regent Street performance can be replicated


   By SIMON DAVIES


Hamleys, which claims to be the finest, and is arguably the largest, toy
shop in the world, is to issue Pounds 20m worth of shares through a
placement and intermediaries offer which is expected to value the company at
about Pounds 40m. Its pathfinder prospectus was published yesterday.
The current management team has revitalised Hamleys since it joined in 1991,
increasing operating profits from Pounds 1m in 1991 to Pounds 3.6m in the
year to January 29 1994. Operating margins have more than doubled to 17 per
cent.
Some analysts argued that it would have to prove that it can replicate this
performance outside Regent Street - in new stores and franchise arrangements
 -to justify the management's claim to a premium stock market rating.
However, the issue is expected to come to the market on an historic p/e
ratio of less than 17 (excluding interest costs), compared with the retail
sector average of 19.
The company will raise about Pounds 12m from the flotation, which will pay
off the remainder of its long-term debt. Some Pounds 8m of shares will be
sold by existing shareholders, and after the flotation the management will
own about 9 per cent.
Hamleys was founded in 1760, and by 1990 it had passed through the hands of
Lines Toys, Burtons, Harris Queensway and a 1989 US-led management buy-in,
before the current management arrived.
Mr Howard Dyer, chairman, and Mr Stephen Woodbridge, managing director -
both senior members of the Williams Holdings management team - have
transformed its operating performance, but by January 1993 the company had
only returned to its 1986 profit levels.
Mr Dyer argues that an anticipated pick-up in tourism to the UK should
improve sales, since about 50 per cent of customers are tourists.
In addition, improving economic conditions should encourage greater spending
from the 5m customers that enter the store each year, of whom only 30 per
cent buy something.
The management is also pushing to capitalise on the Hamleys name and its
retailing skills. It has opened outlets in Covent Garden and Heathrow's
Terminal 4, and will open another at the entrance to the Channel Tunnel.
Mr Dyer said Hamleys would not try to replicate the disastrous foray into
high street toy stores, instigated under Harris Queensway. New stores are
small, focused, and aimed at tourists.
Hamleys will increase own-brand product sales, which currently account for
about 3 per cent of sales, in order to further develop its reputation.
It has also started operating toy concessions for other retailers, signing
an agreement to manage toy departments for 18 House of Fraser stores, and
supplying a further six.
The pricing of the issue will be announced on April 26, and dealing is
expected to start on May 6. The lead sponsors are JO Hambro Magan and
Cazenove.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940414

