FT942-16398

FT  11 APR 94 / Let-down for lift-truck brothers: The 1983 takeover of a
German company has come back to haunt the founders of Lancer Boss


   By ANDREW BAXTER


There is a bitter irony for Sir Neville Bowman-Shaw and his younger brother
Trevor in the receivership of much of Lancer Boss Group, the
Bedfordshire-based lift-truck producer which they founded and own.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Lancer Boss acquired a reputation for
being pipped at the post in the takeovers which created the big players in
the world lift-truck industry.
It finally broke its duck in 1983 with the purchase of the virtually
bankrupt Steinbock in Germany. Other acquisitions in Spain, Italy and France
followed, and by the early 1990s Lancer Boss had reached the top 10 in an
industry where a wide product range and geographical diversity are
increasingly important. It has latterly slipped to 13th.
Now however, the Steinbock acquisition has returned to haunt Sir Neville.
The German company is understood to be in a form of receivership after
German banks took issue with his plans to expand the group. Several British
subsidiaries have been put into receivership in consequence and Sir Neville,
the chairman, has lost his executive powers.
The brothers have weathered many setbacks in the past 37 years, but nothing
quite like this. Sir Neville, who sold encyclopedias after leaving the army,
and his brother, who sold vacuum cleaners, started importing Dutch-built
sidelift trucks in 1957.
Within a year they had parted company with their supplier. With the help of
some engineering drawing books from WH Smith they began designing their own
equipment. The front axle fell off their first machine the day after it was
delivered but a decade of rapid growth followed.
It nearly went under in 1974 because of over-expansion and supply problems
on components, and a period of retrenchment followed before the European
expansion of the mid-1980s and early 1990s.
Sir Neville has criticised the 'bloodlust' of bankers who went for the
company's jugular in 1974, but yesterday he stressed that the recent
behaviour of his British banks, led by National Westminster, was 'excellent
and beyond reproach'.
Steinbock's German banks, however, objected to the outside investors with
which Sir Neville had been negotiating on expanding the group, and withdrew
their support. Sir Neville had no option but to call in the receivers to
protect the UK companies.
The debacle is a personal tragedy for the Bowman-Shaws, but will almost
certainly not be the end of the Lancer Boss story.
Innovative new products are to be launched next week and Mr Allan Rawnsley,
a consultant on the industry, believes interest in the company from rival
lift-truck producers and other companies could be 'red hot'.
He suggested Jungheinrich of Germany would be attracted by Lancer Boss,
whose internal combustion-engined trucks would complement its own strong
position in electric trucks. Toyota of Japan, which through Toyoda Loom is
the world's second-biggest producer, may be lured by the prospect of a
stronger base in Europe.
Such a deal may not necessarily spell doom for all the 700 UK employees of
Lancer Boss. Sir Neville points out that Leighton Buzzard is the cheapest
manufacturing location in the group, and one observer even suggested that a
long-awaited manufacturing reorganisation at Leighton Buzzard, replacing
several small plants with one big new factory, may at last go ahead.
If it does, however, it will be under new - possibly foreign - owners,
ending large-scale UK ownership in the industry. Lancer Boss's great UK
rival, Lansing Bagnall, was bought by Linde in 1989, and as Lansing Linde is
now an integral part of the German company's global strategy.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940411

