FT942-14353

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (29): Airports of the world - Changi -
so little to improve / Singapore


   By KIERAN COOKE


Singapore is clean. It is efficient. It has very little crime. It is a
country that works.
Singapore is boring. Too controlled. More like a giant theme park than a
country. A society in which people are reduced to digits by a government
obsessed by staying ahead.
Opinions on Singapore differ wildly. But even the most jaded observer of the
Singapore scene finds very little to criticise about Changi Airport, the
island republic's international terminus.
First, there is the space. There are acres of arrival and departures halls.
Plenty of seating is available, even at peak travel times. The restaurants
and bars are almost never crowded. And there are enough shops to exhaust a
wallet full of plastic (few bargains are on offer).
It is difficult to tell when Changi is busy. Perhaps that is the test of a
truly efficient airport. No queues, no bustle, no hustlers trying to carry
your bag off to some dark place. Changi runs like - well - like Singapore.
More than half of the Changi site was reclaimed from the sea. Changi opened
in 1981 and now handles more than 18m passengers a year. It is consistently
voted as one of the world's best airports.
A bit of time between flights? A free city tour can be arranged. Singapore
does not suffer the traffic mayhem of other cities in Asia. Your sightseeing
bus is guaranteed to get you back in time.
Need a little rest? Then there are two transit hotels. Rooms can be leased
for SDollars 48 (Dollars 30) for six hours. The charge is double for 12
hours. There are saunas, fitness rooms, a cinema and business centres.
There's even a carp pond to gaze into and meditate.
Skytrains link Changi's two terminals. Kleptomaniacs seem to roam the
world's airports pinching luggage trolleys. No such problems at Changi.
Enough trolleys to trip over.
Singapore loves statistics. It's a sure bet that passengers arriving in
Singapore clear the airport faster than anywhere else. Queues at immigration
are rare. Luggage comes off the carousel like fish down a slide.
No matter how efficient an airport is, the letdown usually happens when
weary passengers reach the real world outside to be greeted by taxi touts or
face an ill-tempered wait for transport.
But in Singapore, air-conditioned taxis are ready to whisk you to your
hotel.
Some might quibble that Changi is a bit soulless. But then airports these
days are hardly places that encourage warmth and tenderness.
There is only one real problem. Changi, in common with other airports, now
bombards passengers in departure lounges with TV pulp. There is no escape.
The screens are large. The sound cannot be turned down. It makes you want to
leave - even to leave Changi.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940420

