FT941-12802

FT  28 JAN 94 / People: Fresh breath sweeps into Welsh aviation sector


For a man usually associated with the introduction of the breathalyser
setting up a small charter air business is not so far fetched as it may
seem.
Welsh Dragon Aviation, launched in Cardiff yesterday, brings to fruition a
dream Tom Parry Jones had when he was a schoolboy in Anglesey, north Wales,
50 years ago.
He then lived not far from the RAF base on the island 'and the sight of the
jets taking-off and landing fired in me the sort of boyhood enthusiasm for
flying that has lasted all my life.'
But instead of taking up flying he became a chemist, took a doctorate in
Canada and while lecturing in Cardiff in the late 1960s was introduced to an
engineer who had an idea for an advanced form of the breathalyser.
The breathalyser had been introduced in the US in about 1940 but it was a
cumbersome affair which needed a laboratory to produce results.
Jones - with his speciality in alcohol chemistry - and his colleague set up
Lion Laboratories to develop the first hand-held electronic breathalyser in
the world.
'That was 1971,' he says, 'and it changed everything. We produced a piece of
equipment the size of a cigarette packet which allowed police to test
drivers at the roadside instead of having to wait for samples to be
analysed. Our success was immediate. We captured not just the British market
but a big share of the world market with sales to the US, Scandinavia and
the rest of Europe.'
Three years ago Parry reached the point where he 'looked for other
challenges' and sold out to MPD, of Kentucky.
At the age of 56 he learnt to fly, entered a round-the-world race - 'we were
respectably placed in the middle of the field' - and subsequently bought a
bigger plane, a Cessna twin 340, the basis of his new company Welsh Dragon.
The company has bought the trading name and on-going business of Brenair
International, for a sum Parry Jones declines to disclose, and intends to
tap the business and sporting market with the Cessna and a larger Piper
Chieftain.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940128

