FT941-3537

FT  16 MAR 94 / Clintons seek to divert attention from Whitewater


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton began a campaign-style swing through New Hampshire
yesterday, vowing to keep his eye on domestic policies despite attacks from
'people who are giving me hell in Washington.'
Mrs Hillary Clinton also continued the administration's attempts to divert
the nation's attention away from the Whitewater affair, stemming from the
Clinton's financial dealings in Arkansas in the 1980s, over which they have
come under heavy fire from Republicans in Washington.
Mrs Clinton was due to address a rally in St. Louis on the second day of a
trip promoting the administration's healthcare reform plan.
On Monday night the President launched an impassioned attack on his
Republican critics and made a plea for a nationwide debate over what he
called the issues of concern to Americans.
'This overriding negative, intensely personal, totally political
devoid-of-principles attack is not good for the country,' he said. 'It is
inconsistent with the tradition of Abraham Lincoln and Teddy Roosevelt.'
He described himself as 'an old-fashioned' man, who believes in the contest
between good and bad and that good wins out.
'We have to appeal to what is good in this country,' he said. 'We have to
ask people to face hard truth and debate hard issues and come together and
think new thoughts about problems that we are frankly not solving today.'
Mr Clinton appeared yesterday morning at a gathering of citizens in the
small New Hampshire town of Nashua, where he got heavy support during his
campaign for president.
In the friendly New Hampshire crowd, he found at least one who agreed with
his attempt to refocus the national debate.
'I'm 68 years old,' one woman told him. 'Whitewater is for canoeing and
rafting. Shame on those who would detract and distract from the important
work you're doing with universal health coverage and jobs.'
'Thank you ..bless you,' Mr Clinton said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940316

