FT944-5950

FT  01 DEC 94 / Accountancy: Clarke's 'lurker' worries insolvency experts -
Jim Kelly reports on possible gaps in the chancellor's plan to keep
threatened businesses afloat


   By JIM KELLY


Every budget contains what one partner at a Big Six firm this week described
as a 'lurker': the seemingly dull detail that will actually change people's
lives far more than the trumpeted measures to promote jobs or increase
savings.
It is part of the definition of such an issue that it is not apparent, and
it is probably too early to say what Mr Kenneth Clarke's contribution to the
species is likely to be. However, for accountants, the Budget held two small
seeds of change.
Heralding a new 'rescue culture' in insolvency, the chancellor said: 'During
the recent recession, businesses, particularly small businesses, were too
often being closed down by their creditors and jobs lost before rescue
options had been properly explored.'
Mr Clarke explained that to give 'management more time to order their
affairs', a 28-day moratorium would be introduced, binding on all parties,
during which rescue prospects could be evaluated and creditors possibly
brought into an arrangement. The chancellor added: 'We are also consulting
further on a mechanism to help substitute equity for debt of firms in
administration or receivership.'
The details released by the Inland Revenue also contained the news that
'individuals will now be able to have necessary expenditure which takes
place after trading activities have ceased relieved for tax purposes against
other income or capital gains.'
'These measures,' said Mr Clarke, 'will contribute further to the creation
of a rescue culture, discouraging wasteful liquidation of sound businesses.'
The announcement prompted several partners with the big firms to remark that
this was all well and good, if a bit late, considering the position of the
economy relative to the recession which brought about the problem.
Insolvency practitioners might also argue that sound businesses are not
lost. The ownership might change through the insolvency process but that is
a different thing.
It looks as though practitioners, and others, will have to wait some time
for the vital detail missing in the chancellor's statement. The paper on
insolvency reform will possibly be with us by Christmas.
Mr Colin Bird, senior corporate recovery partner at Price Waterhouse, says
that the corporate affairs minister Mr Jonathan Evans recently reported
that, after lengthy consultation, there was a consensus in favour of the
moratorium.
There was no consensus, however, on the position of the banks during such a
moratorium. The control of assets during the moratorium period is crucial to
the moratorium issue and no answer was provided by the chancellor. The
British Bankers Association has already said it is unhappy with the
moratorium and the possible curbs it would place on the power of banks to
appoint receivers.
As Mr Bird, who is chairman of the technical committee of the Society of
Practitioners in Insolvency, says: 'You don't want to screw up the whole
basis of lending by banks to small businesses in this country.'
The issue of control during the moratorium is also central to concerns that
such a measure might give unscrupulous directors the opportunity for fraud.
Despite the chancellor's promise of 'safeguards', the public interest issue
will prove controversial. 'This is a very draconian measure and safeguards
are needed against possible abuse,' says Mr Bird.
Other questions crowd in once the concept of a moratorium is accepted. Would
a company's listing have to be suspended? 'I can't imagine not,' says Mr
Bird, considering that the calling of a moratorium would have to represent
the beginning of an insolvency period as creditors would not be paid during
the 28 days.
The suggestion from the chancellor that equity could be substituted for debt
during insolvency is, according to Mr Bird, 'mind blowing'. Although the
government is still at an early stage, Mr Bird essentially envisages debt,
other than mortgage debt, being wiped out and the equity being taken away
from the shareholders and placed with the senior creditor.
All creditors would be offered an option, valid for three months. 'This
would sure make companies solvent,' comments Mr Bird. The proposal depends
on the creation of a securities market for the options and Mr Bird wonders
if the proposals are workable despite being 'interesting economics'.
The second measure which surfaced in the Budget was self-assessment - the
biggest reform to the personal tax system since the introduction of PAYE 50
years ago. 'SA', as it is known, will be on stream by 1996-97.
Around four million people, mostly the self-employed, company directors and
partners and those with investments, currently use agents, such as
accountants, to file tax returns to the Revenue. All these returns fall
within the new system.
SA is a tax system based on figures provided by the taxpayer. The taxpayer,
or their agent, is invited to carry out an assessment of their liability on
the forms provided - but this element is not compulsory.
More fundamentally, the new system is based on current year assessment. The
tax bill for any year relates to the income in that same year and the new
system brings together all income, and capital gains, to be taxed at one
time. The new system has a set of payment dates which are fixed.
Accountants were concerned with two facets of the self-assessment which had
been extensively trailled before the Budget. First, a strict regime of
anti-avoidance measures was proposed to make sure profits and payments were
not shifted around during the transition period in order to avoid liability.
According to Mr Philip David, at Ernst & Young, and a specialist on SA,
these have been watered down in the proposed Finance Bill text.
The second issue was the requirements on employers to provide the
information needed to file the SA return and penalties for failure to do so
by set times. These were published with the Budget, after lengthy
consultation, and are likely to disappoint some employers and accountants.
Mr Michael Kaltz, employer services tax partner at Ernst & Young, said: 'I
am astonished that the Revenue can quote figures of 80 per cent support for
the proposed extremely stringent penalty regime for 'accountants individuals
and others'. We agreed with the 65 per cent of employers who thought these
proposals were a bad idea.'
Finally SA has one other long-term repercussion for accountants. Its
introduction is planned to coincide with the development of the Electronic
Lodgement Service (ELS). This will let accountants file the returns direct
from their own computers, through a secure 'gateway', to the Inland Revenue
computerised system.
A pilot study is currently under way involving the Big Six. The problem is
that the accountants want something out of the project other than helping
the Inland Revenue cut its costs. Mr John Whiting, who heads a special
business forum looking at the project with the Revenue, and is a partner at
Price Waterhouse, says a shopping list of possible benefits have been given
to the Revenue for consideration.
This list swings from the improbable - making agents fees tax deducatable
when ELS is being used - to the extremely modest: allowing Revenue
information to flow back through the gateway to accountants. In the middle
are suggestions such as reducing the technical requirements for SA filing.
Whatever the outcome of this tussle, it will be crucial to the benefits
accountants, and their clients, can win from a system which may one day
dominate the entire UK tax regime.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941201

