FT944-14572

FT  22 OCT 94 / Brazilians wake up from a Real dream: The election over, the
consumer boom has been brought to a sudden halt


   By ANGUS FOSTER


Millions of Brazilian consumers this week woke up from a dream they hoped
would never end. After several months of falling prices and easy credit, the
government announced a package of measures to clamp down on consumer
spending before inflation reignited.
Since the July launch of a new currency, the Real, Brazilians have stocked
up on goods ranging from cars to kettles. The Real reduced monthly inflation
from 50 per cent to less than 2 per cent. Consumers, who found their wages
were worth more, went on a buying spree.
Sales of TV sets in August were 75 per cent higher than in the same month
last year. Mappin, a large department store chain, saw sales rise 20 per
cent in September and the beginning of October. Poorer consumers found they
could suddenly afford canned soft drinks, which fueled a surge in demand
that has left supermarket shelves empty as Brazil has run out of aluminium
cans.
The government was happy to let the spree go on because it helped the
election chances of its candidate, Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who planned
the Real's launch. Once elected, the government was free to apply the brakes
and cool the overheating economy.
The package of measures announced this week mainly involved reducing the
period of credit for consumers. Families hoping to buy an oven or washing
machine could spread the payments over 12 months. Now they have only three
months to find the money.
By yesterday morning, the credit squeeze had started to have its desired
effect. Mr Abrahim da Souza, a salesman at a big domestic appliance retailer
in Sao Paulo, said his sales had fallen sharply. 'People are still coming to
ask for prices but when they hear about the new rules and the shorter credit
periods, they are going away without buying anything,' he said.
The government's other main target were the consorcios, or informal credit
organisations, which are common in Brazil and other developing countries.
This is how the consorcios work: A family which wants to buy a car, but is
not rich enough to get bank financing, goes to a consorcio organiser. The
consorcio needs 100 members who agree to pay 50 monthly instalments each.
Every month two members get their car, one by pre-arranged rota, the other
by drawing names from a hat. At the end of the period, all the members have
a car, and the consorcio organiser is left with a fat profit.
The government has now announced a ban on consorcios buying household goods
and imposed a reduction from 50 months to 12 months for consorcios buying
cars. . The results are likely to be dramatic.
According to the Association of Brazilian Consorcio Companies - which may
exaggerate the figures a little to lift its political clout - 3.9m Brazilian
families belong to consorcios. Last year the industry recorded sales of
Dollars 5.7bn. Before the new government measures, it had expected sales to
reach Dollars 7bn this year.
Mr Luiz Favean, who works for one of Brazil's biggest consorcio organisers,
Remaza, says sales of the cheapest cars, which cost about Dollars 9,000,
will be severely affected by the government move. 'With a 50-month payment
period, poorer families earning Dollars 700 to Dollars 800 a month were able
to afford a car, but now they are not,' he said.
In the Extra supermarket near Sao Paulo's Paulista Avenue, many shoppers
were angered by the new measures. One woman, who had been mulling over
buying a fridge using the store's consorcio organiser, reacted with
frustration then resignation when told that the government had banned new
consorcios from buying domestic goods. 'Our governments always stop workers
from improving our lives,' she said. Asked what she would do next, she said:
'Waste the money on the lottery instead.'
This is a popular complaint, and a dangerous one for the incoming president.
In recent years, each time a government has managed briefly to reduce
inflation, it has triggered a wave of consumer spending which has then led
to a clampdown.
Brazil has the one of the world's biggest gaps between the haves and
have-nots and poorer people may feel they have been tricked once again. The
dream period which coincided with Mr Cardoso's election campaign is over.
Brazil's consumers now face the hangover.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941022

