FT942-15965

FT  13 APR 94 / Mitchell turns down Supreme Court offer


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


Senator George Mitchell of Maine yesterday withdrew his name from
consideration for the vacancy on the US Supreme Court on the grounds that he
could best serve President Bill Clinton by leading the Congressional effort
to pass healthcare reform.
The Democratic majority leader, the initial favourite to succeed the
retiring Justice Harry Blackmun, said Congress had 'a rare opportunity' to
pass 'comprehensive, meaningful healthcare reform and I don't want to do
anything to detract from that'.
Mr Mitchell, who has already announced his intention to leave Congress at
the end of the year, made up his mind on Monday afternoon and later met Mr
Clinton in the White House.
'He told me that he wanted to appoint me to the court,' Mr Mitchell said,
'but that he was concerned as I was about the prospect that the nomination
would affect my ability to serve as majority leader for the rest of the
session.' The president, he added, had 'reluctantly accepted' his arguments
for turning the Court appointment down.
The White House had been actively exploring ways in which the Senator might
be nominated, but still remain in Congress by delaying either a confirmation
vote or his swearing in as a justice until the end of the session.
Mr Mitchell may yet end up on the Court, possibly as Chief Justice. It is
widely assumed that Mr William Rehnquist, the conservative incumbent, will
stay on the bench until the 1996 election, not wishing to hand Mr Clinton
another opportunity to shape the Court. But should Mr Clinton or another
Democrat be returned, his retirement would be expected, with Mr Mitchell a
logical replacement.
The president has no shortage of alternatives for the Court. Leading
candidates are known to include Judge Jose Cabranes of Connecticut, who
could become the Court's first Hispanic member, Mr Drew Days, the solicitor
general and prominent black jurist, and two women, Judges Amalya Kearse and
Judith Kaye, both of New York.
Mr Mitchell's decision to say in Congress and fight for healthcare reform
underlines the high stakes of this pivotal item on the president's agenda.
Both the president and Mrs Hillary Clinton spent most of last week on the
road lobbying for their legislation.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940413

