FT944-10932

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (16): Silk, coffee and silicon chips - The
southern state of Karnataka


   By PAUL TAYLOR


Karnataka's chief minister, Mr M. Veerappa Moily, boasts that the south
Indian state has 'substituted the red carpet for red tape' in its dealings
with potential new investors. New foreign investments, he says, are handled
by a single agency and cleared within 30 days.
Judged by the number of Western high-tech companies which have operations in
Bangalore, Karnataka's capital, Mr Moily's aggressively pro-business
administration is succeeding, in this area at least.
Over the past decade Bangalore has reinforced its claim to be India's
Silicon Valley. Among the multinationals which have established operations
in the leafy Bangalore environs are 3M, AT & T, Digital Equipment, L M
Ericsson, Hewlett Packard, IBM, Motorola, Sanyo, Siemens, and Texas
Instruments. Some are wholly owned subsidiaries, others joint ventures with
Indian partners.
India's eighth largest state in terms of both land area and population,
Karnataka generates about Rs23bn of annual revenues from electronics and is
responsible for about a fifth of India's total electronics output. A tenth
of its 47m population lives in Bangalore, a city known for its pleasant
climate and friendly people.
Karnataka was one of the first states in India to industrialise and
pioneered hydro-electric power in South-east Asia with the building of the
Sivasamudram project in 1902. Ironically, although electric power was one of
the catalysts for the early industrialisation of the state, today a shortage
of power is one of the main constraints on economic growth.
The big surge in industrialisation came in the 1940s and 1950s when the
Indian government decided to base several big public sector companies in
Bangalore including Bharat Electronics and Bharat Earth Movers, Hindustan
Aeronautics, Hindustan Machine Tools and Indian Telephones Industries.
These companies have played an important role in the state and have provided
a strong magnet for ancillary companies, drawing in small-scale industries
which could work as sub-contractors to the big industries.
Today, Karnataka's main industries include electronics, computer
engineering, computer software and services, telecommunications,
aeronautics, machine tools, watch-making, electrical engineering, aluminium,
steel, cement, sugar, food processing, textiles and mining.
Other factors which have contributed to Karnataka's industrial growth have
included an abundance of natural mineral resources including high grade iron
ore, manganese and gold, a well developed network of research and research
establishments, a large pool of engineers and a high literacy rate of 56 per
cent compared with a national average of 52 per cent.
Bangalore, which is 3,000 feet above sea level, also benefits from a
particularly pleasant climate and relatively light rainfall. It is green
with parks and tree-lined roads - quite unlike other big industrial or
business centres, such as Bombay. It has become a popular city with young
educated Indians who frequent Bangalore's many western-style bars, cafes and
boutiques.
There is therefore a large pool of talent which foreign companies in the
electronics and computer software sectors in particular are keen to tap. The
Indian Institute of Science, the Indian Space Research Institute, National
Aeronautic Laboratory and the Central Machine Tool Institute are all to be
found in Bangalore together with a large number of engineering colleges,
training centres and universities.
Bangalore in particular has become known as an important source of software
engineering talent since the mid 1980s when many US technology companies
realised that demand was far outstripping the supply in the US.
Although wage rates are rising rapidly, foreign business leaders say it is
still possible to hire graduate engineers for between Dollars 1,000 to
Dollars 2,000 a month, a fraction of the cost of similarly qualified
employees in the US.
As a result many US, European and Asian information technology and
telecommunications companies have established computer services operations
in the state, mostly to service their internal software or chip design
requirements. Foreign investors say they are attracted by the state's
relatively good record in terms of labour relations, and usually harmonious
community relations as well as the Karnataka government's positive attitude
towards investors.
'Karnataka has been a magnet for foreign investment,' says Mr J C Lynn, the
state's chief secretary. Among companies which have recently chosen to site
their Indian headquarters in Bangalore are Brooke Bond, Lipton and
Britannia.
Under Mr Moily, whose tenure in office began in late 1992 after his
predecessor was ousted because of alleged corruption, the state has drawn up
a new development plan.
As part of its industrial policy the state established the first 'electronic
city' near Bangalore in the early 1980s and is developing two more
electronic cities at Mysore and Dharwad. But despite this focus on
electronics, Karnataka has also made considerable efforts to diversify its
industrial and agricultural base. At Mangalore, Karnataka's main port, a
large oil refinery has been built and is now being expanded. Similarly there
are plans to expand steel and cement production elsewhere in the state.
Irrigation schemes in the northern part of the state have allowed sugar-cane
and rice to be grown in some areas, and the state is rich in teak, rosewood
and sandalwood, particularly from Mysore, Karnataka's beautiful and historic
second city. Karnataka accounts for nearly half of India's silk production
and 80 per cent of the nation's coffee production. Sericulture employs about
200,000 people in the state and generates annual revenues of about Rs2.8bn
including RS1.6bn of foreign exchange earnings.
In industry, however, the rapid growth and development have brought new
problems - in particular, shortages of power, water and transportation.
Bangalore's airport has been brought up to international standards and there
are tentative plans to alleviate the city's traffic problems by setting up a
15 mile elevated mass transport system.
However, the top priority is to meet industry's appetite for electrical
power which already outstrips supply. As a result many companies install
their own generators. Mr Lynn, however, insists that the state can expand
its power capacity.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941108

