FT944-14384

FT  24 OCT 94 / Hamilton under growing pressure to step down


   By DAVID OWEN


The political career of Mr Neil Hamilton, one of the ministers at the heart
of recent allegations of financial impropriety, was hanging by a thread last
night after a senior cabinet minister appeared publicly to distance himself
from him.
The move - by Mr David Hunt, public services minister - came after two
former Conservative ministers, Mr Alan Clark and Mrs Edwina Currie,
indicated that the corporate affairs minister should step down from his post
while he clears his name.
Senior Conservative MPs suggested last night that Mr Hamilton, who has
vehemently denied charges of wrongdoing, should fight to prove his innocence
from the backbenches.
Mr Hamilton was named last week by Mr Mohamed Fayed, the Egyptian financier,
as one of two ministers who, Mr Fayed alleged, had received payments for
asking parliamentary questions.
Mr Hamilton is also alleged to have had an all-expenses paid stay at the
Ritz hotel in Paris. This may be the subject of a parliamentary inquiry. Mr
Fayed owns both the Ritz and Harrods, the London department store.
Meanwhile, the Home Office last night responded to separate reports
suggesting that Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, intervened directly
to help an application from Mr Ali Fayed, brother of Mohamed, for British
citizenship, by denying he had received special treatment.
'The home secretary was concerned at all times to see that the procedures
followed by the department were fair to Mr al-Fayed,' the Home Office said.
Labour said Mr Jack Straw, shadow home secretary, would be pressing for a
Commons statement by Mr Howard.
Commenting on ministerial standards in the wake of allegations about Mr
Hamilton's alleged hotel stay, Mr Hunt said: 'My view is that ministers and
members of parliament must never allow themselves to get into any position
where anyone outside could level an accusation against them that they
weren't adhering to the highest possible standards in public life.'
Mr Clark, a former trade minister, said the prime minister could 'quite
legitimately' say to Mr Hamilton that 'appearances make it impossible for
you to remain in your job for the time being'.
Mrs Edwina Currie, former health minister, said: 'A lot of us would feel
more comfortable if we could support Neil from the backbenches and not find
his work in government is being damaged.'
Mr Alex Carlile, Liberal Democrat MP for Montgomery, sent a letter to Mr
John Major last night referring to an injunction obtained by 'a senior
Minister' against the Financial Times.
Mr Carlile asked for confirmation that such proceedings were regarded as
private actions between those concerned and the press 'and that the
government neither has paid nor will underwrite or pay the costs of any such
private proceedings.'
Move to defuse sleaze row, Page 7
Observer, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941024

