FT943-12731

FT  23 JUL 94 / Caldera defiant over rights suspension


   By JOSEPH MANN


   CARACAS


Venezuela's President Rafael Caldera yesterday suspended constitutional
freedoms a day after Congress had ordered them restored, according to
Interior Minister Ramon Escovar Salom.
Congress voted on Thursday night to restore five out of six constitutional
rights suspended on June 27 by Mr Caldera, overriding protests from the
executive. The original suspension needed to be approved by Congress.
But the president yesterday called a special cabinet meeting to discuss the
move, after which Mr Salom reported that he had decided to suspend the
constitutional guarantees once again.
Citing a critical economic and financial situation in the country, President
Caldera last month decreed the suspension of three civil rights and three
economic rights established under the constitution. The civil rights
protected against arbitrary arrest and imprisonment and ensured the
inviolability of a citizen's home and free movement in and outside national
territory. The economic rights protected the freedom to engage in any legal
economic activity, the ownership of property and against expropriation
without due process and indemnity.
In a marathon session of both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, a
majority voted to restore all rights except that of the freedom to engage in
legal economic activity.
Three opposition political parties - Democratic Action (social democrats),
Copei (Christian democrats) and Radical Cause (a leftist group) - formed a
bloc to back restoration of the five rights. The two parties supporting
President Caldera, Convergence and the socialist MAS, walked out of the
congressional chamber during the vote.
Over the week, members of Mr Caldera's cabinet met congressmen to argue for
continued suspension of the rights. The suspension was also supported by the
military and security services.
However, opposition congressmen argued that existing legislation allowed the
executive sufficient powers to confront the country's problems.
Since the rights were removed, police and soldiers have raided scores of
food stores, arresting owners for alleged profiteering and confiscating
merchandise allegedly 'hoarded'. Police have also raided slum cities,
detaining hundreds of people suspected of criminal activities.
Officials have also seized property belonging to individuals and companies
linked to Banco Latino.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940723

