FT942-16370

FT  11 APR 94 / The case against Major's foes


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


The campaign against the British prime minister is typified by a Jak cartoon
in the Evening Standard showing a Scottish laird in a baronial hall telling
his wife: 'The trouble with John Major is that he just doesn't understand
ordinary people]', while two retainers bring on refreshments to the sound of
the bagpipes.
Old parliamentary hands used to tell new MPs: 'Your enemies are your own
side of the House. Your opponents sit opposite.' I can merely add that I
have seen nothing as hysterical, vicious and disproportionate to the faults
of its victim as the long-running anti-Major campaign.
The main complaint of the anti-Major camp against the Labour party is that
the latter cannot deliver some knockout propaganda blow to topple the prime
minister. It would, however, be surprising if mere political opponents could
rival the Tory anti-Major faction in pure venom. Things have reached a
ridiculous level when cabinet discussion becomes dominated by jockeying for
position for the succession: translated, this means that ministers vie with
each other to seem Euro-phobic.
What, then, are the charges against the prime minister? The first, partisan,
one is that Conservatives are doing very badly in the opinion polls and
could face a catastrophe in the Euro-elections. Governments doing badly in
mid-term elections are, however, among the oldest phenomena of democratic
politics. By-election losses of safe Conservative seats such as Torrington
and Orpington were par for the course in the Macmillan administration. Not
only is this natural; it is not regrettable. No serious student of politics
ever supposed that governments should depend on a day-to-day plebiscite. The
purpose of general elections is to enable voters to deliver a by-and-large
judgment every four or five years. Even that is a highly fallible system
but, as Churchill said, it is less bad than any other.
Let it be conceded straightaway that the present British government is
thoroughly second-rate, nowhere more so than in John Major's choice of
cronies with whom he feels most comfortable. But then so have most
governments been in the history of the world, except for those that have
been third-rate or diabolical. To bemoan this fact excessively is to commit
the cardinal sin of supposing that human progress comes from governments: it
comes from scientists, artists, engineers, business leaders and less
celebrated human beings acting individually or in combination. The
deliberate playing down of this fact by the supposedly free market right is
breathtaking.
The greatest fault of John Major is a lack of public facility with words -
he is fine in private. This lies behind almost every recent disaster. The
European voting volte face was partly due to a hyped-up negotiating stance.
The tragicomedy of 'Back to Basics' is another example. But pause for a
moment. Most of the prime minister's enemies on the right - with the
honourable exception of Frank Johnson in the Sunday Telegraph - want more
'Back to Basics' rather than less: that is, more self-appointed guardians of
puritan public virtue probing into the private lives of people in office.
Have you ever seen the anti-Majorites uttering a word of criticism of the
intrusive hypocrisy of the tabloids?
The fact is that Conservative leaders since Winston Churchill have all
lacked the gift of of words. Eden's speeches were greeted by Ernest Bevin
with the remark: 'one bloody cliche after another' (pronounced 'cluytch').
Macmillan, like Margaret Thatcher herself, was mainly recognised as an
orator in retirement. When he was attacked for lack of leadership, he
replied that people who wanted it should look to archbishops. As for Edward
Heath, it was a constant source of amazement that someone so sensitive to
music could be so insensitive to the nuances of the spoken word.
I have left until last the most obvious feature of the anti-Majorites, their
hostility to Europe - although they never make it clear whether they would
leave the Union or not. This came about almost by accident, because European
issues triggered off, although they did not cause, the departure of Lady
Thatcher. One result has been that paternalists and militarists, who could
not hide their disdain for the former prime minister when she was mainly
associated with free market policies, have now climbed on the anti-Majorite
bandwagon in her name.
Because of the infusion of this element, members of the free market right
have deteriorated abysmally in quality. Whereas in the early 1980s, they
supported the Thatcher government against the 365 economists who wanted more
expansionary economic policies, their typical stance now is 'cheap money and
plenty of it'. They have joined with the left in pedalling the myth that
there is something called 'government competence' that can remove the
business cycle and secure unending prosperity.
If anti-Major Tories had really read the works of their professed
intellectual inspirers such as Oakeshott and Hayek, they would appreciate
that the purpose of government is to provide a framework in which individual
citizens and voluntary associations can follow their own self-chosen
purposes. Leadership may be necessary in war (although Tolstoy had his
doubts - see War and Peace); but there is something deeply inadequate about
people who cannot get on with their peacetime lives without a scoutmaster in
Number 10 blowing on a tin whistle to show them the way.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940411

