FT942-15953

FT  13 APR 94 / World Trade News: Benefits of free trade deal are felt
already - Marrakesh Diary


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES and FRANCES WILLIAMS


The beauty of free trade, as Adam Smith argued two centuries ago, is that it
makes everybody better off. But rarely has anyone reaped the benefits
quicker than the city of Marrakesh, for which the Uruguay Round trade accord
is proving a splendid gravy train.
Not only have the 3,000 attendants at this week's ministerial conference of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade filled hotels and restaurants to
capacity; in preparation for their arrival, the city has been given a giant
spring-clean, at an estimated cost of Dh60m Pounds 4.3m.
The previously faded glories of the 1,000-year-old imperial capital have
been revived with a fresh coat of paint on every wall that the VIPs are
likely to see, while pot-holed roads have been re-surfaced to billiard table
smoothness. The country's first cellular telephone network has been rushed
into service, while top hotels have installed videophones - an innovation in
Morocco - which enable users to see each other while they talk.
But perhaps the biggest wonder of all is the overnight disappearance of the
hordes of beggars, pickpockets and assorted conmen who habitually prey on
unsuspecting tourists. After years of fruitless debate by the city fathers
on how to deal with this problem, the central government has solved it at a
stroke by rounding up several thousand of the usual suspects and shipping
them off to a distant army camp for the duration.
Drivers of the city's fleet of horse-drawn carriages have also been
instructed to refrain from their frequent practice of over-charging
customers and now accept the official fare, albeit grudgingly. However, the
spirit of profiteering is not dead. The newsagent in the Atlas Asni Hotel,
home of the press centre, is cheerfully demanding Dh50 for day-old copies of
the FT with a cover price of Dh15.
                             *      *      *
The question most frequently asked here is why Marrakesh was chosen for the
conference in the first place. Mr Arthur Dunkel, the previous Gatt
director-general, claims some of the credit. He first floated the idea of an
African venue for the Uruguay Round signing while on a visit to Morocco in
1990. King Hassan - described by Mr Dunkel as a visionary leader - jumped at
the idea.
The king apparently believes that the long-term political benefits of
playing host will be even bigger than the short-term economic boost to
Marrakesh. As well as demonstrating the country's commitment to economic
reform and openness to the outside world, the event is clearly intended to
cement links with the west. With troubles deepening in neighbouring Algeria,
Morocco may well need all the foreign friends it can get in the next few
years.
                             *      *      *
The biggest friend of all is the US, which Morocco was the first country to
recognise after the American war of independence. Washington is displaying
its belated gratitude by sending Vice-President Al Gore on a lightning trip
to Marrakesh this week.
Though the visit is due to last only seven hours, its logistics have been
creating headaches for high-powered American diplomats more used to haggling
over tariffs and quotas. First, they have to greet the vice-presidential
motorcade, being shipped in by a huge C-5A transport aircraft. Then there is
Mr Gore's ample retinue, due to arrive with him on Air Force Two tomorrow.
Fortunately, there is already a skilled advance man on the ground in the
shape of Mr Marc Ginsberg, US ambassador to Morocco. A Clinton campaign
groupie and foreign policy wonk, Mr Ginsberg speaks not only good French but
also Arabic, learned as a child while his architect father was working in
the Middle East.
                             *      *      *
Japan's advance work has, typically, been even more diligent. More than a
month ago it dispatched a top diplomat on a fact-finding mission to
Marrakesh. As he explained with some glee, his main task was to locate and
then try out all the nearby golf courses. Seasoned trade policy experts
suspect it is really a cunning ruse to enable Japanese delegates to avoid
another broadside from Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, by staging
a tactical retreat to the fairway. Now that Japan's political crisis has
delayed until Thursday the arrival of Mr Tsutomu Hata, the foreign minister,
in Marrakesh, the contingency plan may not be needed after all.
                             *      *      *
Another delegation looking a shade leaderless is Britain's. Neither Mr
Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, nor Mr Richard Needham,
trade minister, thought it worth coming to Marrakesh. Instead, the
assignment has been left to Mr Tim Sainsbury, number three at the Department
of Trade and Industry, whose job is not to do with trade but with industry.
A bit odd considering all the fuss Mr John Major, the prime minister, made
about the Uruguay Round being the transcendent economic event of last year.
But perhaps just as well given Mr Heseltine's well-advertised disdain for
trade policy matters. Whitehall insiders describe as 'embarrassing' his few
bilateral encounters with top US trade negotiators, who were far better
briefed on the details.
                             *      *      *
If anyone has done better than Marrakesh out of the conference it is France,
which has called on old colonial links to win some handy contracts for
equipment. 'The French have really cleaned up on this whole event,' says a
senior diplomat who has been closely involved in organising the meeting.
One of the less successful results is the press room, where journalists are
required to pay for telephone calls using French-supplied 'smart cards'.
These can only be bought with cash and are consumed in vast quantities on
international calls. They also have a nasty habit of running out during the
computer transmissions which most print journalists use to send stories
these days. . . .

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940413

