FT942-14374

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (10): The economics of persuasion -
Christine Buckley explains the useful art of upgrading your seat


   By CHRISTINE BUCKLEY


Your mission, should you choose to accept it - and let me tell you that your
recession-hit company says you have no choice - is to prepare for a meeting
in an economy-class airline seat.
You must be able to maintain keen concentration and execute your work when
all about you is chaos and acute confinement.
A fine sense of balance will be essential if you are to keep a few papers on
the tiny table in front of you. Skills of contortion will come to the fore
as writing - or heaven forbid, working on a portable - will challenge any
theory of ergonomics. Unless you are very lucky, you will not have secured
an aisle seat.
All around you will be the frivolous noise of holiday travellers. At
frequent intervals with no notice, a few particularly excitable children
will run your way.
And those are only the tasters of your obstacles. If your concentration
manages to remain reasonably intact against these odds, you will also have
to cope with the sudden feeding of the 5,000 when those trays come round.
After that will come the loud and punchy Pearl and Dean style productions of
the duty-free films closely followed by the clatter of the duty-free
trolleys.
Sounds unreasonable? Corporate economising on air travel can indeed be tough
on the travelling executive.
So, what are you going to do about it? Where is your initiative? What
strategy will free you from this business travel into hell?
Well, Passenger X, it won't help to hear this but you should have instigated
action before you left terra firma. Have you never heard of upgrades?
Economy class need not necessarily be a one-way ticket, although obviously
airlines are reluctant to bump a passenger into a higher standard seat just
because he or she has the effrontery to ask for it.
You must also be braced to fight off a good number of rivals who are also
seeking salvation from their allotted economy class. The recession has
obliged many executives to turn right when they enter an aircraft - the way
to economy.
A survey last year by American Express showed that only 14.9 per cent of UK
companies allowed all staff to travel business class, a sharp drop from the
previous year when the figure was 25.4 per cent. According to that survey,
26 per cent of senior managers in Britain flew economy class to long-haul
destinations.
Last year, too, British Airways said that main growth in the first half of
1993 had come in economy class travel.
So Passenger X, if you are up to beating off the opposition with your laptop
and briefcase, consider the options.
Goodwill upgrades at the discretion of the airline from economy class to
business or similar standard are possible. You may be able to sweet-talk the
purser. But the party line from airlines is invariably that passengers get
what they pay for. Some are considerate on compassionate grounds, but
corporate executives wishing to work cannot expect to win such sympathy.
Virgin, for example, says that upgrades for full-fare paying passengers in
economy class are allocated strictly, irrespective of business
considerations. But the airline pledges that it will not turn completely
deaf ears to the plight of a struggling executive: 'It always depends on the
circumstances. Business travellers using economy could check in early, make
their request early and we could see what was suitable.'
Cathay Pacific unlocks the promise of consideration towards the business
traveller via the Marco Polo club. Membership of the club, which requires
relatively frequent - but not excessive - travel, gives the traveller at a
basic level priority service privileges. These include use of the airline's
lounges and those of reciprocal airlines, advanced seat reservations,
telephone or fax check-ins, extra baggage allowance, priority baggage
handling plus frequent flyer programmes.
For the hard-pressed economy-class business person, frequent flyer
programmes are an additional passage out of business travel hell.
On Cathay Pacific one only needs to make two return journeys economy class
between Hong Kong and Los Angeles to qualify for green card Marco Polo
membership. Cathay offers higher grade Marco Polo class such as gold or
diamond.
Likewise, KLM is keen to promote frequent travel concessions as opposed to
straightforward upgrading. The airline says that it does not have a policy
of upgrading because higher standards of travel should be enjoyed by those
passengers who have paid for such treatment.
But KLM operates the frequent flyer programme called Flying Dutchman World
of Difference through which economy class travellers are able to upgrade.
Further schemes guarantee the traveller privileges such as accommodation
upgrades, late check-outs, express check-outs and VIP treatment. In addition
to membership of such schemes, passengers receive points every time they
travel with KLM which they can use towards upgrading their seats.
TWA operates a similar policy. The airline, which last year abolished its
economy class in favour of a new comfort class which features more legroom,
issues full-fare paying comfort class passengers with an upgrade
certificate.
In fact, economy class has also been a beneficiary of a general trend among
airlines to ditch first-class travel. Usually, such a move is accompanied by
improvements to the remaining lower levels. In a trend set by British
Airways 10 years ago on its European flights, scrapping upper class caught
on quickly and most airlines followed suit.
Virgin took the classless society to long haul, replacing first with Upper
Class, which offers business class with first class comfort and providing
mid-class which aims to offer business comfort for full economy fare paying
passengers.
But what if upgradings - both personally and in terms of the airline's
provision - have firmly eluded you and you are absolutely stuck in economy?
What will the airlines do to lessen the misery?
Bad news, really. Little provision is made for business to continue as usual
when executive meets economy.
Few airlines provide newspapers. Virgin suggested that one of the few things
it may be able to offer the determined executive in economy class would be a
seat behind a partition.
Such accommodation may prove not quite mission impossible and you may be
able to assemble your thoughts and papers, but don't bank on it.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940420

