FT943-13118

FT  21 JUL 94 / Greenspan indicates US rates may have to increase


   By MICHAEL PROWSE and PATRICK HARVERSON


   WASHINGTON, NEW YORK


Mr Alan Greenspan, US Federal Reserve chairman, signalled yesterday that
further rises in US short-term interest rates may be needed to restrain
inflation. But he did not give the impression that the Fed would tighten
monetary policy in the near future.
He said the dollar had been weaker than he expected in the past six months
and that was 'bad for the economy'. However, he indicated the Fed would not
let exchange rate considerations determine US monetary policy.
The Fed would continue to focus on domestic goals of solid economic growth
and price stability. He said progress on these fronts would 'ensure that
dollar-denominated assets remain attractive to global investors.
'It is an open question whether our actions to date have been sufficient to
head off inflationary pressures and thus maintain favourable trends in the
economy,' he told the Senate banking committee. 'We are monitoring economic
and financial data carefully to assess whether additional adjustments are
appropriate.'
His remarks initially boosted the dollar, but it later fell back on the view
that, even if US rates were increased again, that might depress bond and
stock prices, reducing overseas demand for US financial assets. In New York
last night the dollar was down slightly at DM1.56385 and Y98.675.
Mr Greenspan spoke after the release of figures showing that housing starts
fell 10 per cent in June from May, a much bigger fall than expected. Data on
starts are volatile on a monthly basis, but this was seen as another sign
that higher long-term interest rates are beginning to depress demand for
housing.
While giving the Fed scope to raise rates again, Mr Greenspan made no effort
to prepare the ground for a tightening of policy, as he did at the end of
January before the Fed embarked on a series of tightening moves that lifted
short-term rates from 3 per cent to 4 1/4 per cent by late May.
He gave the impression instead that the Fed would tighten only if growth
failed to moderate or if the inflation outlook deteriorated. The Fed had not
raised rates at its policy meeting in early July as there was 'considerable
uncertainty about the pace of expansion and the pressures on prices going
forward'. It saw some recent 'hints of moderation in the growth of domestic
final demand'. But the balance of evidence indicated that 'growth remained
above its long-run trend' in the second quarter.
Mr Greenspan was delivering his twice-yearly Humphrey Hawkins monetary
testimony on Capitol Hill.
US share and bond prices were unsettled by Mr Greenspan's comments. The
30-year government bond fell almost a full point, pushing up its yield to
7.540 per cent, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 21.04 lower at
3,727.27.
Moderate growth rate, Page 3
Bonds, Page 30
Currencies, Page 35
Wall Street, Page 41

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940721

