FT941-4041

FT  12 MAR 94 / Travel: Light fantastic - Why artists colonised a remote
Danish fishing village


   By JAMES HENDERSON


Skagen is the most northerly tip of Denmark. As you head up through the rich
farmland of Jutland, the country thins out and turns east, tapering to a
windblown sandy finger that points across to Sweden.
The Skagen peninsula separates two fearsome-sounding seas, the Skaggerak in
the North Sea and the Kattegat, the beginnings of the Baltic. Skagen has a
name in English - a somehow threatening word - the Skaw. Certainly the area
was a danger to sailors once: the Skaw has claimed many ships on its sands.
Skagen is no longer threatening and remote, but it was its remoteness 100
years ago that attracted a group of painters. They came to what was a tiny
fishing village in order to escape the stultifying formality of Copenhagen's
salons. Starting in the 1870s, many Nordic painters decamped there each
summer, forming a sort of artists' colony where they would paint and make
merry.
The Skagen painters are known particularly for their treatment of light. Any
visitor to Skagen will discover that the light has a startling clarity and
brightness - a combination of clear sea air and sunlight reflected off the
two seas and vast expanses of sand.
Summer days are long that far north (Skagen is level with Inverness), and
there is a magical moment each evening at about 10pm, called l'heure bleue,
when the light dissolves into a blue haze between night and day.
The most famous picture produced by the Skagen painters is Summer Evening on
the South Beach at Skagen. Two women in long white dresses are walking on
the strand; the folds in the sand are lit by late-evening sunlight and their
dresses appear almost illuminated. Behind them the sea and sky are an
indistinguishable blue. It was painted 100 years ago by P S Kroyer, perhaps
the finest of the Skagen painters.
I went there in November, when there was an un-summerly chill and it was
dark by 5pm. The town of Skagen has expanded - boats no longer put out from
the beach as they do in the paintings, but from a large fishing and ferry
port. The town has spread into small suburbs.
But the cluster of houses of the old town are charming and pretty, with a
very Nordic neatness. Most of the old houses are single-storey, with ochre
walls and orange roof-tiles, their window-frames and eaves picked out in
white. They are couched in tidy gardens behind white picket fences and
nearly all have a flag-pole. On holidays the Danes fly long double-tapered
flags like medieval standards.
Even in November the light is clear and strong. I found that it had a
curious, invigorating effect, bestowing the delicious, if irrational,
feeling of confident expectation that I normally associate with the onset of
spring. I had prepared myself for melancholy; instead there was a spring in
my step. I could see why painters liked Skagen so much.
Kroyer's Summer Evening hangs in the Skagen museum, which tells the story of
the artists through their paintings. The town itself is central to their
work; there are scenes of fishermen launching their boats and scenes of home
life. The artists also painted one another, and Kroyer was a leader in their
Bohemian revelries.
If the artists came to escape Copenhagen society, the salons soon followed
them. The railway arrived in 1890, the smart Copenhageners built their
seaside villas and Skagen became a chic place to be. The Danish royal family
built a summer palace and royal families visited from all over Europe.
The town has lost its Bohemian feel; there are only a few painters now, and
writers and actors tend to live in private villas, but there is a pleasant
seaside feel and a number of attractive old hotels.
The Skagen painters never amounted to a 'school'. Over the 40 years that the
town flourished, they used widely differing styles and techniques. Some were
realist, almost naturalist in their depiction of the fishermen's simple
lives; others were clearly influenced by the impressionists. There are even
snatches of dour Danish formality in imitation of Dutch masters.
Brondums Hotel still holds pride of place in Skagen. There is a pleasant
antique air about the dining room and reception rooms. They are lined with
dark wood panelling and some original paintings still hang on the walls. I
crept in one afternoon to flee the cold and was working my way through a pot
of hot chocolate when three impossibly tall brunettes tripped in, wearing
evening dress and overcoats, as though they had lost their way en route to a
Copenhagen dinner party.
They chatted furtively in a language I did not understand. It all seemed a
little unlikely for 3pm, particularly when one of the girls flashed me a
wicked smile and started to undress.
All was explained a moment later when the stylist came bounding in - they
were models - and started touching-up their outfits, before despatching
them, one by one, into the cold. The light in Skagen is so good, even in
November, that photographers travel there for fashion shoots.
James Henderson flew to Denmark with Maersk Air (London tel: 071-333-0066),
which has twice-daily links from Gatwick to Copenhagen and to Billund in
Jutland.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

940312

