FT942-12308

FT  30 APR 94 / Israel agrees 'self-rule' for Palestine economy: Accord
covers monetary policy, banks and tax


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


The incoming Palestinian government in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
enclave of Jericho will have wide ranging powers to decide its own monetary
policy, supervise Palestinian banks and set its direct taxation rates,
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation agreed yesterday.
The landmark economic accord was signed in Paris after a breakthrough in
peace talks between the PLO and Israel, which have agreed to sign an
agreement next Wednesday on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip
and Jericho.
The economic pact, which will govern economic relations between the Jewish
state and the future self-governed Palestinian economy for five years, was
described by Mr Avraham Shochat, Israeli finance minister, as 'a historical
breakthrough toward a new economy of peace'.
The comprehensive free trade agreement covers imports and customs, monetary
policy, taxation, labour, agriculture, industry and tourism and was signed
yesterday by Mr Shochat and Mr Ahmed Qurie, PLO negotiator, at the French
foreign ministry. It brought to an end five months of often difficult
negotiations.
However, both sides had to exclude, until further talks, the controversial
issue of whether the Palestinians will have the right to mint their own
currency  - a key demand of the PLO.
In talks in Cairo that precede next week's Gaza signing, Israel also agreed
yesterday to grant other symbols of statehood to the nascent Palestinian
state, including the right of Palestinians to have their own international
dialling code and to issue stamps and travel documents which will also carry
the word 'passport'.
Renewed progress in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has fuelled hopes
of advancing the peace talks between Israel and Syria. Mr Warren
Christopher, US secretary of state, yesterday held detailed talks with Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, before his planned departure today
for Damascus.
Israeli officials say they hope Mr Christopher will shuttle between the
Syrian capital and Jerusalem and take fresh Israeli proposals to President
Hafez al-Assad of Syria in order to advance the sluggish talks which focus
on an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Golan Heights in return for full
peace.
In Paris, Mr Qurie said Palestinians were looking forward to a new era of
common interest rather than dependency in their economic relations with
Israel. He urged international donors, who have promised Dollars 2.5bn
(Pounds 1.6bn) of aid over five years, to fulfil their commitments to what
he said would be a liberal market Palestinian economy.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940430

