FT944-6002

FT  01 DEC 94 / General Accident wins Post Office insurance deal


   By DAVID OWEN, ANDREW ADONIS and RALPH ATKINS


The Post Office will next week presage a possible move into selling general
insurance products by announcing a deal with General Accident, the composite
insurer, to sell travel insurance at many of its 20,000 branches.
Details about the Post Office's hopes of diversifying into selling insurance
 -including household policies - coincided with news that it has suffered a
serious defeat in a battle with the Treasury over the government levy on
post service profits.
Post Office Counters, the division of the postal service responsible for the
branch network, will announce trials starting early next year for travel
insurance, with the intention of the scheme being extended nationwide later
in the year.
The arrangement is likely to be structured so the Post Office earns a
percentage on every policy or block of policies sold. Three insurance
companies are understood to have been on the shortlist for the deal.
At the same time, Post Office Counters is expected to confirm it is
investigating extending the insurance products it can offer, enhancing the
value of what the government has described as the largest chain of shops in
Europe.
Earlier this month the government was forced to abandon plans to privatise
Royal Mail, the Post Office letters division, after opposition from some
Tory backbenchers.
But Post Office managers are keen to exploit new government guidelines on
the range of transactions that can be handled through the organisation's
retail network.
They believe travel insurance complements existing Post Office services,
including bureau de change facilities. The sale of other insurance products
would require approval from the Department of Trade and Industry.
Separately, it emerged yesterday that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, has
rejected pleas by the Post Office board for a Pounds 100m reduction in next
year's Pounds 213m levy.
The Post Office campaigned for the reduction when privatisation plans were
shelved. Mr Bill Cockburn, the Post Office's chief executive, said that a
cut in the levy was essential to boost capital investment. But Mr Clarke
announced in the Budget that next year's levy would remain unchanged and
would fall only to Pounds 178m by 1997-98.
With pre-tax profits last year running at Pounds 306m, the Treasury levy
takes the lion's share of the Post Office's spare cash and has been rising
sharply - up from Pounds 182m last year to Pounds 226m this year.
Mr Clarke's decision bodes ill for the success of efforts by Royal Mail  -
the largest of the Post Office's divisions - to gain greater commercial
freedom within the public sector. Senior managers want to be able to form
joint ventures and foreign alliances, arguing that foreign competition will
otherwise force the Post Office into decline.
The Post Office said yesterday: 'We are very disappointed at the
government's failure to cut our levy: if they continue bleeding us white, we
will not be able to deliver a first-class postal service.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941201

