FT942-15727

FT  14 APR 94 / HK plans receive London's support


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


The attempts of Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor, to broaden democracy
in the territory were yesterday given strong support by an all-party UK
parliamentary committee which has conducted a nine-month study of Britain's
relations with China.
The House of Commons foreign affairs committee, which took evidence from Mr
Patten as well as British and Chinese ministers and officials, fell short of
asserting unequivocally that Mr Patten had no alternative course when he
announced electoral reform plans in October 1992. But it firmly endorsed the
steps Mr Patten took at key points in the resulting dispute with China,
which resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997.
The report also supported proposals that a statutory commission and an
independent watchdog body be established to monitor abuses of human rights
in Hong Kong.
It said fears that China would not honour its commitments were
understandable given its 'increasingly threatening noises' over electoral
reform, its unwillingness to co-operate even on straightforward aspects of
the transfer, and its threats to pro-democracy politicians in Hong Kong.
Mr Patten's proposals, the committee said, were within the letter of
previous agreements with China. Although it objected to the concept of
functional constituencies - business groups electing members of the
Legislative Council - it said: 'We support the widening of the democratic
base of these functional constituencies as proposed by the governor.'
The committee said Mr Patten was right not to negotiate proposals with
Beijing before announcing them in Hong Kong, and in ensuring that the final
decision on them would be taken by LegCo. 'In the face of Chinese
unwillingness to find a compromise, the governor had no choice but to put
his proposals in full to LegCo.'
Using language which echoed that used by Mr Patten himself, the committee
said: 'We hope LegCo will. . . be able to agree electoral arrangements which
are within the terms of the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law and which
are open, fair and acceptable to the people of Hong Kong.'
The Joint Declaration was the 1984 Sino-British agreement on the return of
sovereignty, and the Basic Law is Hong Kong's post-1997 constitution,
written by Beijing.
The report implied a firm rebuke for Sir Percy Cradock, the retired diplomat
who negotiated the Joint Declaration and subsequent Sino-British agreements.
Sir Percy told the committee Mr Patten's reforms risked harming Hong Kong.
The committee said: 'We endorse the foreign secretary's refusal to do a deal
which could appear shabby and inadequate.' Giving in to China would have
undermined the Hong Kong government to the extent that Hong Kong's stability
 -including, perhaps, financial stability - could be at risk.
However, the committee acknowledged that China's treatment of Hong Kong
after 1997 could not be predicted. It cited a letter to the committee from
Mr Ma Yuzhen, Beijing's ambassador in London, saying China would dismantle
the reforms and the 1997 transfer would imply full recovery of
administrative power.
The committee's broader recommendations included calls for broadening
Sino-British cultural links and the government's pursuit of dialogue with
Beijing on human rights and Tibet. It expressed concern that BBC World
Service Television will no longer be broadcast to China by Mr Rupert
Murdoch's Star TV network and hoped the BBC would quickly find a new means
of broadcasting news into China.
House of Commons foreign affairs committee: Relations between the UK and
China in the period up to and beyond 1997. Volume I. HMSO Pounds 17.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940414

