FT942-14498

FT  20 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Time ripe for review of utility
regulatory system


   From Dr DIETER HELM


Sir, In your editorial, 'Sizing up the watchdogs' (April 15), you rightly
assert that 'there is a premium on predictability and the reduction of
regulatory risk'. However, it is far from obvious that the existing system
of utility regulation meets this criterion.
Fearful of political interference, utility regulators have been given
considerable discretion in carrying out their duties. The personality
matters greatly. Witness, for example, the change in tone in the gas and
telecoms industries with the change in incumbent. Under a different
government, simply changing the personalities would have a big impact.
The multiplicity of regulatory bodies adds to the problem of discretion.
With the convergence of many utility businesses likely to gather pace after
the periodic reviews in the water and electricity industries this summer,
the competition between regulators which you promote as being a healthy
feature of the current system becomes critical in determining market
outcomes. The most graphic example arises in the electricity and gas
industries in the run-up to franchise abolition in 1988. The merger of two
bodies, Offer and Ofgas, would increase regulatory certainty, and save
public money by reducing administrative costs.
The time is ripe for a thorough review of the system. After a decade it is
worth reflecting on the lessons of experience. However, your suggestion that
such a review should be conducted by the Office of Fair Trading is
disingenuous. Given that the director general of the OFT has publicly
defended the merits of the current system and argued against change, it is
hardly appropriate for the OFT to conduct such a review.
The right place is the Department of Trade and Industry, responsible as the
sponsoring ministry for most of the utility regulatory bodies. For, although
the ideal of a purely technical solution has attractions, there are
inevitably political issues at stake in utility regulation. To pretend
otherwise is either naive or dangerous.
Dieter Helm,
Fellow in Economics,
New College,
Oxford OX1 3BN.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940420

