FT942-12845

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (13): A tool for altering
risk profile - A look at the growing acceptance of derivatives


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


Pension funds - or, more precisely, their trustees - are gradually yielding
to years of lobbying by bankers on the attractions of derivatives. While
trustees continue to exercise caution, there is a growing acceptance that
derivatives now constitute one of the day-to-day management tools needed by
fund managers. The most common use of derivatives is for asset allocation
purposes.
'Asset allocation is normally the first stage,' says Mr Tony Whalley,
investment director at Scottish Widows. 'It is easy to understand and most
people can see the benefits. Very few trustees will turn around and refuse
permission to use derivatives for this purpose.'
As fund managers have become more sharply focused on picking the right
market, rather than picking the right stock, the importance of efficient
asset allocation has increased. For example, if a fund manager has a heavy
weighting in UK stocks, but decides there are better opportunities in the US
market, he can shift his exposure immediately by using stock index futures.
In contrast, liquidating a portfolio of actual stocks and selecting new
stocks can be a time-consuming and expensive process.
Futures can also be used effectively by fund managers when they are
expecting a large inflow of cash. They can use futures to take advantage of
an immediate market opportunity, ahead of the cash inflow. Fresh impetus was
given to the use of derivatives by pension fund managers in the UK by the
clarification of the tax position in the 1990 Finance Act.
A year later, the Securities and Investments Board produced rules on
''efficient portfolio management'', outlining when the use of futures and
options was an acceptable practice.
Perhaps the most important boost for derivatives came from the publication
two years ago of guidelines on performance measurement developed by the
London International Financial Futures & Options Exchange (LIFFE). These
guidelines, in suggesting how to report derivatives trades so that trustees
could more easily assess how and why derivatives were being used, greatly
increased the level of comfort among trustees. The fact that these standards
were approved by the National Association of Pension Funds gave further
weight to the argument.
However, most trustees keep a tight rein over the use of derivatives by
imposing a limit of 5-10 per cent on the proportion of the fund which can be
invested in derivatives at any given time.
'You really have to talk through the reasons for using derivatives with
trustees,' said one specialist. 'If they say they are not happy with 5 per
cent (as a limit), we say what about 2 1/2 per cent.'
However, there are some within the pension fund industry who believe that
the industry's own performance measurement criteria are inappropriate, and
that this is restricting greater use of derivatives.
'Pension fund managers tend to think that if the market is down 10 per cent
and they are only down 8 per cent they have done well,' argues one
derivatives expert. 'There is too much incentive to become a median
performer, and too little to show a bit of flair.'
Certainly, while anyone with money in a pension fund is probably mainly
interested in absolute performance, pension fund managers do often seem
obsessed with relative performance. This is the result of the way they are
assessed - most are measured against indices, and also against competitors.
The potential growth in derivatives' use by pension funds remains
substantial, both in the UK and elsewhere. In the UK, for example, most fund
managers do not tend to hedge their foreign currency exposure.
Since the amount of pension fund assets in the UK totals more than Pounds
400bn, and the typical asset allocation is around 25 per cent in overseas
equities and 5 per cent in overseas bonds, it can be assumed that there is
significant exposure to foreign currency risk.
But the fact is that many fund managers are doing very little about their
currency exposure, arguing in some cases that they are not clever enough to
separate the currency component from, say, a US equity investment.
However, because most managers do not hedge foreign exchange risk, to do so
can be perceived as risky. 'For a UK pension fund manager to hedge currency
risk is to take a huge bet against a performance benchmark, since that is
usually unhedged,' explains Mr Patrick Lee of pension fund consultants R
Watson & Sons.
US fund managers, who usually have a smaller proportion of their assets
overseas, nevertheless tend to be more concerned about currency risk and are
more likely to hedge.
More US fund managers are starting to use currency overlay programmes, to
separate their bond and stock exposure from currency exposure. The idea is
that good value in a bond or stock market does not necessarily mean good
value in its currency. An overlay strategy can be used to separate these
decisions.
Despite some nasty experiences in the first quarter of 1994, when financial
markets around the world slid rapidly, the broad trend is for fund managers
around the world to continue to diversify their investments. As a result,
the need to use derivatives for asset allocation and for hedging is set to
increase substantially, as more managers and trustees grasp their
complexities, and put in place the necessary systems to use these financial
instruments.
But trustees are right to be cautious. They have only to look at some of the
disaster stories at companies - most recently Procter & Gamble's loss of
Dollars 100m after tax on swap positions in the first quarter - to see what
can go wrong.
'At the end of the day, derivatives are ostensibly a tool for altering risk
profile. They do not change the basic rule that if you get it right you make
money, and if you get it wrong you lose, they merely alter the amounts
involved, and certainly don't provide a free lunch or conjure up an extra 2
per cent in performance,' warns Mr Whalley of Scottish Widows, 'Their main
benefit lies in the additional flexibility they afford the fund manager.'

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940427

