FT943-13306

FT  20 JUL 94 / Hoping the dollar may get a breather


   By BARRY RILEY


The dollar, it seems, did not need much help from the G7 summit 10 days ago.
It looks as though traders are reasoning that at these levels it is simply
getting too risky to gamble on even more distortion of the dollar/yen
exchange rate. But there are no rules about when turning points may come -
though the dollar was suddenly looking frisky yesterday afternoon.
How the dollar drifted to under 100 yen (and is being projected down to 90
by some analysts) is clear enough from the financial flows. Last year the
combination of the US current account deficit and the outflows on capital
account totalled nearly Dollars 300bn (Pounds 197bn). There were substantial
long-term capital inflows too, but it looks as though something like half of
that near-Dollars 300bn total had to be financed by attracting short-term
flows.
The role of the financial institutions in the US and Japan has become
crucial. As the latest BZW Global Economic Digest points out, the Japanese
were net sellers of Dollars 3.4bn of US securities in the first quarter of
1994, whereas the Americans bought Japanese securities worth Dollars 12.9bn.
Between the October- December and January-March quarters there was a net
turnround of Dollars 28bn in capital flows between the two countries,
undoubtedly contributing to the weakness of the dollar.
Such flows have become destabilising. In theory, assets denominated in a
weakening currency should become more attractive to foreigners and
counterbalancing flows will be induced. In practice, the weakness may choke
off inflows entirely because foreign investors fear more short-term currency
losses.
For instance, unhedged Japanese investors have lost 15 per cent in yen terms
on US equities so far this year, and about 17 per cent on 10-year US
Treasury bonds. Of course, the currency risks can be covered separately, but
conservative institutions find it difficult to engage in transactions which
could be regarded as currency speculation.
In theory, an equity market will weaken when the currency is strong, because
profits will be damaged: export prices will soften and imports will become
more competitive. However, the Tokyo market has been strong this year, with
foreign capital attracted in a self-feeding way to exaggerate the
imbalances.
Japanese investors - notably banks - have sold equities to foreign buyers,
but have switched the resulting dollars or other currencies back into yen,
strengthening the exchange rate further. Indeed, a yen deposit has been
practically the best investment that could have been made this year. It
follows that markets dominated by such influences are likely to overshoot
but then flip suddenly back as the fears subside and the underlying values
become attractive and safely realisable.
The recent improvements in most securities markets may reflect an attempt by
hedge funds and other speculators to anticipate that the Japanese may turn
the tap on again. Meanwhile, the yen could weaken again quite significantly,
as it did in the later months of last year. But the timing of this is highly
uncertain.
In those circumstances some of the market movements of the past six months
could be partly reversed. This would be positive for the US Treasury bonds
which have recovered far less than European bonds in the past few weeks. But
could there be a backlash for Japanese equities as foreigners attempt to
take profits?
At any rate, such a move would emphasise just how much the global markets in
general, and the US in particular, depend upon the Japanese savings
mountain. As Mr George Magnus of Warburg points out, the G7 countries are
due to issue more than Dollars 100bn of bonds within just the next four
weeks.
It happens, however, that Japanese savings are threatened in the medium term
by the development of a unique consumer-led economic recovery in Japan,
encouraged by an overvalued currency (which is now causing consumer prices
to fall) and fiscal laxity.
If the Japanese surpluses are eroded they are likely to shift to the
developing countries, which are much less likely buyers of US Treasuries,
but will be eagerly importing capital goods instead. Any respite for the
dollar and the deficit-ridden US economy should be seen as a temporary
remission rather than a cure.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940720

