FT944-5959

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Clarke left pondering a return trip to Dudley -
Political Notebook


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


Good economics is good politics. It is a phrase that Mr Kenneth Clarke has
used many times since his appointment as chancellor 18 months ago. He
repeated it yesterday and sounded once again as if he meant it. Not everyone
in the government shares his confidence.
Mr John Major will not now face a leadership contest this year. When it came
to the crunch not enough of the malcontents were willing to risk putting
their names to a challenge.
Crucially, the prime minister's enemies on the left of the party judged that
they could not join forces with the Eurosceptic irreconcilables without
tainting the eventual candidacies of Mr Michael Heseltine or Mr Clarke.
But the leadership speculation will go away only if and when the
government's dire position in the opinion polls starts to improve
significantly.
Just as the Budget left Tory MPs expecting tax cuts next year, so the
passing of the deadline for a challenge to the prime minister was followed
by talk of a contest next year. Mr Major cannot eschew populism with the
same confidence as his chancellor.
Mr Clarke did not expect rave reviews for the Budget. He was as conscious as
anyone that Mr Tony Blair would exploit to the full the planned increase
from 8 per cent to 17.5 per cent in value added tax on domestic fuel. He
expects the government to win next week's procedural vote which would allow
Labour to re-open the issue. But he cannot be sure.
More broadly, a neutral package which left untouched the Pounds 6bn in tax
rises due next year was hardly calculated to nurture a feelgood factor in
the country. The raft of micro measures to ease the transition for the
long-term jobless from benefit to employment were not susceptible to easy
tabloid headlines. Nor was the package for small businesses.
As Mr John Maples pointed out in his now-celebrated memorandum to the prime
minister, real incomes for the average family are expected to fall again
next year. An economic recovery driven by exports and financing a huge cut
in borrowing may be virtuous. It is not voter-friendly.
So Mr Clarke's message to Tory MPs yesterday was once again an exhortation
to keep their nerve. The political gains from a strong economic recovery,
unthreatened yet from any signs of an upsurge in inflation, would
materialise before the general election - as long as the Tory party stopped
panicking.
But he was self-consciously Delphic about the prospects for the tax cuts
that every Tory MP now expects before the general election. He did not want
to commit himself a year in advance of the next Budget.
The chancellor is convinced that the government will reap the political
rewards from lower taxes only if the electorate believes they are
sustainable. But he thinks he has done enough now with the public finances
at least to give himself the option in 1995 and 1996. He knows also that
without the hope of sizeable tax cuts, many Tory MPs would already be
packing their bags.
By and large the package added to Mr Clarke's reputation as the leading
heavyweight in a government not overburdened with great political figures.
Even those on the right who loathe his pro-Europeanism tend to respect the
chancellor's political nerve.
The speculation about tax cuts, however, will be matched soon by the reality
of the public spending squeeze. In real terms Mr Clarke's figures allow for
growth in spending of less than 0.5 per cent between now and the election.
Next year he expects a real cut. Tory MPs applauded the cuts. Some of the
right grumbled that the axe should have cut much deeper. Few thought through
the implications for their constituents.
For all his protestations that key elements of the welfare state will be
protected, Mr Clarke is proposing a draconian regime. At best the figures in
the Red Book suggest that public services will not share in any of the
benefits of economic growth. At worst, there will be a real decline in
provision in transport, housing and, quite possibly, health and education.
Cynics at Westminster were insistent that the targets would not be met. Mr
Clarke would relax them before the general election. But either way it is
not going to be much fun for the next three years to work in the welfare
state. Doctors, nurses, street-cleaners and teachers are voters too.
Mr Clarke's breezy self-confidence did not disguise the short-term
difficulties of a government living from week to week. Next week's vote on
VAT is not the only hurdle before Mr Major can call a much-need Christmas
respite.
Some time ago, when he was being attacked by the opposition for reneging on
the government's 1992 promises to cut taxes, Mr Clarke insisted that he
would not be constrained by promises made 'on a wet night in Dudley'.
In two weeks' time the electors of Dudley have the opportunity to take their
revenge in a by-election the Tories seem certain to lose.
The chancellor has yet to decide whether to hit the campaign trail.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

941201

