FT943-12876

FT  22 JUL 94 / Arts: Patsy's star shines brightly - Musical


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


This is becoming very predictable. You enter a theatre auditorium to see the
cast already hamming it up on stage. Their eyes light up at the sight of an
audience and they jump down into the stalls to greet it with many a
'howyadoing' and 'glad to see ya'. Eventually they re-assemble and yet
another bio-musical begins.
In fact, Patsy Cline, A Musical Tribute is better than most, mainly because
it has an impressive star, Sandy Kelly, playing Patsy and partly because it
concentrates on the music - there are more than 40 songs - and sketches in
the short life of this country icon with as much detail as a leader in The
Sun.
It is hard to deny that getting herself killed in a plane crash at the age
of 31 was a shrewd career move for the singer: it ensures an untarnished
reputation and that her records sell well - although, as in her lifetime
when she was signed to a typic-ally Machiavellian producer, Patsy fails to
enjoy the royalties.
Surprisingly Mervyn Conn's production makes little of the drama of her
death. It excels, however, in projecting the other great characteristic of
Cline, a stunningly resonant voice, so different from the usual country
whine. It makes a Cline recording instantly recognisable to this day and
enabled her to become the first female singer to move from the country
charts to pop.
Cline spent most of her life on stage so it is acceptable that the set is a
rough-up of the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville with a large cast of musicians
who periodically - with hit and miss success - lapse into acting, mainly
portraying the men who Cline climbed over to reach the top.
The show has toured the country for months which provides a good ensemble
feel but the performances are workmanlike when set against Sandy Kelly. She
catches the heartbreak in Cline's voice with emotional perfection and the
tortured ballads - 'Crazy', 'I fall to Pieces', 'Sweet Dreams' - come out
newly minted.
George Hamilton IV (the 'IV' embroidered on his waistcoat is the giveaway)
gives her generous self-effacing support as a narrator who actually knew
Patsy Cline.
Go see the musical for the salty Kelly and for the music, the short,
escapist, tuneful, country songs which seem so refreshingly innocent
compared with modern grunge.
Do not expect much in the way of character development or in-depth
examination of the Nashville music scene of the 1950s.
The Whitehall Theatre.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940722

