FT941-4225

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (16): Dizzying descent begins to
slow - It is clear that the worst is finally over for Sweden, although
recovery remains elusive / Sweden


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


The descent has been dizzying but at last it is beginning to slow. Having
dropped further than most other European property markets during the 1990s,
it is clear that the worst is finally over for Sweden. Recovery, though,
remains elusive, particularly for the commercial property sector. Vacancy
rates are still extremely high and rents, with few exceptions, are
declining.
The continuing oversupply means that the commercial property sector will
only gradually stabilise. But, in contrast to a year ago, at least there are
some encouraging signs.
Yields are falling for the first time since 1989, if only because of lower
interest rates. Companies are not going bankrupt at anything like the rate
that they were, slowing the flow of additional properties onto the market.
And companies and public sector organisations are moving back into central
Stockholm again, after a big exodus to peripheral regions of the city,
helping to push rent levels up slightly.
Some stabilisation is not surprising given that capital values and rental
prices have more than halved in Stockholm since their 1990 peak. In the
centre of the city, rents of SKr1,500-2,000 a sq m are typical, compared
with SKr3,500-4,000 four years ago.
A number of external factors are helping to arrest the decline. They include
a sharp drop in Swedish interest rates since late 1992, gathering evidence
of a general economic recovery and clear signs that the worst of the Swedish
banking crisis is over.
The return of stability to the financial sector has helped to calm the
property market because collapsing real estate values were at the heart of
the Swedish banking crisis, forcing banks to seize hundreds of properties
both at home and abroad after loans to real estate companies went sour.
The melt-down resulted in Swedish financial institutions becoming some of
the country's biggest property owners, threatening to destabilise further an
already unstable situation. In fact the nightmare scenario of banks dumping
properties wholesale onto the market was avoided, thanks to the improvement
in their own fortunes - again, a product of lower interest rates - and the
nature of government intervention.
Generous state support meant 'bad bank' entities such as Securum and Retriva
were well-capitalised, ensuring they did not have to dispose of properties
into a declining market.
'Contrary to what certain people feared, the equivalent of two or three
years' turnover of property stock was prevented from flooding the market,'
says Mr Erik Persson, research and development director with Catella, a
property consulting group.
Those who believe the market is about to turn base their optimism on a
number of factors.
First, the residential market is in a clear recovery phase, thanks to much
lower mortgage rates and a gradual loosening of the rent control system.
Secondly, commercial property yields have begun to fall: having peaked at
between 7 and 8 per cent in 1992-3, they are now below 7 per cent.
Thirdly, property company share prices have begun to outperform the stock
market. Indeed, the strong stock market run suggests it may only be a matter
of time before investors switch some funds out of equities into other areas,
including property.
Finally, foreigners are showing a growing interest in the market, enticed by
low prices and the weak krona. A German pension fund has paid SKr285m for a
large property in northern Stockholm, while an affiliate of Credit Lyonnais,
Altus Nord, has been active in both Stockholm and Gothenburg.
'I expect international buyers will make some large investments before the
summer,' says Mr Jan Wejdmark, managing director of Ljungquist
Fastighetsvarderingar.
Yet reasons for believing that any recovery will be slow are plentiful.
Office vacancies are still rising in most locations and rents are declining.
This is because unemployment continues to climb and companies are using
space more efficiently. In some areas of Stockholm vacancy rates are as high
as 15 to 20 per cent.
'You can see from looking at other international cities that if vacancies
are more than 10 per cent, then rents will normally go down,' says Mr
Wejdmark.
It is also difficult to see who the new breed of property investors will be.
Some of the big players of the late 1980s, such as insurance groups, got
their fingers so badly burned that they are likely to be far more cautious
about investing in property in the future.
Not surprisingly, development activity has shrunk to a fraction of earlier
levels. In Stockholm as little as 30,000-40,000 sq m will be completed
during 1994, compared with as much as 400,000 sq m a year at the market
peak.
Yet with interest rates set to fall further this year, the prospects for
recovery look better today than at any time in the past five years. But the
revival will be slow if only because of the number of properties waiting to
find a new home.
Swedish financial institutions are estimated to have taken over properties
worth between SKr60bn and SKr80bn during the bank crisis. Even this may not
slow the recovery too much, because it is only equivalent to one-two years
of normal turnover.
'If you press down an air-filled ball into the water for long enough, it
will eventually bounce back up again,' says Mr Persson.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940311

