FT944-10946

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (1): Reasons for pride and for caution - The
pace of reform is winning international acclaim. But there are urgent social
reasons why India cannot rest on its laurels


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


Mr PV Narasimha Rao, the Indian prime minister, has much to celebrate in the
results of the economic liberalisation he launched three years ago. But he
needs to carry out further radical reforms if the party is to live up to
expectations.
Seven good monsoons in succession have brought prosperity to many farmers.
Industrial output is growing faster than at any time since reforms began.
Promises of foreign investment are pouring in and the stock market is
trading near its all-time high. If the economy continues to perform
strongly, Mr Rao will be well placed for the next general election, due by
mid-1996.
Yet, India is still some way from achieving economic take-off. As Mr Amit
Mitra, secretary general of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
and Industry, says: 'There's an incredible amount of energy in Indian
industry now. There's an expectation of growth. But it will take time to
fructify.'
Mr Manmohan Singh believes the economy can achieve a growth rate of 7 per
cent a year in the late 1990s. But it has not got there yet - for the
current year the government expects the economy to grow 5 per cent, less
than the 5.5 per cent achieved in the pre-reform 1980s and well short of the
growth rates of India's leading international rivals in the developing
world. As the International Monetary Fund, in its annual report published on
the eve of last month's IMF-World Bank meeting in Madrid, said: 'Reforms
will need to be accelerated in order to sustain robust growth and allow
India to share in the prosperity and rapid development enjoyed by a growing
number of countries in east and southeast Asia.'
The IMF and other advocates of reform praise India for the changes made
already - including cuts in import barriers, reductions in public spending
and easing of controls on private business activity. But these reforms
cannot transform India without digging deeper into the heart of the
pre-reform economy by cutting the bloated state-owned enterprises, the
over-manned bureaucracy, and the coils of patronage and corruption which
surround the government. Without such reforms, India cannot enjoy the gains
in efficiency which it needs to compete in world markets. It would also find
it difficult to raise the funds for those services which the government
plans to enhance - including education, health care, population control and
infrastructure.
Mr Rao argues that a large democracy like India cannot rush reform. He wants
to take time to develop a consensus and pursue an approach he calls 'the
middle way' in which the development of a free market economy is balanced
with a proper regard for the economic role of the state.
The prime minister's critics say India cannot afford delays if it is to
catch up with fast-moving international rivals such as China and Indonesia.
The country also has little time to waste in improving the miserable living
standards of most of its 900m people, especially the 250m living below the
government's own poverty line. The recent outbreak of plague, which claimed
more than 50 lives and spread panic around the world, showed that India's
rapidly-growing cities are in crying need of better water supplies, sewers,
waste disposal services and medical care. With the population still growing
at over 2 per cent annually, there are nearly 20m extra people to provide
for every year.
There is a political dimension to the argument as Mr Manmohan Singh himself
points out. He said in a recent speech that without faster growth India
would be condemned to divisive rows about sharing out the economic pie. In a
crowded country, laced with divisions of caste, religion and language, such
rows can quickly become very bloody. The current tensions in the large
northern state of Uttar Pradesh are a case in point. A chief minister, who
took power in the name of the lower castes last autumn, is busy enforcing
government job quotas of up to 49 per cent for the lower castes. Upper caste
Hindus are responding with angry demonstrations which have led to the loss
of about 20 lives.
Since taking office in 1991, Mr Rao has succeeded in containing such
tensions, notably the Hindu-Moslem arguments which culminated in the
destruction of the Ayodhya mosque in December 1992 by Hindu fanatics and
widespread violence. He resisted pressure to confront the right-wing Hindu
Bharatiya Janata Party, the main opposition party. Instead, he patiently
waited for the storms to subside.
The strategy has worked - up to a point. When voters went to the polls in
four northern states last autumn, the BJP suffered a significant setback.
Its charismatic leader, Mr LK Advani, and his colleagues are now struggling
to regain the momentum and unity they created around the Ayodhya issue.
Their efforts to launch a credible national challenge to the ruling Congress
(I) party have floundered.
In the meantime, the wily Mr Rao has reinforced his own position. Since
stepping in as a stop-gap for the assassinated Rajiv Gandhi in 1991, Mr Rao
has beaten intra-party challenges to his leadership. Early this year, he
extended his grip on Parliament by winning over splinter groups to turn a
government minority into a majority. While he has done little to create
lasting peace in the troubled northern state of Jammu and Kashmir, where
Moslem insurgents are fighting the security forces, the prime minister has
at least contained the domestic and international political fall-out of the
conflict. Barring electoral disaster in the 10 state elections to be held
later this year and early next, Mr Rao now seems certain to lead Congress
into the next general election.
Yet for all his political skill, Mr Rao has yet to generate genuine popular
enthusiasm, either for himself or for his party. Disenchantment with the BJP
has not fuelled any surge of support for Congress. The big winner in last
year's state election was the alliance of lower caste parties in Uttar
Pradesh. Caste-based and regional parties are also likely to perform well in
the forthcoming polls.
Congress has in the past proved adept at winning support from local parties
in national elections - and will probably carry on with this form of
horse-trading. But that forces Mr Rao and his colleagues to concentrate on
ways of dividing the pie - an unsatisfactory strategy, as Mr Manmohan Singh
warned.
Fortunately, the economy is performing well enough to give Mr Rao room for
manoeuvre as he prepares for the state and general elections. Richer farmers
are enjoying record incomes. Industry, which suffered in the first two years
of reform from cuts in public spending, has redirected its sales to exports
and the private sector. Companies are queueing up to invest in
infrastructure following decisions to open power, telecommunications and
transport to private investment. Businessmen are optimistic about their
prospects, for the first time in three years. 'We have faith in India's
future,' says Mr Anil Ambani, managing director of Reliance Industries, the
country's largest group.
Foreign companies are also showing growing interest in India. Foreign direct
investment nearly doubled last year to Dollars 620m and portfolio investment
jumped from negligible levels to Dollars 4.1bn. Exports soared 20 per cent
last year. As Mr John Bossidy, the chairman and chief executive officer of
Allied Signal, the US engineering combine, said during a visit to India last
month: 'It's important to step up our presence in India now. The potential
for continued economic growth is staggering.'
For many groups, investment in India means little more than establishing a
toehold in a country from which they have been virtually absent, kept out by
decades of protectionism. But a few are starting to commit substantial sums
to India, notably companies planning to invest in power and in
telecommunications. General Electric and Enron, the energy group, of the US,
National Power, the UK generating company, and the Hindujas, the
London-based expatriate Indian business family, are among those planning
power stations. Potential investors in telecommunications include US West
and Motorola of the US.
The inflow of foreign investment has buoyed India's foreign exchange
reserves to a record level of Dollars 19bn, up from Dollars 1bn during the
1991 balance-of-payments crisis. The reserves have created something of a
headache for Mr Manmohan Singh by contributing to a rise in inflation, now
running at about 9 per cent a year. This is squeezing the incomes of the
poor and undermining the competitiveness of India's exports.
However, large reserves have also brought considerable benefits by creating
a cushion against future economic shocks, such as a drought. It has also
given India more confidence on the international stage. Mr Manmohan Singh,
who acted as the unofficial spokesman for the developing world at
September's IMF-World Bank annual meeting, would have cut a less impressive
figure if India's gold was still lying in pawn in as it was in 1991.
But these impressive gains may still be wasted if the government does not
press ahead with further economic restructuring. Ministers have carried out
some important changes this year - notably ending the state's monopoly of
telecommunications services, relaxing some foreign exchange controls, and
most recently liberalising bank lending rates. They also have other plans on
their immediate agenda such as liberalising insurance.
But more fundamental reforms have been postponed, including genuine
privatisation and reviewing over-protective labour laws which give the
government a veto over all large-scale redundancies. After toying with these
ideas for a while, Mr Narasimha Rao has this year set them firmly aside.
The key problem lies in dealing with the state-owned industries which
consume about half the nation's industrial capital but produce only a
quarter of its output. Unless these are made efficient, it is hard for
private industry to compete in world markets. But in order to make them
efficient, the government must shed labour. It will not because it says it
is concerned about creating unemployment. However, the unemployed could be
given redundancy payments, as is happening to a limited extent in private
industry.
The experience of other countries shows that properly-controlled
privatisation mostly leads to productivity gains which benefit the whole
economy.
Mr Narasimha Rao has permitted the sale of shares in state-owned businesses
but insists on retaining 51 per cent for the government so that politicians
keep their influence and patronage.
Also, while bureaucratic controls have often been removed, the bureaucrats
have not and fight to retain influence. Rules for private investors' entry
into power and telecommunications, for example, have been left vague, giving
civil servants plenty of discretion, so creating scope for untransparent
decision-making and corruption.
Although the government has trimmed public spending it is struggling to keep
public borrowings under control because of the rising burden of interest
payments on accumulated debt. As Mr Manmohan Singh has said, this burden can
only be substantially cut through raising money by privatisation. In the
meantime there is a ferocious squeeze on the funds available for health,
education and rural development.
The last point is crucial to building a modern economy. Ill-fed,
poorly-housed and semi-literate people will find it hard to participate in
industrialisation. If they do not participate, they will remain stuck in the
medieval hinterland of 20th century India.
India's elite is aware of these challenges and of the possible responses.
But it lacks a real sense of urgency. It deserves credit for what has been
achieved in the past few years but it should not forget how much more
remains to be done.

The Financial Times


London Page I

941108

