FT943-949

FT  27 SEP 94 / Management (The Growing Business): US lead that London
ignored - A look at Nasdaq's return for one venture investor


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


The Stock Exchange's announcement earlier this month that it is to set up an
Alternative Investment Market (AIM) for trading in smaller company shares
has been nothing if not controversial.
The new market may well provide an alternative to the old rule 535 (2)
trading facility (now called Stock Exchange rule 4.2) under which about 200
shares currently trade. In this way it might become viewed as a replacement
for the Unlisted Securities Market, which will accept no new entrants from
December and will be wound up at the end of 1996.
But it remains to be seen whether young and rapidly-growing companies will
be able to raise larger amounts of capital. In the US, for example, where
many such companies choose to float on the regulated National Market of the
US Nasdaq Stock Exchange, the average new issue size this year has been
Dollars 34m (Pounds 21.5m). The largest was for Dollars 413m.
With AIM unlikely to require issues to be sponsored by recognised
stockbrokers or to have rigorously vetted (and therefore expensive) listing
particulars, some venture capitalists say that institutional interest will
be limited. The obstacle, some investors and stockbrokers say, is the lack
of regulation - precisely the feature the Stock Exchange wants to maintain
for its new market.
Advocates of a more regulated market argue that venture capitalists would be
much more likely to back young growing companies if they knew there was a
market in which they could achieve a much earlier exit than is currently
possible on the Official List in London. The London Stock Exchange has only
made an exception for bio-technology companies, which do not need an
earnings record before floating.
'The experience in the US is that the public market is crucial to a private
equity market,' says Ronald Cohen, chairman of Apax Partners and a lukewarm
supporter of AIM.
A similar view is taken by Thomas Judge, director of Alternative Investments
at AT&T Investment Management Corp, the biggest investor in venture capital
in the US. AT&T's investment returns from venture capital investment might
make UK institutions take greater interest in the formation of a vibrant and
accessible stock exchange for young rapidly growing companies.
AT&T started investing in venture capital in 1980. After a slow start, it
now has Dollars 1.3bn invested in the asset class through 87 venture capital
firms. This means about 3 per cent of the Dollars 39bn AT&T pension fund is
in seed investment, development capital and what it calls 'smaller
buy-outs'.
'Nearly all the Dollars 592m of investments distributed to us was from stock
that was listed on Nasdaq,' says Judge.
AT&T does not sell its investments as soon as shares are distributed to it
on flotation. In 1989, it hired Warburg Pincus, the US investment
institution, with a mandate either to sell or hold the stocks in the
distributed portfolio. From 1989 to the end of last year, this portfolio
achieved an annual 22 per cent compound rate of return, Judge says.
This compared with a 15 per cent return on the Nasdaq Industrial Index over
the same period and a 12 per cent return from the Russell 2000 Index, which
tracks the performance of smaller issues traded on Nasdaq and other US
exchanges. In the UK, where until last year the level of flotations had been
modest for three years and trade sales were a more common exit route for
venture capitalists, such returns would not have been possible.
One other US fact supports the case for a Nasdaq type of market for growing
companies. According to VentureOne, a San Francisco-based research
organisation, more than 95 per cent of venture backed companies go public on
Nasdaq. For AT&T, the figure is slightly lower at 88 per cent. Judge is
quite clear about the role the exchange has played in allowing AT&T to
invest Dollars 1.3bn in growing companies. 'We feel without Nasdaq in the US
we would have been hard pressed to do what we did,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940927

