FT942-15988

FT  13 APR 94 / Russia-Ukraine tensions rise


   By JOHN LLOYD and JILL BARSHAY


   KIEV


Relations between Ukraine and Crimea were tense yesterday, following Monday
night's takeover by Crimean President Yuri Meshkov of the Crimean branches
of the Ukrainian Internal Affairs and Security ministries.
The pro-Russian Mr Meshkov has sought greater autonomy from Kiev since his
election as Crimea's first president in January, but has become far more
confrontational since an overwhelming vote favouring the policy on March 27.
Observers fear that Mr Meshkov's moves, bitterly opposed by Ukrainian
President Leonid Kravchuk, could escalate into a conflict with Russia.
Nearly 70 per cent of Crimea's population is Russian.
At the same time, crisis talks began in Kiev yesterday to resolve the
weekend's armed confrontations between Russian and Ukrainians in the Black
Sea fleet.
At the end of last week Russian sailors defied Ukrainian orders and seized
one of the fleet's ships. Ukraine retaliated by attacking a Russian naval
base and arresting three Russian officers.
President Kravchuk's chief domestic adviser, Mr Nikolai Mikhailchenko,
yesterday accused both Russia and Crimea of provoking conflicts and
destroying opportunities to find compromises.
'Meshkov has begun the path of direct confrontation by making such sharp
moves,' he said, referring to Crimea's refusal to accept a Kiev presidential
representative and order to restrict local conscripts from serving elsewhere
in Ukraine, creating a de facto separate Crimean army.
Mr Meshkov has also replaced Kiev's appointees with his own in the two key
national ministries.
President Kravchuk's ability to focus on these issues has been hindered by
continued uncertainty in Kiev's domestic parliamentary elections, under way
for the last three weeks and not yet concluded.
International observers yesterday also raised serious concerns about the
fairness of the elections.
They cited pressuring of voters in rural regions, a politicised, poorly
functioning central electoral commission and instances where access was
denied to foreign observers at polling stations.
After two rounds of elections, some 337 seats in the 450-seat parliament are
now filled. Most of the remaining 113 will go to a third round of voting at
a date yet to be decided.
So far Mr Kravchuk has lost half his government, including his prime
minister, and the formation of a new government will be delayed at least
until May, when the new parliament is due to meet for the first time.
Mr Kravchuk is also preoccupied with trying to delay his own presidential
elections, now scheduled for June 26, and establishing a strong presidential
republic, at the same time as his adversaries are working to reduce his
position to that of a figurehead.
Feature, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940413

