FT942-14904

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (10): Honing a competitive edge -
Releasing labour for skilled jobs is behind a drive towards automation


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


Residents of a Singapore suburb will take part this year in an experiment
which could set trends all over the world. They will be given a 'smart card'
with which they will eventually be able to carry out virtually all daily
transactions.
The card, containing a chip on which value can be stored, will be an
'electronic purse', enabling the holder to make purchases in shops, travel
on the subway and make telephone calls. It will also work in banks'
automated teller machines (ATMs), so that the holder can withdraw cash,
apply for new share offerings, and so on.
People in many industrialised countries will recognise elements of the
experiment in services already available to them. Moreover, Singapore's
grand aims for technology are very similar to the 'information
superhighways' talked of elsewhere - the marshalling of computer and
communications technology so that information is easily available and put to
efficient use by all.
What makes Singapore different is its comprehensive plan to bring
information technology to bear on every aspect of life.
The country has a pressing need to automate whatever it can. It has a small
pool of people with increasingly high aspirations. They want skilled jobs.
The government, seeking to speed economic development ever higher up the
curve of technology and added value, wants them to have skilled jobs. A job
replaced by information technology releases a citizen for more productive
work and may reduce costs.
Singapore not only has the need. It also has the potential to make the
information technology dream come true. First, it is small and has no rural
areas: technological changes involving everybody are less difficult to
achieve than elsewhere. Second, it has a government with a predilection for
planning and a people who fall in with the plans. Third, it has the money to
invest in those plans.
The National Computer Board, charged by the government with supervising the
information technology revolution, is working to create an 'intelligent
island' - a phrase it borrowed from a British Broadcasting Corporation
documentary about Singapore.
Essentially, the plan involves wiring Singapore throughout with fibre optic
cable which will enable all homes and offices to have access to a vast range
of inter-active services via telephones and personal computers.
One of the NCB's principal tasks is to oversee the building of the
information pipeline - what it calls the National Information
Infrastructure. It aims to have fibre optic cables to every home and office
by 2005.
Just as challenging, however, is conceiving a broad enough range of services
and activities available on the system to give it general appeal. It is all
very well to look forward to the day when every home will have a computer
through which personal business and recreational transactions can be
accessed. But will people actually turn the machines on?
Mr Ko Kheng Hwa, NCB chief executive, reels off a list of National
Information Infrastructure 'trigger products', a number of which are
essentially educational - using computers in the classroom, or having
tuition at home via computer. Singaporeans will be able to browse through
possible cultural and recreational activities.
They would also be able to take advantage of a 'borderless library' or to
create a 'personalised electronic newspaper'. These are concepts which do
not sit easily with the Singapore government's close control over the
availability of information - it bans satellite dishes and controls entry of
foreign publications.
Mr Ko, who notes that Singaporeans have enormous access to information
through travel and through foreign news sources which they can easily
receive, acknowledges that the subject is 'one of the challenging issues
that we have to address. . . As we move along we have to come to solutions
to some of these issues.'
Although it is unclear how many uses Singaporeans, and people elsewhere,
will find for computers, there is no doubt that the wiring of Singapore will
create the potential for big improvements in efficiency of business.
Some elements which do not require fibre optic cabling of the whole island
are already operating: for example, all types of businesses and government
departments involved in exporting and importing are linked to 'TradeNet',
which enables rapid processing on screen of customs and other formalities. A
'LawNet' system is also operating.
Singapore Telecom offers a Teleview service including home banking,
financial information, news, games and educational services. There are about
90 service providers on the system, and about 20,000 subscribers.
Ms Chua Sock Koong, treasurer of Singapore Telecom, says: 'It's not an easy
service to market. There is a lot to overcome.' But she says that the best
way to inculcate a general acceptance of the uses of information technology
is in schools.
From 1996, Singapore's system for making drivers pay to enter the busiest
city districts will be computerised. Cars will carry units which will be
detected as they enter the areas and will automatically debit drivers'
pre-paid smart cards.
The development of such services means intensive work in Singapore on
computer software and hardware. If it pays off, it will not only make the
island an extraordinarily high-tech place in the next decade. It is aimed to
give Singapore a competitive edge in technological development so that it is
less dependent on creative work elsewhere.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940418

