FT943-979

FT  27 SEP 94 / Law Society rejects Belling pensions compensation claim


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


The Law Society has turned down a request for Pounds 2m compensation from
members of the pension scheme of Belling, the cooker manufacturer that
collapsed two years ago. The pension scheme members say they were defrauded
by a solicitor and claimed the money from the society's discretionary
compensation scheme.
Law Debenture Corporation, independent trustee for the Belling pension
scheme, said it intended to seek judicial review of the decision.
The Solicitors Complaints Bureau, which runs the compensation scheme, has
been facing steeply rising costs from claims in recent years. Mr Charles
Elly, the Law Society president, has identified rooting out fraud among
solicitors as one of his chief priorities.
The sum sought by Law Debenture represents an advance fee for a Dollars 50m
loan which was to be made to Belling itself in 1991 when the company faced
severe financial difficulties. Two directors of Belling, Mr Richard Belling
and Mr Michael Stewart, who were also pension scheme trustees, authorised
the pension scheme to make the payment from its own bank account directly
into the account of solicitor Mr Charles Julian Deacon. The loan to Belling
never materialised and in May 1992 receivers were appointed to the company.
Law Debenture says that, before making the payment to Mr Deacon, the Belling
directors received assurances from the Law Society that Mr Deacon was a
properly accredited and bona fide solicitor.
The Law Society said it rejected the claim because 'the directors (of
Belling) were the cause of the loss,' and the trustees should be pursuing
them. However even had the directors approached the fund, the application
'in all probability' would have been rejected because the directors should
not have misused pension scheme monies.
Mr Deacon, a solicitor from Newcastle-under-Lyme, was charged in May with
fraud and attempt to defraud. The charges allege that Mr Deacon and Mr Keith
Fuller obtained money by falsely representing a fee was an advance payment
for a larger loan. The two men are awaiting trial.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940927

