FT942-15336

FT  15 APR 94 / UK Company News: Scudder enters UK with Pounds 50m trust
launch


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Scudder Stevens Clark, the US fund management group, is raising its profile
in the UK by aiming to raise about Pounds 50m by the end of the month
through a new Latin American investment trust.
Scudder Latin America Investment Trust will be the group's first venture
into the UK investment trust sector, but Latin America is more familiar
territory: Dollars 2.5bn of the group's Dollars 90bn (Pounds 62bn) funds
under management is in Latin American debt and equities. It has been
investing in Mexico since 1979, and has eight specialist Latin American
funds, run by a team of 12 based in Boston.
Scudder's activities in London have up to now been limited to a small number
of insurance funds. As the name is not yet widely known to the British
public, the trust is being launched by means of an institutional placing,
and possibly small intermediaries offer, rather than a full public offer.
Scudder said it was confident of attracting sufficient interest in the fund,
although it will be the fourth investment trust focusing on Latin America to
be launched in the UK this year. The first two, from Morgan Grenfell and
Edinburgh Fund Managers, raised less than their initial targets, at Pounds
64m and Pounds 39m respectively. The offer for Templeton's version has not
yet closed, but it raised Pounds 37.5m from a placing.
Beta Global, the emerging markets investment trust, is seeking up to Pounds
28.6m of net new equity, through a placing and open offer of up to 30m
conversion shares at 100p.
Institutions have already indicated interest in 24.5m C-shares; a minimum of
3m C-shares have been reserved for the open offer, which is restricted to
existing share and warrant holders, and closes on May 6. Warrants will be
issued on a 1-for-5.13 basis after conversion of the C-shares into ordinary
shares. This should be effected by October 31 at the latest.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940415

