FT942-16273

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (18): Mood turns distinctly
sour - Eurobonds


   By SARA WEBB


Latin American borrowers have seen the mood in the international bond market
turn distinctly sour in recent weeks as the combination of higher US
interest rates and a host of quite unexpected domestic factors have
unsettled investors.
Given the volatile conditions in the world bond markets, Latin American
names may well find that they have to accept less favourable borrowing terms
on their bond issues for the foreseeable future, offering investors more
generous yields to entice them back into the market.
And following the collapse of Banco Latino, Venezuela's second largest bank,
in January and the subsequent crisis in the Venezuelan financial system,
many investors would be wise to pay closer attention to the creditworthiness
of individual Latin American borrowers, especially if some of the less
familiar names make an appearance once market conditions calm down.
Latin American borrowers, sovereign and corporate alike, had a field day in
the international bond market in 1992 and 1993. While Latin American names
raised a total of Dollars 9.64bn with 112 separate issues in 1992, the
amount raised soared to Dollars 22.58bn (218 new issues) in 1993, according
to figures compiled by Euromoney.
As interest rates in the US gradually declined during the 1990s, and yields
on US Treasury bonds fell to their lowest level in nearly 20 years, US
investors searched further afield for high-yielding bonds with enhanced
returns.
A wall of money washed across the globe as investors hunted for yield and
turned to the emerging markets. Latin American Eurobonds proved attractive
investments: they are mainly denominated in US dollars and offer investors a
high yield pick-up - known as the yield spread - over US Treasury bonds,
ranging up to about 550 basis points over Treasuries for some of the poorer
credits.
Investors were keen to lock into a high yield and make capital gains as bond
markets rallied and as yield spreads over Treasuries narrowed, helped by
expectations that certain Latin American borrowers such as Mexico would see
an upwards revision in their credit rating.
Borrowers were able to raise cheaper funding abroad in the international
bond markets than back home in their own domestic financial markets. They
raised fixed rate funding in US dollars and used it partly to pay down the
more expensive domestic debt and partly to fund expansion.
Several important trends have taken place since the emergence of Brady plans
enabled the rehabilitation of Latin American borrowers in the international
capital markets. The range of borrowers has widened to include private
sector corporate names as well as sovereign borrowers and public sector
companies. A handful of Latin American borrowers - such as Cemex of Mexico
and the Republic of Argentina - have launched large global bond issues,
providing investors with more liquid paper. Borrowers have succeeded in
launching longer-dated paper, and have broadened the range of currencies in
which their bonds are denominated to appeal to a wider investor base.
'This is a relatively new market, born out of the Brady plans in 1991-92,
and it will go through various ups and downs, but it will continue to grow
and attract interest,' says Mr Jerry Brown, manager of emerging market
Eurobond trading at Salomon Brothers in New York.
This gradual evolutionary process has been disturbed by the recent severe
shake-up in the world's bond markets.
The decision by the US Federal Reserve to raise interest rates by a quarter
point on February 4 upset the world financial markets and left borrowers
uncertain about the direction of US interest rates. Until the markets become
more settled, it seems unlikely that borrowers of any description will hurry
to issue fixed rate bonds.
However, some Latin American names - including Pemex and Banamex - have
launched floating rate notes (FRN), hoping to take advantage of investor
uncertainty. Mr Paul Luke, Head of Emerging Markets Research at Morgan
Grenfell, warns borrowers will have to concentrate on the FRN sector in
future, and must accept higher yield spreads on their fixed rate issues.
However, countenancing higher spreads in the secondary market and on new
issues is not necessarily going to make life easier, some experts warn.
'Borrowers face a very difficult problem, because even if they want to come
at slightly higher yield spreads, lead managers (on the bond issues) will
find it difficult to place the paper (with investors),' says Mr Pepe de
Aguinaga, head of bonds at LatInvest Securities.
He warns that if borrowers are forced to borrow in their domestic markets,
they could face higher borrowing costs and this could eat into corporate
profits. Mr Luke says the main losers 'would include the Brazilian
institutions, given that real domestic interest rates are so high'.
On the domestic front, Mexico's various political problems and Venezuela's
banking scandal have probably had the most impact on bond issues with some
psychological spillover into neighbouring markets.
Mr Brown of Salomon Brothers says that since mid-January, the Mexican market
has been extremely volatile due to the peasant uprising in the southern
state of Chiapas, the kidnapping of a senior banker in March, and the
assassination of Mr Luis Donaldo Colosio, presidential candidate of the
governing party.
'We need to see the following happen now - a new presidential candidate, a
resolution of the Chiapas situation, and a sorting out of the
democratisation process. Until this happens (Latin American) Eurobonds will
continue to be volatile,' says Mr Brown.
Even so, many Latin American experts are optimistic about the longer-term
prospects for Mexico, which is widely expected to have its credit rating
raised from sub-investment (or 'junk') to investment grade, probably by the
end of this year.
Mr Luke points out that there is a silver lining to the otherwise difficult
international background. 'Higher US rates do not matter as much as many
observers think because 60-70 per cent of Latin American debt is fixed.
Moreover, commodity prices have risen by eight times as much as nominal
rates in the last six months, so LDCs (less developed countries) face
negative real interest rates. Faster US growth is also excellent news for
the Latins' says Mr Luke.
Ms Leena El-Ali, fixed income manager at Foreign & Colonial Emerging
Markets, points out that 'countries like Mexico and Argentina have a good
domestic story', adding that in Mexico's case, it will benefit from factors
such as Nafta and membership of the OECD. 'At the moment, people are
concentrating on the international aspects. As this situation is resolved,
the local stories will become more important,' predicts Ms El-Ali.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940411

