FT942-16026

FT  12 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Strong finish but trading volume
decreases - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The first day of the new equity trading session saw UK stocks in better
form, although the market took its cue first from British government bonds
and, later, from a promising start on Wall Street. By the close, London was
following New York step for step, closing very firmly as the Dow Industrial
Average swung higher in early trading after Ms Elaine Garzarelli, the widely
regarded Lehman Brothers analyst, revised her year-end forecast for the US
stock market.
The FT-SE 100 Index ended at the day's best reading of 3,149.4 with a net
gain of 28.6. A succession of large deals in blue chip stocks traded at the
market close. After slipping briefly at the opening, the market advanced
smartly behind more confident views on the interest rate outlook. The
Footsie showed a gain of 28.1 before a nervous opening on Wall Street
trimmed rises in London.
The UK market lagged behind equity markets in France and Germany, which
responded to increasing confidence that the Bundesbank will ease rates again
this week. Equity investors took a neutral view of the Pounds 277m rise in
UK bank credit business in February, which was seen as implying that
consumer spending had stood up well ahead of the increases in taxation
phased in this month.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index followed the trend of the Footsie, closing 24 points
up on the day at 3,779.5. Seaq volume gathered pace as the session
developed, but the closing total of 602.3m shares compared with 894.4m on
Friday. Retail, or customer, business was worth Pounds 1.79bn on Friday, at
the higher end of daily average levels.
Some encouragement was seen in the stock market's buoyancy in what is the
start of the first equity trading account of the new tax year in the UK. But
the London market appeared to be a follower of other markets yesterday, and
somewhat lacking in self-direction.
London's close pursuit of the New York market towards the close of trading
caused some analysts to warn that Wall Street could be tested tomorrow when
the latest US retail sales and consumer price statistics are due.
Equity strategists continued to compare the London stock market outlook with
that of Wall Street. At Salomon Brothers International, Mr Marcus Grubb
commented that Continental markets are likely to remain 'less vulnerable'
than the UK to inflation fears, which he believes will be prompted by the
strength of the US economy and expectations of further tightening of credit
policy by the Federal Reserve.
Mr Peter Lyon of Smith New Court told clients that economies outside the US
have 'plenty of spare capacity' and that their bond and equity markets can
continue to make progress even if the Federal Reserve tightens policy
further.
The Footsie was helped by renewed strength in the oil majors as investors
began to anticipate firmer crude oil prices as global economies extend their
recovery. Gains were fairly eveny spread across the manufacturing sectors.
There was renewed support for financial stocks, where the life assurance
companies stood out.
Consumer shares moved ahead as the bank credit numbers for February were
digested by the market. But across the range of the market, investment
support was still cautious and traders were wary of a return of the volatile
trends seen in equities over the past three weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

940412

