FT941-12941

FT  27 JAN 94 / Major launches bid to reassert his political authority


   By DAVID OWEN and PHILIP STEPHENS


Mr John Major will tomorrow attempt to relaunch the government's troubled
'back to basics' initiative in a speech which was being interpreted last
night as the start of a concerted push to rebuild his political authority.
The prime minister will use a visit to the north of England to set out his
'prospectus for 1994' amid mounting pressure for him to regain a grip on the
government after a month of turmoil.
Downing Street said last night that Mr Major would use the speech to explain
his policy priorities for the rest of the year.
Meanwhile, the war of words at Westminster over tax and spending priorities
rumbled on, with senior Conservatives disputing a claim by Mr Gordon Brown,
the shadow chancellor, that Labour had made no public spending commitments
whatsoever.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, dismissed government allegations about
Labour's spending plans as 'bogus rubbish.' However, he warned the shadow
cabinet not to give the Conservatives ammunition by making irresponsible
promises.
Amid continue sniping last night among Tory MPs and ministers, Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, faced heavy criticism from some rightwing Tory MPs
for his apparent failure to react quickly enough to Labour's attack on the
government's planned tax increases.
His deputy at the Treasury, Mr Michael Portillo, was being attacked from the
left of the party for seeking to raise his own profile ahead of any
challenge to Mr Major's leadership.
Amid a general mood of feverish disenchantment on the Tory backbenches,
rightwing MPs were also speculating about the possible candidacies of Mr
Michael Heseltine and Mr Douglas Hurd if Mr Major is threatened.
Yesterday's exchanges on Labour's spending pledges came after Mr Brown had
said in a morning radio interview that the party had 'no commitment to spend
money on anything.'
Mr Portillo promptly accused Mr Brown of 'stepping on the garden rake.' The
shadow chancellor's 'rash campaign against his colleagues' showed he
realised that that 'if you promise to spend more you will have to tax more',
he said.
The theme was taken up by Sir Norman Fowler, the Conservative party
chairman, who said that by making tax the 'main political issue', Labour had
scored 'a significant own goal'.
Straw accused of undermining Labour spending promise, Page 6 Lilley to cut
jobless benefits for the young, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1II

940127

