FT944-2435

FT  16 DEC 94 / Main plank of job tribunal plans attacked


   By RICHARD WOLFFE


Industrial tribunal users yesterday rejected a central plank of the
government's proposals to reduce tribunal delays and raise standards.
Employers, lawyers and trade unions criticised the government's green paper
for placing too much power in the hands of tribunal chairmen and failing to
address the issue of additional funding.
Chairmen, who are legally trained, sit alongside two lay members
representing the interests of employers and employees. The green paper
suggests chairmen should sit alone in 'relatively straightforward or
technical types of proceedings', which do not include claims of unfair
dismissal and discrimination.
Mrs Janina Schiebler, a lay tribunal member who represents employers'
interests in the Norwich area, said: 'I think you get a more balanced
viewpoint when there are three of us. We sit and discuss different points of
view and we all have totally different questions.'
Employment lawyers, who have been criticised for their increasing
involvement in tribunals, also argue against greater powers for tribunal
chairmen.
Mr Stephen Levinson, head of the employment department of City solicitors
Paisner & Co, said: 'Chairmen sitting alone would help if you are concerned
with getting through cases quicker, but that has to be balanced against the
function of the tribunal as an industrial jury. The criticism put forward is
that tribunals are too legalistic, but you make them more legalistic if the
only person running them is a lawyer.'
The green paper follows a 150 per cent increase in tribunals' workload over
the past five years to 73,000 cases last year.
Delays are particularly long in London and the south-east of England. The
tribunals' budget has risen by 75 per cent since 1988 to Pounds 26.6m this
year and the number of administrative staff has increased by 64 per cent
from 290 to 475.
Mr Levinson, who sits on tribunal user groups in the London area, claims the
system's delays are caused by underfunding.
'They ought to be looking at the resources they put into the administration
of the tribunals. One of the biggest problems at the moment is that they do
not have enough people to cope with the volume of cases.'
The tribunal green paper concentrates on streamlining measures which include
imposing time limits on the presentation and cross-examination of evidence.
Other efficiency measures, such as giving tribunals the power to weed out
weak cases at pre-hearings, won broad approval from all parties.
Mr Peter Skyte represents tribunal applicants as a regional officer of the
white collar union MSF.
He said: 'It seems obvious and sensible to weed out the cases which have not
got a hope in hell's chance of success.
'But the danger is that any extension of the pre-hearing review system will
be used to make life difficult for applicants as a way of frightening people
off even in cases which have a reasonable chance of success.'
However, employers' organisations and trade unions agree with green paper
proposals to give the conciliation service Acas a wider role in resolving
cases.
Mr Peter Martin, head of legal services at the Engineering Employers
Federation, said: 'Employers and employees will be interested in ways of
settling cases more quickly.
'But some of the other suggestions may be considerably more contentious.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941216

