FT941-4045

FT  12 MAR 94 / Fashion (The Global Wardrobe - At a Wedding): The bride
wears white but the guests are a mess - In the last of our series on dress
codes around the world, FT writers attend a wedding / Paris


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


One of the ironies of French life is that for a country in which adultery is
virtually a national institution, the ritual of the wedding ceremony is
taken very, very seriously.
The smartest French weddings take place in the old country homes of the
bride's family. Yet every Saturday, the streets of Paris are filled with
honking horns as drivers 'salute' the bridal cars - with white ribbons tied
around the radio aerials - on their way to the local mairie or church.
The men at society weddings are still kitted out in morning suits. But
French morning suits, unlike the British version, are expected to be in mint
condition and French men are fond of ensuring that all the male guests sport
matching ties and buttonholes.
Parisians also like to liven up their lounge suits on less formal occasions
with elaborate waistcoats. Hermes' intricately printed silk waistcoats, with
co-ordinating ties and handkerchieves, are popular as are Koji Tatsuno's
woven silk waistcoats and Yohji Yamamoto's embroidered suits.
The female guests are expected to be visions of chic. The outfit itself is
often kept as simple as possible so that it can be topped off with a really
resplendent hat: the bigger the brim the better. Snappy little
pastel-coloured Chanel suits are popular - or long, flowing frocks for more
bohemian weddings.
The high-society bride herself will almost certainly wear a dress made for
the day by her favourite designer. And no truly chic Parisian wedding would
be complete without the designer in attendance to preen for the
photographers and fuss over the frock.
One model who got married in Paris this summer appointed John Galliano in
the dual role of dress designer and chief attendant. He rose to the occasion
by donning a rakish hat and orchid buttonhole to whisk her train along the
aisle.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940312

