FT942-12813

FT  28 APR 94 / World Trade News: End of an eastern love affair - Kieran
Cooke detects Malaysian disenchantment with Japan


   By KIERAN COOKE


In the mid-80's Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, declared his
country's 'Look East' policy. If Malaysia was to reach its goal of being
fully industrialised by the year 2020, said Dr Mahathir, it must learn from
Japan. In particular it should make use of Japanese technology.
There are signs now that the Malaysian love affair with the Japanese way is
ending. The main issue is technology transfer - or the lack of it - with
attention focused on Malaysia's national car industry, one of Dr Mahathir's
pet projects.
At the end of last week Proton, the country's car manufacturer, announced
that by the middle of the year it would begin casting its own engine blocks.
The move is seen as an important step towards more self-sufficiency at
Proton.
More than 120,000 Protons are produced each year in co-operation with
Mitsubishi of Japan. The first Proton rolled off the assembly line at the
company's factory outside Kuala Lumpur in 1985.
Proton says domestic content of its cars is well over 70 per cent. However,
the core technology and high-value items, including much of the transmission
system, is still imported from Japan. Proton has been working with
Mitsubishi for 10 years. Proton feels the Japanese have been too slow to
transfer technology.
Mr Nadzmi Mohamed Salleh, a Malaysian who last year replaced a Mitsubishi
executive as Proton's managing director, says that Proton does not have
sufficient economies of scale to make 100 per cent local content a realistic
proposition. 'The costs involved would be too high,' says Mr Nadzmi.
'Instead Proton may well opt for global sourcing.'
Next month Dr Mahathir will be making a private trip to France. It is
believed the prime minister's main host will be Peugeot Citroen. The French
car manufacturer has been cultivating contacts in Malaysia for several
years.
For Proton the recent rise of the yen - and the depreciation of the ringgit,
the Malaysian dollar - has given new urgency to the question of high-value
Japanese imports.
Proton has been one of the success stories of modern Malaysia. More than 70
per cent of the cars on Malaysia's roads are now Protons. Production is
being increased to 150,000 per year. Last year more than 17,000 Protons were
exported, most of them to the UK where it is among the best selling cars at
the lower end of the market. The success of Proton exports has been a cause
of friction with Mitsubishi, as the Japanese car maker is concerned that the
Malaysian car is eating into its own export markets.
After a decade in the fast lane Proton is facing a number of problems.
Though the Wira, Proton's new model launched in the middle of last year, has
given a boost to sales, the highly protected home market is at
near-saturation point. This year a second car project, undertaken in
co-operation with Daihatsu of Japan, is due to come on stream.
Late last year Proton announced it was expanding its sales in Europe. But
those plans received a setback last month with the death of Mr David Brown,
the British businessman who engineered the highly successful launch of the
Proton in the UK. Mr Brown was to have taken a 55 per cent stake in a new
Anglo-Malaysian joint venture company which would market the Proton in
continental Europe.
'The ringgit has fallen by more than 6 per cent against a basket of
currencies this year,' says a Kuala Lumpur motor industry specialist. 'That
has helped Proton's exports. But its yen imports have become more expensive
 -that's why its vital that more technology is transferred from Japan.
Either that or Proton has to find cheaper suppliers elsewhere.'
The increasingly difficult relationship between Proton and the Japanese is
part of a more general disenchantment between Malaysia and its powerful
regional neighbour. The Japanese have been less than enthusiastic about Dr
Mahathir's plans for the formation of a new trading body, the East Asia
Economic Caucus
Japanese companies like to maintain tight control over local ventures, and
rarely opt for overseas stock market listings. Malaysian investors have been
frustrated that they have not been given more chance to take equity in often
highly profitable local ventures controlled by Japanese companies.
Malaysians also say that Japanese companies frequently fail to promote
locals to senior positions of responsibility.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940428

