FT944-2623

FT  16 DEC 94 / Saatchi executives press chairman to resign his post


   By ROBERT PESTON


Mr Maurice Saatchi's tenure as chairman of Saatchi & Saatchi, the
advertising company he founded, looked increasingly uncertain last night
after the company's top executives said he should stand down.
Mr Saatchi's position was further undermined when the group's financial
advisers, SG Warburg and UBS, told the company they felt Mr Saatchi could
not survive a shareholders' vote.
However Mr Charles Scott, the group's chief executive, and Mr Jeremy
Sinclair, executive deputy chairman, said in a memo they would not support a
call for Mr Saatchi's resignation.
'If a resolution is put to the board demanding the chairman's dismissal we
could not in the best interests of the shareholders support it,' they said.
The memo, also signed by Mr Saatchi, was intended for the six non-executives
attending a board meeting today.
A friend of Mr Scott said last night that the chief executive had signed the
memo in the interests of maintaining peace in the boardroom, but it 'does
not mean he is standing shoulder to shoulder with Mr Saatchi'.
Commenting on the battle by a powerful group of shareholders to unseat Mr
Saatchi, a senior official of the company said: 'I have been authorised to
say the following: 'Most people in the company would accept that Maurice has
a value but not as chairman and not on the board''.
Dissident shareholders say they will call an extraordinary meeting to force
Mr Saatchi out, if the board does not ask him to stand down.
'Morale here would be devastated if we go through eight weeks of a public
campaign to unseat Maurice, ahead of the meeting,' a director said.
Meanwhile, one of the company's leading customers, Sir Colin Marshall,
chairman of British Airways, has intervened in support of Mr Saatchi. He has
written to Mr David Herro, of Harris Associates, the fund manager leading
the shareholders' revolt, saying that 'in the event that Maurice Saatchi was
no longer in a position to direct BA's advertising strategy we would
consider our position'.
Mr David Herro said more than 40 per cent of shareholders had contacted him
to back him.
Friends of Mr Saatchi said they feared shareholders were unaware of the
potential damage if Mr Saatchi were ousted. 'There is a serious risk that
Saatchi would lose the Mars and British Airways accounts,' one said. Those
represent about Pounds 50m or more than 5 per cent of Saatchi's annual
revenue.
Mr Saatchi has made clear to colleagues that he will quit the group rather
than accept a compromise proposal that he stand down to become chairman of
the advertising subsidiary, Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising Worldwide.
He has also said he would resign rather than see the holding company change
its name, another demand being made by the dissident shareholders.
A change of holding company name, so that the 'Saatchi' brand is used only
by the advertising subsidiary, is also favoured by a growing number of
Saatchi executives.
Mr Saatchi would, however, agree to an official study into possible benefits
of a change in corporate identity.
The shareholders' campaign to oust Mr Saatchi was provoked by a proposal
that he receive a Pounds 5m option package. However, colleagues of Mr
Saatchi say Mr Herro gave approval in principle to such a package last May.
When charm wears thin, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941216

