FT941-5441

FT  07 MAR 94 / 'Output gap' takes edge off worries about prices: Leading
economies show there is little reason to fear a rapid return of the bogey of
resurgent inflation


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


Is the period of increasingly low inflation that the industrialised world
has enjoyed so far this decade about to come to an end? Recent falls in bond
prices suggest that markets think so. But a closer look at the evidence
shows that there is little, if any, sign of a resurgence of inflation.
Current inflation remains subdued. Consumer price inflation in the seven
major industrial countries has been running at an annual rate of about 2 per
cent, while the prices charged by producers at the factory gate have
actually been falling. Japanese producer prices have even been declining at
the remarkable rate of 2.9 per cent a year.
Only commodity prices have been showing evidence of a pick-up in inflation.
The prices of industrial raw materials, in particular, have risen steeply
over the last eight months, to levels not seen since 1988.
Prices of commodities can be a good predictor of turning points in
inflation. This is partly because higher costs feed through into prices. It
is also because commodity prices are very sensitive to any changes in
demand. For this reason, any rise in global demand will show up first in
commodity prices.
Nevertheless, short-term movements in commodity prices are far from a
reliable predictor of inflation. The price of gold - which Mr Alan
Greenspan, the chairman of the US Federal Reserve, has said he regards as a
leading indicator of inflation, because of its sensitivity to inflationary
expectations - has risen a little, but hardly in a convincing manner.
Only an excess of demand over full capacity supply is likely to generate a
sustained rise in prices.
A good indicator of how close an economy is to that point is the 'output
gap', which measures the difference between actual and potential output.
Whenever actual output is below its potential level, inflation ought to
decline and vice versa.
Although difficult to estimate accurately, the output gap in the 10 major
industrial countries seems to have been widening since the second quarter of
1991. It continues to do so, which should mean a further strengthening of
disinflationary pressures.
Only in the US has the gap been closing. The belief that it could even
disappear around the end of this year was one reason why the Federal
Reserve, under Mr Greenspan's chairmanship, raised the federal funds
interest rate on February 4.
The German output gap does remain relatively small, which puts the scale of
its recession in context, but the gap in Japan is very large and widening
still further. Outright deflation, rather than inflation, is the main threat
to Japanese economic stability. The UK output gap, though wide, has begun to
close. But UK economic growth is still not much above its underlying trend
rate, which suggests that the gap will not be closed for some time.
Over the long term, expansion of the money supply is a prime cause of
changes in demand and so of inflation. For some time the monetary picture in
the major industrial countries has been somewhat peculiar. For all that,
there is little to suggest an early resurgence in inflationary demand.
One unusual phenomenon has been the faster growth of narrow money, which
consists of notes, coins and commercial bank deposits with the central bank,
than of broad money, which includes the public's deposits in banking
institutions.
Narrow money has little causal significance in a modern monetary system.
Despite signs of a slight pick-up, the growth of broad money, which is
largely driven by bank lending, has remained very slow indeed. In the US,
for example, its annualised rate of growth in the six months to January 1994
was only 2.4 per cent. In Japan it was still less, at 1.6 per cent.
Amazingly, Germany's broad money offers the sole exception to the pattern of
generally low growth. It is not surprising, therefore, that bond markets
reacted sharply to the shocking figure for German M3 announced last week.
But January's annualised increase of 20.6 per cent over the average for the
last three months of 1993 was freakish, as even the Bundesbank has argued.
Notwithstanding the lack of any obvious economic reason for concern, the
bond market retreat - with an increase in yields of almost one percentage
point on US 10-year bonds since October 1993 - would seem to signal the fear
that inflation is about to rise.
UK 10-year gilt yields have also risen by a little over one percentage point
since the beginning of 1994. But it is clear in this case that only a little
more than half of that increase in nominal yields is due to a change in
inflationary expectations.
In the UK the gap between yields on index-linked bonds and on conventional
bonds provides a good indicator of these expectations. Since early January
the index-linked yield itself has risen by a little less than half a
percentage point, while the gap between the two yields has risen by a little
more than half a percentage point.
Thus a significant part of the change in yields is due to higher real
interest rates, themselves presumably a reflection of greater optimism about
world recovery, fuelled by what is happening in the US, in particular.
It does seem plausible that the bottom of the current inflationary cycle is
now being reached, with financial markets convinced that recovery from
recession is well established, especially in the US and UK. Inflation is
unlikely to fall very much further, therefore, except in Japan and perhaps
in France.
Nevertheless, there is also no evidence that recovery would cause global
inflation to rise significantly. Current inflation remains subdued, output
gaps leave plenty of room for growth, while monetary conditions look far
from worrying, except perhaps in Germany. Policy-makers may react with
caution to the turbulence of recent weeks. But there is little reason for
them to fear a rapid return of the bogey of resurgent inflation.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940307

