FT942-16204

FT  12 APR 94 / Parties clash on Eastleigh by-election date


   By JAMES BLITZ and ROLAND RUDD


The Liberal Democrats and the government were yesterday heading for a
confrontation over the timing of the Eastleigh by-election in Hampshire amid
indications that the Conservatives would like to delay it until June.
Mr John Major will meet senior cabinet colleagues today to discuss a date
for the poll, which was caused by the death of Mr Stephen Milligan, the
sitting MP, in February.
But there was speculation at Westminster that the poll - originally expected
on May 5, the day of the local elections - might be postponed until June 9,
the date of the European elections, as part of an informal understanding
between Tory and Labour party managers.
In return for tacit Labour support in delaying the poll, the Conservatives
are understood to have agreed that Labour could defer the by-election due in
Barking until the same date. Labour could then hold the three by-elections
due in east London simultaneously, concentrating their campaign effort.
Liberal Democrat leaders warned they would bring a motion before the Commons
'moving the writ' for the Eastleigh by-election, if ministers did not
announce a date by tomorrow night. A writ is traditionally moved by the
party defending the seat. It is rare for another party to move it.
The Liberal Democrats are favoured to take Eastleigh, which Mr Milligan held
for the Conservatives with a majority of 17,702 at the last election.
Conservatives are worried that the Liberal Democrats' rating tends to climb
after by-election victories and fear that this may enhance their performance
in the European poll if the Eastleigh by-election were held before it.
The Liberal Democrats have warned the government that the Conservative party
would be breaking the conventional time limit within which by-elections are
held if it tried to combine the by-election with the European election. They
are considering moving a writ in the Commons on Thursday that would mean the
poll would be held on May 5, the date of the local elections.
The Liberal Democrats said convention dictated that the writ for a
by-election be moved within three months of the death of a sitting member.
Even if the government moves the writ at the last possible date, May 7, the
returning officer in Eastleigh would technically be obliged to hold the
election on May 26 or June 2. Liberal Democrats suspect that if the
government does not move the writ tomorrow it will try to 'stretch the
rules' so that the by-election is held on June 9.
Mr Gerald Malone, Tory deputy chairman, indicated that Eastleigh would not
suffer if the by-election was held in June as all the parties' policies
would be 'exposed to further scrutiny'.
Major's campaign, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940412

