FT944-14552

FT  22 OCT 94 / Ulster Peace Process: Major takes risks to boost confidence


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Recognition yesterday by Mr John Major that the IRA and its loyalist
counterparts intend a permanent end to violence was accompanied by an
extensive package of measures to restore normality to the province after 25
years of terrorism.
In his speech to the Institute of Directors in Belfast, Mr Major admitted he
was taking risks on the IRA's intentions after its refusal to spell out
explicitly that its campaign of violence had ended for good.
But he made clear that his aim was to create an environment in Northern
Ireland which would make it difficult if not impossible for the IRA to
return to violence.
Alongside the government's 'working assumption' that the IRA ceasefire was
intended to be permanent and its willingness to open exploratory talks with
Sinn Fein before the end of the year, Mr Major listed a series of immediate
confidence-building measures:
All border crossings between the north and the republic are to be re-opened;
The exclusion orders on Mr Gerry Adams and Mr Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein
have been rescinded. They are free to travel anywhere within the UK,
provided they remain committed to the democratic process. Other exclusion
orders will remain in place for the time being;
Troop levels will be reviewed in relation to the threat but the government's
'firm objective' is to return to exclusively civilian policing;
The government will enter 'at the appropriate time' into contact with
loyalist paramilitaries and consider how the interests of such groups can be
represented in the political talks process;
A conference in Belfast in December involving investors from Britain,
Europe, America and the Far East will aim to boost the flow of inward
investment into the province. A task force is developing a new European
Union initiative for Northern Ireland which will result in a substantial
injection of 'new money'.
The prime minister said that the proposed talks with Sinn Fein would rest on
the assumption that it continued to establish a commitment to 'exclusively
peaceful methods' and on the IRA's continuing to show it had ended
terrorism,
Over the medium term there could be no assurance of peace until the
paramilitaries on both sides had handed over their weapons. He intended to
develop a joint approach with the Dublin government on the 'deposit' and
'decommissioning' of guns and explosives.
In a reference to the demands of republican groups for 'self-policing' Mr
Major insisted: 'No groups will be allowed to take the law into their own
hands. All sections of the community must have confidence in the police.'
Turning to the framework document under discussion with the Republic to
establish new relations between the two governments and between the north
and south, Mr Major said it would be based on an 'unshakeable'
constitutional guarantee to the people of Ulster that they would decide
their own future. It would be a basis for negotiations rather than a
blueprint.
Meanwhile the British government would produce its own proposals for
devolution of political power to a Northern Ireland assembly. The
restoration of local accountability meant neither a purely internal
solution, nor a return to domination of one side by the other, would achieve
this.
Finally - and importantly - Mr Major reiterated that all proposals for the
province's political future would be published before any negotiations
between the political parties. The eventual settlement would be submitted to
a referendum in the province.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941022

