FT942-15973

FT  13 APR 94 / Israel and PLO agree on police and prisoners


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


Israel and the PLO yesterday resolved two key security issues blocking the
long-delayed implementation of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and
West Bank town of Jericho, but left many more problems outstanding for talks
which resume on Sunday.
Both sides said in Cairo they had made substantial progress in recent days
and had agreed the terms for a 9,000-strong Palestinian police force and a
timetable for the release of 5,000 Palestinian prisoners.
On the economic track of negotiations Mr Avraham Shochat, Israeli finance
minister, said in Paris he had reached agreement with the PLO on most
sectors of economic relations between Israel and the future self-governed
areas and expected to end talks next week.
Violence flared again, however, in the occupied West Bank where Israelis
shot dead two Palestinians, including a pregnant woman, during clashes with
stone throwers. In Ramallah Israeli soldiers imposed a curfew and attacked a
Palestinian house with rockets before bulldozing it.
Under yesterday's agreements in Cairo, the first contingent of 6,000
Palestinian policemen will be deployed immediately after the two sides sign
a comprehensive self-rule accord. Each will be armed with an automatic
weapon.
The two sides also agreed that 5,000 of 8,500 Palestinian prisoners would be
released by Israel in the coming weeks. Israeli negotiators refused to meet
PLO demands for the release of some prisoners belonging to the Islamic
extremist Hamas movement.
Yet to be agreed in Cairo are the security zoning arrangements for the Gaza
Strip; details of the crossing points into the self-rule areas and rules for
military operations and joint Israeli-Palestinian patrols.
The adjournment of talks for four days removed any chance of a breakthrough
before tonight's deadline for completion of Israeli military withdrawal as
set out in last September's peace agreement.
In Paris Mr Shochat said the two sides had finalised accords covering
agriculture, industry and energy and were close to agreement on direct and
indirect taxation. Problems still to resolve are Palestinian demands for a
symbolic national currency, the rate of value added tax to be imposed; and
details of import and export duties, labour, tourism and insurance.
Neither side has said yet when they will sign a final comprehensive
agreement including economic, security and transfer-of-power issues.
Continued delay in implementing the agreement and Israel's heavy-handed
treatment of Palestinians has fuelled Arab disappointment and suspicion and
strengthened the hand of extremist groups opposed to the peace process.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940413

