FT942-12759

FT  28 APR 94 / Two TV groups face ITC censure


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Carlton Television, the London independent television licence holder, and
GMTV, the commercial breakfast television company, are both likely to be
criticised in the Independent Television Commission's review of their first
year on air, but to different degrees.
GMTV, in which Carlton has a 20 per cent stake, will be generally criticised
for the quality of its programme. Although its licence is not under threat
the implication is that more will be expected this year now that the
financial prospects of the company are improving.
GMTV, whose other shareholders are Granada, Scottish Television, Guardian
Media Group and the Walt Disney Company, is expecting commission criticism,
but believes it will refer to the station's early months on air.
GMTV executives clearly hope the commission will recognise that in a
difficult competitive position standards have been rising.
Carlton, the largest ITV company, which took over the London weekday
franchise from Thames, will get a relatively clean bill of health.
The commission, which has not yet completed the review process, is expected
to find that Carlton has fulfilled its licence obligations.
But it is believed that the quality of some of Carlton's productions for the
national ITV network will be criticised. The criticisms will also be
addressed to the ITV Network Centre for not demanding higher standards.
Carlton Television, it is being suggested, should also pay more attention to
the quality of national programmes produced under its name by independent
producers.
The Independent Television Commission yesterday blocked any chance of the
two largest ITV advertising sales houses, The Time Exchange and Laser Sales,
continuing to represent their present range of ITV companies.
Both sales houses are owned by Granada Group following its takeover of
London Weekend Television.
The Department of Trade and Industry decided in February not to send the
Granada-LWT deal to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission providing the
combined company did not control more than 25 per cent of total UK
television advertising by August 1995.
But the two sales houses represent Granada, Border, Scottish, LWT and
Yorkshire-Tyne Tees and account for around 28 per cent of the market.
The ITC said last month that it was prepared to look at the possibility of
being flexible to ensure that the interests of smaller ITV companies were
looked after.
But the commission said yesterday that a single sales house combining both
Time Exchange and Laser would exceed the 25 per cent threshold and could not
be accepted.
The ITC said it would judge other pleas for flexibility by small companies
on a case-by-case basis.
The commission also ruled that 'rate hardening', withholding some airtime to
harden advertising rates, would not be allowed.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940428

