FT942-16233

FT  12 APR 94 / IADB capital to be boosted by two-thirds


   By STEPHEN FIDLER, Latin America Editor


   GUADALAJARA


An agreement to expand the capital of the Inter-American Development Bank by
two-thirds was forged early yesterday by shareholder governments. The change
enlarges the stakes of Japan and Europe in the institution.
The accord will take the capital of the bank from Dollars 61bn to Dollars
101bn (Pounds 69bn), making it the largest of the regional development
banks. The stake of Japan will rise from 1.1 to 5 per cent and that of four
of the five main European shareholders will double. Germany, Spain, France
and Italy will increase their share of the bank to just under 2 per cent,
but Britain's will remain unchanged at under 1 per cent.
The agreement, which accomplishes a long-held Japanese ambition to increase
its influence in a region where it has financially supported US initiatives,
will be achieved by reducing the share held by the US, Canada and Latin
American members in the bank. The US stake drops to a fraction above 30 per
cent from 34.67 per cent, while that held by Latin American and Caribbean
countries falls to 50 per cent from 53.86 per cent. Two extra board seats
were created, for Japan and Chile, bringing the board size to 14.
The move was broadly welcomed. Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury secretary, said
in Washington: 'The agreement represents tremendous progress, reflecting the
vitality of both the bank and the region.' Mr Hans-Peter Repnik, Germany's
vice-minister for economic co-operation and development, who chaired the
talks, said he was 'very satisfied by the result, particularly because it
gives the non-regional countries finally their proper role in the most
important development institution for Latin America and the Caribbean'.
The accord, which allows the bank to lend indefinitely at the current rate
of Dollars 6bn a year or somewhat more, will also set in train big changes
for the bank's operations.
In a move designed to meet concerns that newly privatised companies will be
unable to raise finance, the bank will be expected to make up to 5 per cent
of its loans to the private sector. Convention previously dictated the bank
make all its loans under government guarantee.
Loans to the private sector will be expected to encourage further lending by
private financial institutions. In no case will the bank's lending exceed
Dollars 75m or 25 per cent of a project's costs. Interest rates will be
decided on a case-by-case basis depending on the perceived risk of the
project, and could theoretically be higher or lower than the lending rate to
governments, currently 7.26 per cent.
Asked about concerns that lending without government guarantee could hurt
the bank's top credit rating, Mr Repnik said the bank's management had shown
itself capable of handling the risks. 'I don't see any particular risk, but
rather new possibilities,' he said.
The bank will also expand lending to fight poverty. Some 40 per cent of the
value of loans and 50 per cent of the number of loan operations will be
directed towards social sectors.
Some 35 per cent of total lending will be directed to the region's smaller
countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940412

