FT941-17167

FT  06 JAN 94 / China proves a risk too good to resist: The attractions and
frustrations that banks find on the other side of the open door


   By LOUISE LUCAS


Angelina Fung lives in Shanghai in a five-star hotel which she says might as
well have 500 for all it can compensate for the apartment and lifestyle she
gave up in Hong Kong. The hotel offers only six-month corporate rates to
guests such as Ms Fung because inflation makes it impossible to set prices
over a longer period.
Vice-president of the foreign investment business sector division of
Citibank China, Ms Fung cannot look forward to early relief. But China,
where every day seems to bring new economic reforms and improved access to
foreigners, is the market every bank wants to win a share of.
Citibank underlined its commitment to the market last August, when it moved
its country headquarters - plus personnel - to Shanghai from Hong Kong. It
is just one of the international players forging a role for itself in China,
even though the big business - local yuan business - is still closed to
foreign banks. Overseas institutions can only deal with ventures which are
at least 25 per cent foreign-owned.
'Undoubtedly what we want is the renminbi (China's national currency)
business,' says Mr Anthony Russell, managing director of Hongkong Bank China
Services, 'and we have got one hand tied behind our back until that happens.
How quickly will we be allowed to build it up? That's the long-term
objective of the foreign banks.'
Instead, trade and project financing form much of the bread-and-butter work.
China, as an emerging country on a grand scale, has a full quota of property
and infrastructural development projects under way, many of them at an early
stage. These projects carry no security for their financiers - be it a
charge on the property underpinning the project or on cash flows - and banks
are forced to scrutinise the guarantors behind the project, usually a
Chinese bank or state-owned investment arm.
There is tentative talk of a national mortgage law, but at this stage laws
are either untried or at a rudimentary stage.
Credit analysis is further frustrated by the fact that disclosure of
information by companies to creditors is sketchy.
'Being banks we are in a risk-taking business, but we need to know what kind
of risk we are taking. This is one of the major problems,' says Ms Fung,
while Mr Russell dubs it 'much more hairy' than assessing more familiar
borrowers' credentials.
Mr Tony Nicolle, general manager for Hong Kong and China at Standard
Chartered Bank - Hong Kong's second note-issuing bank - says processing
trade finance paper on behalf of Chinese export companies dominates the
day-to-day work of the branch network in China, along with foreign lending.
The group will have 14 branch and representative offices by March.
On top of corporate banking, full service houses such as Citibank, Standard
Chartered and Hongkong Bank are able to tap into the securities market via
specially designated shares available to foreigners.
Overseas bankers reckon Beijing's long-awaited move last Saturday to unify
exchange rates by scrapping the official rate clears the way for the
authorities to grant overseas institutions the right to conduct yuan
business.
'The jungle drums suggest that some breakthrough will come this year,' says
Mr Russell. 'The People's Bank of China (the central bank) has been saying
for a while that there are two obstacles.
'One is the different rates of exchange - the official rate and the swap
centre rate. The other is the differential in taxation between foreign banks
and the domestic banks. The domestic banks complain of an unlevel playing
field because they pay twice as much tax.'
Mr Russell says the ministry of finance has introduced regulations that will
enable the domestic banks to have a similar tax structure. 'So these two big
problems are being removed.'
However, dismantling the fundamental obstacles still leaves a host of
technical issues. Not the least of these, from the Chinese authorities'
viewpoint, is how they will manage to retain control over money supply when
foreign entrants, operating on a different basis from the local banks which
can be held in check, enter the picture.
Yet to be decreed are how foreign banks can procure the yuan they lend and,
supposing they are allowed to receive yuan deposits, how they prepare for
alternative sources if deposits are withdrawn; what liquidity requirements
will look like; and what - if any - discount window facility will be
employed.
Banks with a strong presence across the border in Hong Kong see themselves
at an advantage to other international competitors. The colony plays a
pivotal role in dealings with mainland China, especially in terms of trade
and capital raising, and allows the bank to establish strong links with
overseas Chinese, who dominate direct investment and trade in China.
So far, with the exception of the Jardine group, which was singled out for a
harshly-worded verbal attack by Beijing, business has not been dragged into
the political conflict that is raging over the future of the colony and its
transitional arrangements for return to China in 1997.
'We are businessmen and have sought scrupulously to avoid being in political
difficulties that have arisen between Britain and China,' says Mr Nicolle.
'As a prominent bank in Hong Kong we are committed to promoting the
stability and prosperity of Hong Kong just as much as the British and
Chinese governments are and we hope we can go forward knowing it is in all
our interests not to get business and politics mixed up.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940106

