FT944-10944

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (3): Fast start, still trailing - Alexander
Nicoll studies India's form in Asia's investment race


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


Each day in India now brings news of foreign and Indian companies discussing
joint venture agreements. After three years of economic reform, foreign
direct investment shows signs of acquiring momentum.
According to a report by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, actual direct investment in India is expected to rise to
Dollars 2bn in 1995 from Dollars 577m in 1993. This would be a big increase,
especially considering that in 1991 the figure was virtually zero.
The upsurge of foreign interest in India is encouraging for the government.
But the amounts of money are still dwarfed by those pouring into its rapidly
growing Asian neighbours.
While New Delhi approved Dollars 3bn or so of potential investments last
year, the Chinese authorities approved Dollars 26bn. Even in the
Philippines, which is seeking to increase its attractiveness to investors
after several years as the laggard of south-east Asia, the Board of
Investment approved projects worth Dollars 8.6bn in the first half of 1994
alone.
There are several obvious reasons for India's lag. Its economic reform
programme began only three years ago, when new foreign investment was
virtually at a standstill. Investment in China also began slowly after Deng
Xiaoping began his reforms at the end of 1978, and has since seen several
stuttering periods until it reached the extraordinary pace of the past few
years.
Many foreign companies were wary of India, which had had a habit of
nationalising or expelling them since independence in 1947, and had
subjected the hardy few that persisted to mind-boggling bureaucracy.
A more immediate concern was that economic reform was only undertaken as a
result of a financial crisis which reduced foreign currency reserves
virtually to zero in 1991. Inevitably, it took some time for the government
of Mr PV Narasimha Rao to convince the outside world that it was serious
about its change of direction and for the new policies to show through in
economic performance.
Even now, budget deficit targets are routinely exceeded and both exports and
industrial output have failed to gather strong momentum. However, the
government will have taken heart from the strong confidence in India's
economic prospects expressed from all sides at this month's annual
International Monetary Fund/World Bank meetings in Madrid.
Once persuaded that India is a promising venue for investment, companies
take time to explore their market and to find the right partners in a
country whose size alone offers vast opportunities to those who make the
right choices.
Those who venture in find that, in most industries, the red tape surrounding
approvals of foreign investment has substantially diminished. Bureaucracy,
however, has hardly disappeared, especially at the state level.
Professor Michael Porter, a Harvard management expert who has conducted a
detailed study of India's competitiveness, noted in September that India now
has the 'benefit of the doubt, as China or Brazil did 10 years ago. But this
is fragile and can shift.' He urged a new burst of micro-economic
liberalisation to sharpen India's edge.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the UK stockbroker, also compared India with China
and said in a recent report: 'Our economic analysis concludes that India
represents the better-safe-than-sorry emerging market, or perhaps the
investment tortoise against China's hare.'
India is perceived to have some advantages over China. These include:
A well-developed private sector providing plenty of potential partners as
well as business culture and management experience. China's
communist-turned-capitalist leadership has had to try to re-create all these
after stifling the entrepreneurial spirit for a generation.
A legal system modelled on that of England, assuring investors of rights of
ownership and legal redress. China's lack of an effective legal system is
seen as one of its biggest disadvantages.
A financial system and stock market which, although in need of more reform,
are far more advanced than China's.
India's steady economic growth rate is seen by some as offering a safer ride
than China's roller-coaster switches between inflation-producing booms and
periods of austerity.
Moreover, some of India's handicaps are precisely the same as those of China
or of other Asian dynamos in the earlier stages of their development: lack
of infrastructure; intractable labour problems; poor quality of industrial
products engendered by excessive protection of the economy through high
tariffs and other barriers.
Competition is now being enhanced by progressive reductions in tariffs, and
the government is beginning to tackle the need for more power and better
roads and telecommunications.
However, the recurrence of bubonic and pneumonic plague in September
highlighted India's lack of attention to more basic infrastructure:
sanitation, clean water, refuse collection and public health. At the same
time, the government's handling of some infrastructure contracts has aroused
concern about increasing corruption.
India is not alone in liberalising its economy in slow stages. South Korea
and Taiwan ensure that the process is tightly controlled. South-east Asian
countries, although generally more open to investment, can be impenetrable
and difficult to do business in.
But, inevitably, there are hiccoughs. The government's inept handling of an
international share issue planned by Videsh Sanchar Nigam, the international
telephone monopoly which was intended to be the first public sector company
to issue equity internationally, has raised doubts about its willingness to
adapt to the markets' faster pace.
More broadly, there are signs of growing satisfaction within the government
that it has already done enough for the time being to reform the economy. A
rise in foreign exchange reserves has reduced the need for aid from
international financing institutions and has thus also reduced the urgency
to follow their advice on restructuring sectors of the economy.
Asia's fastest growing countries, meanwhile, have wasted little time on
self-congratulation. China and Indonesia are huge borrowers from the World
Bank and Asian Development Bank. The World Bank is very closely involved in
the re-shaping of China's economy.
Indian reform is thus likely to continue to be slow and erratic. This means
that foreign investors need a long time horizon. Rare will be the company
turning a quick profit on its investment in India - but this is equally true
of investment almost all other Asian countries.
Serious investors are prepared to accept this. Mr Arnold G. Langbo, chairman
of Kellogg, the US cereal group, interviewed about its investment in India
by the Business Standard newspaper, said: 'Some markets take five years,
some take 10, but it really doesn't matter to us. We think in terms of 10 to
20 years to grow the markets so that 20 years from now we're going to have a
huge business here.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

941108

