FT943-1026

FT  27 SEP 94 / Fears grow of hung parliament in Bonn: Chronic weakness of
liberal FDP raises doubts about outcome of federal election


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


The outcome of Germany's general election in less than three weeks still
hangs in the balance, in spite of a clear victory on Sunday for Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's closest allies in the state of Bavaria.
The chances of a hung parliament, with a grand coalition between Mr Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the opposition Social Democratic party
(SPD) the only means of forging a clear majority, remain real, according to
most political analysts.
One key element in the calculation is the chronic weakness in the polls of
the Free Democratic party (FDP), the junior partner in Mr Kohl's coalition,
which slumped to only 2.8 per cent of the vote in Bavaria, losing all its
seats in the state parliament. The setback was the sixth successive time the
liberal, free-market party has failed to gain the required 5 per cent
support needed to win seats in a state election.
Several recent opinion polls suggest that the recovery of Mr Kohl's CDU and
its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), may have peaked
at a combined vote of around 41 per cent, with the SPD still picking up a
little support at around 35 to 37 per cent.
The other unknown factor is the performance of the Party of Democratic
Socialism (PDS), the former East German Communist party, which could win
more than 30 places in the German Bundestag and hold the balance of power,
thanks to pockets of strong support in several east German cities.
Leaders of the SPD insisted yesterday that the race remained wide open,
while Mr Kohl himself warned his supporters against any tendency to think it
was already won.
'It would be quite wrong to think that the election is already decided,' he
said after a meeting of his party executive in Bonn. 'We must fight for
every vote. We have no votes to lend or to give away.'
The chancellor remains convinced that the FDP will be represented in the
Bundestag, in spite of repeated weakness in state elections, because of the
long-standing tradition of German voters giving it their decisive second
votes, in favour of a party list rather than an individual candidate.
The latest polls still give the FDP around 8 per cent support on the basis
of second votes, which should be just enough to give the ruling coalition a
majority after October 16.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the FDP party leader and foreign minister, was putting a
determinedly brave face on the party's plight yesterday, before he flew off
to the UN General Assembly. 'We are not giving up,' he said.
The opposition Social Democrats, however, are clearly gunning for the FDP
vote, and hope the series of disastrous defeats will persuade electors that
even a second vote for the FDP is scarcely worthwhile. 'Our aim is to make
ourselves so strong that it will be impossible to rule without us,' Mr
Gunter Verheugen, SPD general secretary, said yesterday.
The final result in Bavaria gave the CSU an absolute majority, with 52.8 per
cent, down from 54.9 per cent in 1990, while the SPD improved its vote by
4.1 points to 30.1 per cent. Apart from the FDP, the main losers were the
far-right Republicans, who scored only 3.9 per cent in the state where they
are supposed to be strongest.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940927

