FT943-13031

FT  21 JUL 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): From neutral to
higher gear - A revamped BHS hopes to excite shoppers


   By DIANE SUMMERS


Not enough people get up in the morning and think 'I must go to BHS'. That
is the problem Helena Packshaw, marketing director of the British retailer,
faces as she attempts to transform the chain into a 'destination' store,
rather than somewhere shoppers just drift in to from the high street.
The BHS brand, says Packshaw, is 'too neutral'. Christopher Satterthwaite,
from BHS's advertising agency Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury, puts it more
bluntly: 'Reality and perception are not matching now. It's better than you
expected when you go in the store.'
The first evidence of a vast brand-building exercise aimed at remedying this
situation is about to hit the television screens as BHS starts to advertise
for the first time in about five years. The logo has also been revamped and,
from next year, the shop interiors will also begin to look different.
The moves are part of the restructuring and recovery of the Storehouse
group, of which BHS is part. The last three or four years have been spent
developing a young, energetic organisation, and defining the store's 'value
proposition' says Packshaw.
The three parts of this proposition, central to the way the brand is
promoted, are: 'fashion-moderate' products, which are up-to-date but
mainstream, rather than at the cutting-edge of fashion; consistent and
appropriate quality; and low prices attractive to mothers on tight budgets,
who form by far the largest group among BHS's customers.
The TV advertising, which starts in early August, will use real people at
specially-staged 'happenings' in BHS stores around the country. In a new
piece of advertising jargon which, one suspects, will not catch on,
Satterthwaite hails the campaign as 'Fresh TV'. There will be just a few
days' gap between filming and screening, and a new ad will be made about
every two weeks.
Pilot advertisements were shot in Watford last month. Over one day, five
'beach parties' were staged in BHS stores in the town. Members of the public
were stopped on the street, invited to join the parties and to take part in
catwalk shows featuring BHS clothing. The linkman, a young black actor
called Sylvester, is the only professional to appear in the ads.
Out of this unscripted filming, a 60-second commercial is distilled. There
is a deliberately 'home movie' feel, with black and white video until the
point when the BHS products are featured, when the film moves into colour.
The overall effect is lively and loud, with Sylvester as a slightly nervous
parody of the male in the traditional soap powder advertisements.
The format will be adapted to show different seasons' clothes and could also
be extended to other BHS lines, for example its lighting. The first place to
get the treatment will be Gateshead's giant shopping centre, the
MetroCentre.
The idea of the in-store 'event' will be used to drive local publicity and
as a general promotional tool, and will be extended to shops which are not
featured in the TV commercials. The intention is that customers should be
able to go to the stores and immediately locate the merchandise featured on
television.
The new logo is, says Packshaw, a 'more feminine, more fluid' version of the
existing one, which is 'OK but doesn't give her (the customer) the feeling
of excitement or energy' that BHS is keen should be associated with the
brand.
Do not expect to see the new logo on high-street shop fronts for some time.
The 122 fascias will be replaced as stores are refurbished. In any case,
Packshaw believes that customers know where their local BHS store is and so
rarely look up at the sign.
Instead, the company is concentrating on getting the new logo on to carrier
bags, inside the stores for displays, and on to labels.
The final piece in the jigsaw is a revamp of the store interiors which,
Packshaw says, will show merchandising off to greater effect and 'allow it
to breathe'. The new look is being unveiled in the Cambridge store next
year.
As far as the entire strategy is concerned, Packshaw will want to see
concrete evidence of success. The shops currently show Pounds 200-Pounds 220
revenue per square foot, compared with about Pounds 400 at Marks and
Spencer, she says.
Although no one is expecting sales densities to double overnight, there will
have to be an appreciable narrowing of this gap.
Apart from sales, there will also be longer-term measurement of perceptions
of the brand, for the campaign 'is also about elevating the brand in the
minds of people to whom it might be neutral'.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940721

