FT942-12591

FT  28 APR 94 / World Trade News: Israeli companies look to Egypt


   By REUTER


   CAIRO


Israeli telecommunications companies, denied direct access to Middle East
markets by an Arab boycott of their country, say they hope to use Egypt as a
springboard to launch their products in the region, Reuter reports from
Cairo.
Delegates from the six companies, in Egypt to attend a trade fair, said they
were looking for partnerships with Egyptian companies which might produce
their goods under licence for sales elsewhere in the Middle East.
Egypt is the only Arab state to have signed a peace treaty with Israel and
is exempt from an Arab League boycott of the Jewish state.
Mr Haim Ashkenazi, an executive with the Israel Export Institute, said the
companies were the first Israeli telecommunications companies to exhibit in
the Arab world.
Mr Elisha Ben-Nachum, sales manager at cables manufacturer Teldor, said his
company would be discussing possibilities of joint ventures with Egyptian
companies.
The Arab boycott of Israel also blacklists companies with major investments
in the Jewish state, but there have been signs that this 'secondary' boycott
is slipping.
Mr Ron Brown, US trade secretary, on a visit to the region in January, said
a number of US companies on the boycott blacklist had been prominent
exhibitors at a trade show in Riyadh that month.
Another Israeli company at the Cairo show said it was looking for
joint-venture agreements with Egypt or other African countries to produce
its emergency back-up generators.
One of the companies, national telecommunications operator Bezeq, is using
the occasion to inaugurate a direct telephone line linking Israel and Egypt.
'This is a big breakthrough. It is the first direct link between Israel and
an Arab country,' said Bezeq official Mr Daniel Charbit.
The terrestrial fibre-optic line can carry thousands of calls between Cairo
and Tel Aviv. At present calls have to be routed via submarine lines to
Italy, Mr Charbit said.

The Financial Times


International Page 7

940428

