FT942-14894

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (16): Third party
benefits - M&S has switched to outsourcing


   By KENNETH GOODING


Mr David Dennis, compensation manager for Marks & Spencer, has explained why
one of Britain's leading retail groups decided to make changes in the way it
handled its fleet of 1,200 company vehicles.
'The company car is an extremely important benefit. But it is more than just
the provision of wheels.
'It is the total service that matters, the removal of hassle over such
things as maintenance, replacement and so on.' By moving to out-sourcing, he
says, 'we've taken a big step forward to enhance this benefit'.
Out-sourcing is the latest buzzword in the vehicle fleet management
business. This is when a company delegates all its fleet management to a
specialist third-party, eliminating the need for dedicated in-house support
personnel.
'Put quite simply, it is one nominated contract hire supplier managing all
the other suppliers to that customer. So all invoices for monthly rentals,
excess mileages, or whatever, are controlled by the nominated supplier, who
then provides the client with one consolidated invoice for auditing,'
explains Mr Neil Pykett, managing director of Cowie Interleasing, the UK's
biggest vehicle contract hire company. Cowie have the Marks & Spencer
out-sourcing contract.
He said: 'We replace the client's software with our own and his people with
our people. Although based at our head office, they answer the phone in the
client's name. The benefits are that the client has only one set of invoices
to auditand we free his own staff to concentrate on other, perhaps more
important, core activities.'
Mr Dennis said there were two main reasons why M&S moved to out-sourcing: to
reduce the administrative burden, of course, and to shorten the
communication lines between the company car driver and the people providing
the day-to-day service.
No longer does the driver have to contact the M&S fleet department and then
wait while it contacts the car supplier. 'With the new arrangements, the
driver rings Cowie and gets an instant answer in most cases.' M&S was
already running its company car fleet 'ridiculously efficiently,' according
to Mr Dennis. It had a fleet manager with one assistant. Staffing remained
the same after the change to out-sourcing, but the fleet manager had other
jobs to do, such as looking after group travel arrangements.
There are four women at Cowie devoting their entire working time to handling
the M&S fleet. Previously M&S had its cars on four-year contract hire from
three suppliers, including Cowie.
The other two companies are still responsible for maintaining their vehicles
but liaise with Cowie. Mr Dennis says that M&S will continue with a second
company car supplier - Kenning Leaseline - which will have about 15 per cent
of the total business 'to maintain a competitive element and to provide us
with market intelligence.'
Out-sourcing is not suitable for every company, according to Mr Colin
Grant-Wilson, managing director of Lease Plan UK. He told a recent meeting
of the Institute of Directors that there had to be 'an out-sourcing culture'
within the company moving to this style of management. 'It is risky to go
into out-sourcing for the first time with the company car. The skills
required are different.'
Companies thinking of out-sourcing their fleets had to make careful
preparations, insisted Mr Grant-Wilson. 'It has to be got right from the
start. You have to ensure that you have identified all the elements and have
negotiated with a supplier exactly what you expect from him.'
According to the British Vehicle Rental and Leasing Association (BVRLA), the
most recent survey of its members' fleets showed that the 'notable trend
towards the concept of out-sourcing' has helped contract hire and contract
purchase increase their shares of the available market. This is because
these two methods of company car acquisition incorporate a high degree of
fleet management support.
Contract hire involves a rental agreement at a fixed price and for a fixed
term which is not usually less than two years. The supplier, or lessor,
retains ownership of the vehicle and takes all the risks, including resale.
The vehicle's user, or lessee, is buying a service, and therefore does not
show the vehicles on its balance sheet. The contract may or may not require
the lessor to provide maintenance or other support services.
The disadvantages of contract hire include inflexibility, higher cost to
compensate the lessor for the finance provided, excess mileage charges for
exceeding contractual mileages and early termination policies which can be
restrictive and costly.
BVRLA says that, as contract hire is longer-established than contract
purchase, it has been experiencing slower growth. Contract purchase,
however, showed a 35.2 per cent growth among BVRLA members in 1993,
'testament to its greater acceptance among vehicle users, increased
awareness of its benefits, an enhanced confidence in its legal foundation
and the higher number of fleet cars costing more than Pounds 12,000 for
which contract purchase is a more tax-efficient means of acquisition.'
Contract purchase involves the provision of vehicles under a funding
arrangement that is not a lease, but an agreement to purchase whereby the
vehicle supplier agrees to buy back the fleet at the end of a fixed period
for a pre-determined sum.
The risks of ownership are therefore transferred to the supplier, although
the fleet must be shown on the user's balance sheet. The supplier may also
provide maintenance and other support services with the vehicles.
BVRLA's research showed that the the rise in contract purchase's popularity
caused a drop in the use of finance leasing and fleet management.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940418

