FT943-12631

FT  23 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: Working to rule 535(2) - How to deal
in unquoted securities / Diary of a Private Investor


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


Rule 535(2) sounded as if it might be part of a European Union regulation,
such as the one which defined a carrot as a fruit so that the Portuguese
could continue using these vegetables in the production of jam. In fact,
535(2) was not an EU regulation but a very useful rule of the London Stock
Exchange to facilitate dealings in certain unquoted securities.
Since July 18, when the stock exchange's new, re-numbered rule book came
into operation, rule 535(2) has become rule 4.2. But its general provisions
remain unchanged.
Shares in 236 companies are traded under Rule 4.2. These include the
Arsenal, Aston Villa, Everton and Glasgow Rangers football clubs; Adnams and
Shepherd Neame, which operate breweries and pubs; Lawrie Group, a tea and
coffee company; Exchem, which makes speciality chemicals, mining and quarry
supplies; and cereal-maker Weetabix.
In April, Michael Lawrence, chief executive of the London Stock Exchange,
launched a plan to 'promote the interests of both quoted and unquoted
smaller companies'. One of its suggestions was the 'development and
re-launch of the 4.2 trading facility as a distinct market with a suitable
level of regulation'.
I first bought shares in a 4.2 company in 1989 when a stockbroker
recommended Southern Newspapers. Based in Southampton, the company dominates
its regional market; its publications include an evening newspaper in the
Poole and Bournemouth area, where I live. I was happy to pay 325p as I felt
the company had a bright future, possibly through a take-over bid.
An unfortunate investment in Leading Leisure led to write-offs in Southern's
1990 accounts of more than Pounds 12m and a decline in its take-over
prospects; as a result, the shares drifted down. Undeterred, I took the
opportunity in 1992 to add to my holding at 225p. Southern's shares now are
worth more than Pounds 4 and the company is valued at well over Pounds 90m.
Pre-tax profits for the half-year to January 1 1994 were Pounds 7.15m,
although this included Pounds 3.5m from selling its shareholding in
Portsmouth & Sunderland newspapers.
Several companies have moved from the 4.2 market to gain a full listing;
recent examples include Celltech, Independent Insurance Group, Scotia,
Tadpole Technology, The Telegraph newspaper group and Vardon, a leisure
concern. This means that some 4.2 companies - not all of which are big - can
be viewed as a ground-floor investment opportunity, the hope being that they
(and their share prices) will appreciate when full stock market listings
eventually are obtained.
Yet, many 4.2 companies do not want a full listing. Perhaps the directors
want to maintain their firm's local character. Or, they may want to ensure
they can act for its longer-term future without the publicity that can come
from a full listing. Some have been deterred by the cost of a USM or full
listing, plus complying with all the regulatory requirements.
Under Rule 4.2, a company need not pay a fee to have its shares traded.
Instead, a stock exchange member firm applies to deal in the shares of a
particular concern; if permission is given, this lasts for 12 months from
the date of the last trade. If dealings are so few that there are no trades
within a 12-month period, then a fresh application for permission must be
made.
Most of the dealings in this market are on a 'matched bargains' basis: a
seller is matched with a buyer and vice-versa. Details are reported to the
stock exchange and prices are published in its daily Official List as well
as on the dealings page in the Saturday edition of the Financial Times.
Some 4.2 companies actually are very private, and share dealings are
extremely limited. Without the 4.2 facility, shareholders may well be locked
into the company. Even with the rule, a share deal might not be possible for
months - if at all.
There are two reasons for this: first, because no one wants to buy at or
near the price offered; or, second, because there are not enough shares
available to satisfy every potential purchaser. Therefore, investors should
not rush into this market on a short-term basis. They could find themselves
with a holding that no one wants to buy for a long time.
On the positive side, interest in this market has increased greatly in the
past 18 months. In 1993, for instance, dealings worth Pounds 520m were
reported and this year should show an increase.
Direct investment in 4.2 companies can provide considerable tax incentives
for private investors. In its annual report, Southern Newspapers points out
that because its shares are not quoted on a recognised exchange, they 'prima
facie fall within section 105(i)(c) of the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 as a
relevant business property which, in appropriate circumstances, will rank
for a reduction of 50 per cent (30 per cent prior to March 10, 1992) in
value for inheritance tax purposes'.
In other words - and subject to certain conditions - if an investor owns
less than 25 per cent of an unquoted company, the IHT is reduced by 50 per
cent on such holdings.
It is encouraging to see interest being focused on this area - although one
hopes that the various tax incentives will continue to be protected.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940723

