FT944-5953

FT  01 DEC 94 / Management (Management and Advertising): Smoking issue
smoulders - Victoria Griffith reports on a controversial US proposal


   By VICTORIA GRIFFITH


A US federal government proposal to limit smoking in the workplace could
soon make private houses, clubs, cars and the outdoors the only places
people can light up, and would make cigarette marketing even more difficult
for the already embattled tobacco industry.
Hearings on the far-reaching proposal by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) will wrap up at the end of this month. Already, sparks
are flying over the possibility of sweeping changes. Cigarette maker Philip
Morris refused to testify at the OSHA hearings this week after accusing the
agency of bias against the tobacco industry.
The proposal could mean that smoking in any taxi, hotel room or restaurant
would be forbidden. Even cigarette and tobacco companies would have to post
'No Smoking' signs in their offices.
According to the proposal, setting aside a separate room for smokers within
an office building is not enough. The room would also have to be equipped
with its own ventilation system.
Even if a restaurant sets aside an all-smoking lounge, for instance,
management could not ask waiters to enter the area. Similarly, a conductor
could not be forced to walk through the smoking car of a train to collect
tickets, and a housekeeper could not clean up a hotel room in which someone
had been smoking.
The speed with which the anti-smoking movement has snowballed has caught
many by surprise. Yet OSHA says it is just trying to protect US workers.
'OSHA's mission is to save lives, prevent injuries and illnesses and protect
the health and safety of America's workers,' says Joseph Dear, assistant
secretary of labour for OSHA. 'We believe the evidence supports our
conclusion that air contaminants present a significant risk to employees in
indoor environments.'
The tobacco industry has been trying to garner opposition to the OSHA
proposal through a nationwide advertising campaign. 'This is nothing more
than an anti-smokers' pipe-dream,' says the Tobacco Institute. The industry
argues that proposals would outlaw smoking in private homes, since a
carpenter, repairman, or cleaner could not be asked to enter the house.
OSHA says this is simply not true. 'The agency is not proposing to regulate
smoking in private homes or private vehicles and is not banning smoking,'
says Dear. 'The objective of this proposed rule is to protect non-smoking
employees from the effects of passive smoke.'
Opposition is fiercer than OSHA may have anticipated, however. The agency
has received thousands of protest letters, a few so threatening that OSHA
handed them over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
With or without the OSHA proposal, the trend in the US is for more smoking
restrictions. Vermont and California have strict limitations in place, and
dozens of municipalities have banned smoking in all public buildings. The
new OSHA proposal, however, means cigarette restrictions would be put in
place much faster, and with more far-reaching consequences, than most
observers imagined.
The restaurant industry is one of the most outspoken opponents of the
proposal. The National Restaurant Association estimates that it will lose
Dollars 18bn a year in revenue if the smoking ban is enforced. 'People will
still go to restaurants, but they won't have the espresso, dessert or drink
they would usually enjoy with a cigarette,' says Robert Harrington, director
of technical services for the Association. 'That means they won't be
spending as much money.'
The furore over the proposal will probably guarantee that smoking in the
workplace remains a hotly contested issue. Tobacco industry advocates hope
the new Republican Congress will prevent OSHA from moving forward with its
proposal by enacting a law protecting smokers. However, anti-smoking
lobbyists point out that such a stance could be politically dangerous, as
the tobacco industry is, at the moment, extremely unpopular with voters.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

941201

