FT941-13122

FT  27 JAN 94 / Family loses out in social changes: More people live alone -
Sharp increase in divorce rate


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


An apparently unequal struggle between the conventional family and social
and demographic change is shown today in Social Trends, the Central
Statistical Office's annual compendium of British life.
Political controversies over the future of the welfare state and the causes
of crime have brought the role of traditional family values into sharp
focus. But Social Trends shows that, while the debate continues, so does the
decline of the traditional family.
Couples with dependent children formed the majority of households as
recently as the early 1970s. By 1992 they constituted less than 40 per cent,
and it is now increasingly likely that such couples will not be married.
One significant reason for the change is a growing proportion of people
living alone. Single people now account for more than a quarter of all
households - there has been a threefold increase in the proportion of people
living alone during the past 30 years.
The biggest recent growth has been among men of working age, but the ageing
of the population is another factor that will fuel a continuing increase in
single-person households. By the year 2031 there will be more than 16m
people of pensionable age in Britain's population - more than double the
1961 number.
Recent years have seen an even more striking rise in the proportion of
lone-parent families - these have quadrupled since the early 1960s. The
government's General Household Survey, also published this week, shows that
21 per cent of families were headed by lone parents in 1992. The main
increase in single-parent households occurred during the 1970s and 1980s,
and there has been little further change in the proportion since 1990, the
government's household survey adds.
Allied to this change is Social Trends' now-familiar soaring graph showing
the remarkable rise in births outside marriage. Unmarried mothers now
account for almost one-in-three births - an increase from the one-in-20
level that, apart from the two world wars, had persisted throughout the
century until the 1960s. In Scotland and the north-east of England, 90 per
cent of mothers under 20 were unmarried in 1992.
The proportion of births outside marriage more than doubled during the 1980s
alone. But the children do not all grow up in single-parent families - in
1992, 75 per cent of babies born outside marriage were registered by both
parents.
Divorce, as well as births outside marriage, is contributing to the growth
in single-parent households. Marriages have declined by nearly 16 per cent
during the past 20 years, while divorces have more than doubled.
Some politicians hope that a renewed appreciation of the importance of
community involvement will fill the gaps created by fragmenting family
relationships. However, evidence in Social Trends suggests that this may be
wishful thinking.
Surveys show that only 4 per cent of the population has taken an active part
in a political campaign. The proportion of churchgoers is, at 15 per cent,
lower than in many other European countries.
Almost 75 per cent of the population has done no recent voluntary work. Some
of the active minority who do volunteer put in more than 10 hours a month -
but this compares with nearly 27 hours a week spent by the average citizen
watching television.
Social Trends 24. HMSO. Pounds 27.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940127

