FT943-957

FT  27 SEP 94 / Swan Hunter closure becomes virtual certainty


   By NORMA COHEN


Closure of Swan Hunter, the Tyneside shipyard in liquidation, yesterday
became a virtual certainty when the bulk of the design team, crucial to the
continuation of the business, were told that they would be made redundant on
Friday.
Receivers Price Waterhouse yesterday told the unions a further 177 would be
made redundant on Friday, of whom 79 were from the 103-strong design team.
Loss of the team would make it impossible for Swan Hunter to tender for more
work, in effect ensuring its demise by ending the prospects of its sale as a
going concern.
This week's redundancies will leave just 450 workers at the yard, which has
been in receivership for 16 months. Union officials said they had been told
that more jobs would go in mid-October and most of the rest at the start of
November, when the yard's last frigate, HMS Richmond, leaves to be handed
over to the Royal Navy.
Only about 100 will remain for maintenance and security - the last survivors
of the 2,500 on the payroll last May.
The unions insisted that they still did not regard closure as inevitable -
there could be a move for the yard after everyone has been made redundant.
Shipbuilding could continue on the Tyne after the company was broken up. The
unions understood that 'parties' were interested in constituent parts of the
business such as the Hebburn dry dock and the Neptune and Wallsend yards.
Norma Cohen writes: Members of the Swan Hunter pension scheme are being
asked whether they wish to accept a cash sum to transfer to a personal
pension which may not pay benefits equal to those promised by the employer's
scheme.
Alternatively, they could accept a lump sum to buy guaranteed benefits from
an insurance company which would probably cover no more than 60 per cent of
their benefits.
In a letter to scheme members Law Debenture Corporation, independent trustee
for the pension scheme, told members that if all deferred pensioners - those
who are no longer employed by Swan Hunter but are too young to retire - took
the first option, the scheme would have enough money to provide a full
transfer value for all.
Some deferred pensioners may be able to have an immediate pension if they
are more than 50 years old.
According to Law Debenture the scheme will be formally wound up in late
October or early November, when payments can be made.
The letter notes that all current pensioners will continue to receive their
entitlements in full.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940927

