FT942-15428

FT  15 APR 94 / German rival could rescue Lancer Boss


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Jungheinrich, the Hamburg-based lift-truck producer, last night emerged as
the leading contender to buy the UK operations of its rival Lancer Boss,
after clinching a deal to buy Steinbock Boss, the Bedfordshire company's
German unit.
The purchase, a day earlier than expected, comes less than a week after
Steinbock Boss's German bankers, led by Bayerische Hypo-Bank, withdrew
facilities from the company, prompting directors to call in a receiver. This
forced Lancer Boss to call in administrative receivers to its UK operations.
Last night Sir Neville Bowman-Shaw, chairman of Lancer Boss before the
receivership, said Jung-heinrich's purchase of Steinbock Boss put it in
'pole position' to buy Lancer Boss.
He added: 'I am glad that the anxiety has been taken away for the workers at
Steinbock.'
The deal means that a bid from a UK company, conditional on buying both the
UK and German parts of the collapsed group, has lapsed.
Mr Allan Griffiths, partner at Grant Thornton and one of the administrative
receivers for the UK operations, said: 'Given the new situation, and the
close synergy between the different ranges produced by Lancer Boss and
Steinbock Boss, we will be looking forward to discussions with the directors
of Jungheinrich on future co-operation between the two companies.'
Throughout this week Mr Griffiths has been trying to win the co-operation of
the German receiver, Mr Werner Folger, because he believed that the group
was worth more if the UK and German units were sold together. But there has
been some frustration in the UK at the speed of events in Germany. The
German banks have been keen to see Steinbock Boss sold to Jungheinrich as
quickly as possible.
There has been considerable interest in Lancer Boss but very few bids
because would-be buyers have been given so little time. Speaking before the
purchase of Steinbock Boss was known, Mr Griffiths said the case differed
from other UK receiverships where a shortlist could be drawn up of buyers
which would have time for 'due diligence' examinations.
Terms for the purchase of Steinbock Boss were not disclosed but Jungheinrich
said the 'rapid and unbureaucratic' sale of the company was necessary to
overcome uncertainty among dealers and customers before next week's
important Hanover trade fair.
It said a quick deal was possible because the German banking group had made
a 'concrete financial contribution' to secure Steinbock's plant at Moosburg
and the workers' jobs. Mr Klaus Schenk, managing director of
Manchester-based Jungheinrich (GB), said the takeover put Steinbock Boss in
a healthy financial position.
Observer, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940415

