FT943-710

FT  28 SEP 94 / Management: Break-Out: a new fashion at Sears - How a UK
retailer is encouraging its different chains to co-operate with each other


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Inside a warehouse on an industrial estate near Birmingham last month stood
a high street, complete with a row of shops, fast food outlets, and an
amphitheatre at one end with a giant screen and sound equipment.
This was not a theme park, or the UK's latest new town. It was created as
the venue for a series of training days for store managers from Sears, the
UK fashion group whose chains include Dolcis, Wallis, Warehouse, Richards,
and Olympus, as well as Selfridges department store in London.
The shops were constructed within days from canvas and metal frames in
redundant warehousing space, and disappeared just as quickly, but they
served as an effective environment in which store managers could meet and
learn new skills.
Such initiatives have played an important part in the regeneration of Sears
 -further evidence of which was provided by yesterday's rise in interim
pre-tax profits from Pounds 38.9m to Pounds 53.8m.
Of the four large UK fashion groups which ran into difficulties around the
turn of this decade - Next, Storehouse, Burton and Sears - it was perhaps
Sears, with 3,500 stores under more than a dozen fascias, and about 35,000
full-time equivalent staff, that faced the most complex problems.
It may not have been losing money - even if group profits fell from a
pre-tax peak of Pounds 246m in the year to January 1988 to Pounds 81m in the
year to January 1992 - and it had fewer debt worries than some competitors.
The group, however, was sprawling and unwieldy. Communications between
stores and the centre - and between stores themselves - were poor. Functions
were sometimes duplicated, and there were few structures allowing ideas and
expertise to be passed from one chain to another.
As chains had been acquired, they had often been left to do things their own
way. Burton, another fashion retailer made up of a number of multiple
chains, faced a similar problem, with its high-street stores trading in
competition with one another rather than co-operating in certain areas and
targeting different market segments.
Another problem was that Sears would often be one of the biggest retailers
in a town centre, but its turnover was split between ten or more stores
which hardly knew one another. This denied Sears a potentially powerful
voice in the town's affairs.
Liam Strong, the former marketing director of British Airways appointed
Sears chief executive in spring 1992, realised that as well as restructuring
 -the underperforming menswear businesses were sold and the shoe business
British Shoe Corporation revamped - a culture change was needed. He hired
Rod Taylor, a former colleague at British Airways, as director of human
resources, and at a conference of the top 200 Sears executives in October
1992 launched the Sears Action Programme. The aim was to bring together
different functions, such as buying, merchandising and marketing, and to get
stores and chains to work together.
By the following February, the programme, now known as Break-Out, was
showing results. Meetings between chains had identified possible cost
savings of between Pounds 7m and Pounds 8m a year.
Further evidence of the culture change could be seen at a conference for the
top 300 executives in March. 'People started to stand up and say things
like, I have 'stolen' this idea from womenswear,' says Taylor.
Co-operation still did not go far enough, however. Taylor launched a
Break-Out team, putting together 17 people from Sears businesses with five
consultants from Gemini Consulting, to deepen the process. He also
introduced a management training programme at the centre and in the stores.
At head office, where staff had been extensively reshuffled by Strong, the
top 50 executives were invited to undertake a course of executive coaching,
weekly sessions of management training with consultants, at the company's
expense. They were free to choose the coach and the skills they wanted to
develop. All but two took up the offer, and Taylor is confident that the
Pounds 250,000 costs of the scheme will be more than recouped by the
benefits, in the form of better-trained directors who can pass on their
skills.
At the stores level, Sears brought managers together in a series of day-long
training events. The first ten regional Break-Out days, involving 350 store
and concession managers at a time, were held a year ago. A follow-up series
of eight 'Sears retail days' for 450 managers at a time, was held last month
in the mock-up high street in Solihull.
Events began with a 'town meeting' hosted by a jeans-wearing Liam Strong, at
which managers were able to put questions to similarly casually attired
managing directors of the retail divisions. These were frequently blunt -
'How can we get head office to listen to us?' was one question last month -
but Taylor says the process was important for both sides. 'Confronting the
managers was a big learning process for the MDs. They realised answers that
sounded like cotton wool were not going to be credible.'
After this town meeting, managers moved into the store areas to participate
in seminars on such subjects as visual merchandising and customer loyalty.
They also held meetings with colleagues from their own towns to discuss
forms of co-operation, such as cross-fascia training or joint security
meas-ures.
Strong says these events were important as a way of getting store managers
talking to one another, and making them feel personally involved in the
changes.
The feedback from the retail days has been good and there have been visible
changes in the stores.
'People can only take away very simple messages from these events,' he says.
'The two ideas we wanted them to take away is that we continue to be
committed to change, but it is tough going. The second is that there is a
lot they can do themselves.'

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940928

