FT942-12508

FT  29 APR 94 / Housing benefit cuts drawn up


   By JAMES BLITZ


Social security ministers are preparing wide-ranging plans to reduce
spending on housing benefit and mortgage interest relief for low-income
groups, amid fears that the department's expenditure plans are overshooting
government targets for the current financial year.
Cuts in housing support - which would affect people on low incomes - could
be one of the main features of this year's public spending round.
Ministers believe housing benefit and mortgage relief paid through income
support are among the fastest growing elements of the department's budget -
nearly 15 per cent of the overall total of Pounds 85bn.
Attempts to curb spending in housing support could create a political storm,
and reduce the willingness of banks and building societies to lend to low
income groups.
Last year the government took initial steps to limit the amount of mortgage
relief offered to people on low incomes, lowering the ceiling for mortgages
on which such payments could be made from Pounds 150,000 to Pounds 125,000.
DSS officials said yesterday that a further reduction in the ceiling was
being considered because of concern that some recently unemployed people
were receiving help with mortgages, while continuing to live in luxury
accommodation. Officials said the government was seeking ways to encourage
people to take out private insurance against job loss, rather than relying
on the state.
The department is also looking at ways to reduce the Pounds 8.8bn spent on
housing benefit, which goes to 4.5m people living in rented or local
authority accommodation.
People on very low incomes can theoretically have all their rent paid for in
housing benefit. Ministers are concerned that this pushes up the price of
private rented accommodation, and discourages people from looking for
cheaper housing.
They are looking at a variety of ways to reduce the housing benefit budget,
including imposition of maximum rents. Local authorities could also be given
a legal duty to find cheaper alternative accommodation for families.
The government's encouragement to people to buy their own homes makes it
politically difficult to reduce support if they become unemployed.
Banks and building societies might be less willing to offer mortgages if
they think people are less likely to receive state support when they are in
financial difficulties. This could restrain the recovery in the housing
market.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940429

