FT941-16810

FT  07 JAN 94 / International Company News: Hewlett-Packard to take stake in
software venture


   By ALAN CANE


Hewlett-Packard, a leading US electronics manufacturer, is to take a 15 per
cent equity stake in Taligent, a joint venture between International
Business Machines and Apple Computer. The value of the deal will not be
revealed.
Taligent, formed in March, 1992, is developing advanced computer software
which IBM and Apple hope will be used to operate the next generation of
personal computers and workstations.
More than 90 per cent of personal computers now use operating systems
developed by Microsoft of the US, the world's largest software house.
The involvement of HP, which unlike IBM has successfully maintained
profitability throughout the recession, gives fresh weight and credibility
to the Taligent venture.
Mr Bernard Guidon, HP's computer systems director for Europe, said yesterday
the company would work with Taligent to develop its 'object-oriented'
technology.
Object technology - in which programs are constructed from re-usable
software components - is seen as an important solution for large companies
developing new business software and replacing older, obsolete, programs.
Mr Guidon said HP would run Taligent's software on its own computers and
would supply Taligent with its distributed computing technology. Distributed
computing expertise is essential for companies attempting to build
enterprise-wide networks.
He discounted the argument that Taligent was aimed directly at Microsoft,
saying the software house was no longer the competitive threat it had been.
The computer industry had been disappointed by the performance of
'Windows-NT', Microsoft's own next-generation operating software, he said.
A greater threat was Next Corporation's 'Nextstep' software, but HP had
already concluded an agreement with Next and would be able to offer
customers either Nextstep or Taligent software. Microsoft and Apple said
yesterday that they had agreed to develop software which would enable their
customers to share information and messaging services across networks which
use both Microsoft and Apple operating systems.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940107

