FT944-10917

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (28): So many people to move - The woes of
the world's second biggest rail network


   By JIMMY BURNS


India's railway system, the world's second largest, straddles the country
like a colossus. Without it, social and economic life would collapse.
The railways represent India's main form of transport, with annual passenger
levels estimated at 3.7bn, and freight traffic, including essential
commodities such as mineral ore, food grain, and fertilisers, totalling 362m
tonnes in the year 1993-94. It is one of the world's largest single
employers, with 1.6m on its staff.
The minister for railways, C K Jaffer Sharief, says that his main objective
is 'to provide an effective, dynamic, cost-effective transport system which
can serve as an engine for economic growth'.
But insuring that the railway system meets the demands of a growing
population and an expanding economy is proving a formidable task for the
state-owned Railways Board, as it looks for fresh ways of financing its
modernisation programme after having its budgetary support savagely cut by
the central government.
A stark illustration of the kind of pressures facing India's rail chiefs is
provided by Delhi's main railway station. Mr Parajeet Kumar, the station
master, contemplates the whirlpool of humanity which daily builds up on his
platforms, and the gradual encroachment by the slum dwellers who live along
the railway lines. At the height of this autumn's plague scare, passengers
with their faces covered with handkerchiefs stood watching black rats
scurrying over the lines.
'We try and put on more trains every day but we still don't seem to have
enough to deal with the population. We need more stations, more lines, and
greater capacity in our repair yards,' says Mr Kumar.
The backbone of the nationwide modernisation plan is an ambitious programme
of conversion of 6,000 kilometres of track from metre gauge to broad gauge
by 1997, to help meet an expected 25 per cent increase in freight traffic
over the next three years.
The programme represents the biggest single conversion programme carried out
anywhere in the world during this century, and the biggest single project
undertaken by Indian Railways since the first railway service got under way
in 1857.
India's vast network of metre and narrow gauge lines has been carrying less
freight traffic every year, causing heavy losses. As an alternative to
providing funds for the continuing maintenance of the network, the current
policy is to convert the more important metre gauge routes to broad gauge so
as to introduce alternative routes for freight traffic, and obviating the
need for the construction of new broad gauge lines.
The conversion is aimed at accelerating the turn-around time of wagons,
minimising transhipment bottlenecks, and by so doing improving the overall
operating ratio of the system. It is aimed at overcoming the sense of
economic isolation felt by some parts of India which have been dependant on
meter gauge.
The gauge conversion will link mineral rich areas of India with production
and consumption centres in other parts of the country. For example, the
Jodhpur-Jaisalmer area of Rajasthan with rich high quality limestone
reserves will be linked by broad gauge route with other parts of India.
As the minister Jaffer Sharief has put it: 'The problem with the railways is
that their line capacity is saturated ..With gauge conversion, several
alternative routes will become available leading to increase in line
capacity. This will result in long-haul road traffic reverting to rail.'
Another key plank of the modernisation programme is the introduction of
higher capacity trains and higher horsepower locomotives capable of handling
more tonnage and more passengers in less time.
A controversial and long running debate over whether or not India should
import high-tech locomotives has finally been resolved. Under a contract
worth Dollars 190m , Asea Brown Boveri, the European engineering combine,
will supply next year 33 new generation micro-chip-controlled
alternating-current engines. The contract involves transfer of technology to
facilitate the development and construction of a further 30 similar
locomotives in India, increasing to a production target of 150 by the year
2000.
The controversy surrounding the award of the contract showed that despite
the government's official commitment to economic liberalisation, doing
business in India can still be fraught with problems.
ABB, which has a large Indian affiliate employing 4,000, has been supplying
Indian railways since the 1960s. But members of a government advisory
committee lobbied actively against the award of the contract ostensibly on
cost grounds but with the main intention of promoting India's own
engineering industry.
In its defence, ABB claims that the state-of-the art technology it is
bringing, and which it will hand over to the Indians, has an energy
conservation potential of 35 per cent, lower maintenance cost of up to 40
per cent, and a higher turnaround that will increase the availability of
locomotives by 50 per cent.
In addition it points out that the introduction of the locomotives will
bring about a matching modernisation of signalling and telecommunications in
and and around India's railway stations. Only 10 per cent of India's railway
stations are currently semiautomated.
Mr Viren Srivastava, a senior executive with ABB, says: 'In India what is
still important is to ensure that trains get to their destinations. We hope
to ensure that. It's better to learn to walk before you can run.' Walking
rather than running also means that the Indian government is unlikely to
embark on am ambitious programme of privatisation. Some free market
economists believe Indian Railways is hugely overstaffed. One estimate is
that the railways could be run more effectively with a third of the current
staff.
However, according to senior railway officials such an estimate ignores the
huge political and social costs that the government would encounter were it
to embark on a programme of mass lay offs.
In the current five year plan, which began in the year 1992-93, budgetary
support of Indian Railways has been cut from 75 per cent of capital
requirements to 19 per cent.
Over the last two years, both passenger and freight traffic revenue have
been hit as a result of railway accidents and communal disturbances.
To offset losses the Railway Board is planning to lease or sell some of its
properties, and tighten up on passenger and freight receipts. Meanwhile, it
is extending an olive branch to the private sector while still holding on to
its overall monopoly. Thus the operation of some tourist trains - the
so-called palaces-on-wheels - are being put in private hands, while catering
is being increasingly entrusted to private contractors. The private sector
is also being given greater opportunity to advertise on Indian trains.
Such cosmetic changes may boost revenue, but may fall short of making the
Indian Railways the self reliant and efficient transport agency its
officials promise. Within the context of India, it is nevertheless near
miraculous that railways function at all.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

941108

