FT942-15757

FT  14 APR 94 / Sarajevo hangs between war and peace: Edward Mortimer and
Laura Silber on deprivations in the war-ravaged capital


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


'What do I need a tram for? To ride around inside this prison camp? Nothing
is better here.'
'Gorazde? It's all the same to me. After what we've been through in the last
two years, you become selfish. You only worry about yourself.'
'Well, I suppose (the Nato air strike) is positive. They finally showed they
can do something. But it wasn't much, considering what's happened in the
last two years, and how we've suffered. None of us think it's the end.'
'No, I'm an optimist as far as Sarajevo is concerned. I think the Nato
ultimatum works. You see, we only take account of the news as far as it
affects us personally.'
Sarajevo, as the above comments gathered at random from its inhabitants
suggest, is a city hanging between peace and war. Most people still live on
meagre rations brought in by humanitarian agencies, which depend on an
airlift run by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. The airlift has been
suspended since the air strikes against Bosnian Serb forces in Gorazde
earlier this week - as it usually is at times of high tension. But the UNHCR
built up significant stocks of food during March, when flights were
uninterrupted, and now reckons to have supplies for at least 10 days.
To the visitor, Sarajevo displays an eerie calm. There is virtually no
traffic in the streets, except for the famous trams and the white vehicles -
some armoured - of the UN and Red Cross. A taxi charges DM50 (Pounds 20) for
the mile or so from the PTT building, where the UN has its headquarters, to
the Holiday Inn where the foreign press corps is holed up.
Life in the Holiday Inn is privileged by Sarajevo standards, but still far
from luxurious. Parts of the building, including what was once known as 'the
safe restaurant', have been closed because of shell damage. The rooms that
are still usable command, through cracked window panes or plastic sheeting,
a view of two burnt-out skyscrapers, once the headquarters of a state-owned
conglomerate, with a backdrop of red-roofed houses rising up towards the
heights from which, until February, the shells were fired.
Running water is available only in the daytime (from about 9am) and rarely
hot. Power cuts are frequent, but of late have been mercifully short. Meals,
served in the 'dangerous restaurant' (so-called because it is on the side
more exposed to Serb snipers), are filling, if hardly gastronomic, and can
be washed down with white wine from Mostar at Dollars 35 (Pounds 24) a
bottle.
The label shows Mostar's famous bridge, as it was before Croat artillery
destroyed it last October.
Telephone links survive only within the city, except for those privileged
few with access to satellite phones. Both Reuter and the BBC have installed
these in suites within the hotel, making other news media heavily dependent
on their goodwill.
Outside the hotel is a broad boulevard running east-west through the city.
Westward it leads to the PTT, the airport, and Serb barracks at Lukavica,
where until Monday those armed with suitable documents could cross into
Serb-held territory. VIPs like Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the
peace mediators, can still fly in and out, but for journalists this week it
once again became almost impossible either to reach Sarajevo or, if one is
already there, to leave. For the vast majority of Sarajevo residents, going
anywhere else remains a pipe dream.
To the east, it is a short walk from the Holiday Inn (if one braves the
snipers) to the city centre, with its twin seats of government: the
'presidency', which houses the battered but defiant state apparatus of the
republic of Bosnia and Hercegovina; and the 'residency', where the telegenic
head of 'BH Command', Gen Sir Michael Rose, holds court.
Every morning at 9.45 the press assembles in the PTT building for a briefing
from Gen Rose's spokesman, Maj Rob Annink. This hapless, if well-meaning,
Dutchman has been given the task of making a thoroughly abnormal situation
sound normal.
Since Monday the Serbs have been making life quite nasty for the UN. Between
30 and 50 UN military observers are now being held hostage, or 'under house
arrest', in Serb-held territory. One has disappeared altogether.
But this, Maj Annink insists, is 'an administrative matter' to be sorted out
by quiet diplomacy rather than threats.
There is just one snag: the Serbs have cut off relations with the UN, which
makes diplomacy rather difficult.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940414

