FT941-5492

FT  05 MAR 94 / Gardening: The scent that says spring - How can the
sweet-smelling mimosa be grown successfully in Britain


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


Throughout the week there have been definite signs of spring, but they mean
different things in different countries.
In Britain, they mean the best of the crocuses, emergent flower on
brown-leaved Prunus and lengthening beads of flower on my particular
favourite among yellow-flowered shrubs, the Stachyurus.
Roses have started into leaf and if you want to ward off black spot, you
must start to spray now, using Nimrod T once a fortnight on the young
leaves. Delay, and you have lost the war.
Who has cared about black spot this week on a latitude below Europe's fog
belt? I have been in the right place at the right time.
It has been shirt-sleeves only outside San Spirito; Primavera has stepped
out of Botticelli's painting; no-one is pining by the Arno; there have been
angels at large in Florence and, on the track of Fra Angelicos, I found
something heavenly. Along the Borgo Pinto, the houses open on to courtyards.
Just before Perugino's Crucifixion, spring met me head on in clouds of
yellow, pink and satin-red flowers.
We will soon have our pink-flowered almonds in the UK and already, there are
satin-red buds on the japonicas. The yellow is denied to us.
In florists throughout London you can buy a few sprigs of mimosa. In
Florence, there are huge trees of it, flowering as thickly as those Banksian
roses which are next month's glory in southern Spain.
Mimosa, not tax, may yet drive me offshore.
Expatriates gloat among it over breakfast on the Riviera. Florentine
flat-dwellers look on to trees of it beside branches of the almond blossom
which are picked and displayed on the counters of flower-conscious shops.
In their great Italian city, we all complain about our fellow-tourists, but
we ought to remember what we owe to botanical immigrants. If the great men
of the past could return, they would be amazed by the present
Mediterra-nean.
The Greeks knew no eucalyptus and the Romans knew no orange trees in
Andalucia. Botticelli never saw mimosa, nor did the English Grand Tourists
who visited the Uffizi and idealised its naked statue of Venus without
bothering to look at the paintings which now amaze us.
Mimosa arrived in the 1820s, the Antipodes' postscript to old European art.
Of course Masaccio's frescoes are memorable, but a full-flowering tree of
mimosa measures up to him, as yellow as the robes of the youthful St John. I
have never expected that a prime site in Florence would be Austra-lian.
How can we grow mimosa in Britain? Only once have I seen it luxuriate, in
the great Irish garden of Glen Veagh in County Donegal. Its lavish American
owner would advance on the trees with his personalised secateurs and clip
the branches with suitable throw-away comments before handing them to his
guests.
Derbyshire is not County Donegal and you cannot grow a mimosa outdoors in
most of Britain's climate. In warm areas, it will survive by the Gulf
Stream, in Devon or even in especially sheltered parts of London.
It is happiest on a wall, but it never flowers as freely as I have now seen
it: the reason, I think, is not so much the risk of frost as its need to be
thoroughly ripened by sun in summer.
In Britain, the best place for the best varieties is a conservatory or cool
greenhouse.
Under cover mimosas need little more heat than suffices to keep out frost in
winter: they will grow best in a bed with room for their roots, but most of
them will try to touch the skies if they are happy. The hardiest forms have
been recorded at heights of 100ft in wild Australia.
Unless you have a glass castle, you should confine your plant in a large pot
and prune it heavily after flowering. The main reason why indoor mimosas
flower half-heartedly is that they are allowed to become too dry at the root
in winter.
Stand them so that you can water freely from below and try not to choose the
more boring varieties. Mimosas are correctly listed as Acacias nowadays.
A big selection is still offered by Burncoose Nurseries, at Redruth, in
Cornwall and their small plants will grow away quickly.
The best is baileyana which comes from New South Wales and is distinguished
by its silvery-blue leaf, an exceptionally pretty feature.
On a wall, the silvery pravissima arches into a good shape and is too little
known: up a pillar in a conservatory, you would also enjoy riceana which is
named after a chancellor of the exchequer but as he died long ago, you need
not hold the name against it.
In Australia, these wonderful trees are known as Wattles: Silver Wattles,
Oven Wattles, Rice's Wattle until you wonder wattle turn up next.
In Britain, we all know them as mimosa, grouping them with those similar
sensitive plants which curl up their leaves when you touch them or brush
against them while sheltering underneath.
Their sensitive habits mimic sensitive humans and so, I suppose, they began
to be known as mimosas because of their mimicry.
Personally, I love the scent. Imitate the Florentines and, if you cannot
join them, at least compete by growing your own mimosa in a pot for cut
flowers and that exquisite scent of warm Italy.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

940305

