FT943-12703

FT  23 JUL 94 / Food, water - and troops: How the world should aid Rwanda


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


It has happened again, and on the most horrific scale yet. True, the
absolute number of refugees displaced by the Afghan war was higher, but that
problem built up over a period of years.
In Rwanda, more than 2m people have fled into neighbouring countries since
April 6; most of them within the past two weeks. And, as Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, the UN secretary-general, said yesterday, 'another million
may be on their way'. If one adds the people displaced within the country,
more than half Rwanda's 7m people have been uprooted.
As many of these people face death by starvation, or from cholera and other
diseases to which their resistance is lowered by malnutrition and lack of
sanitation or clean drinking-water, clearly the first priority must be to
get emergency aid to them, in the shape of food, medical supplies, water
tankers and equipment for digging latrines. The UN yesterday issued an
appeal to governments to provide services 'as self-contained packages' in
airport services, domestic fuel, sanitation facilities and water management.
The UN estimates financial requirements at about Dollars 435m, and is
begging governments to make resources available without delay. It points out
that this time it has succeeded in co-ordinating the efforts of all its
specialised agencies and of some 30 non-governmental organisations -
something governments blamed it for failing to do in previous emergencies.
At present, aid is not getting through fast enough, because of the
difficulty of reaching the refugees. Forty-five Hercules aircraft each day
are needed to bring in food at Goma alone, says Nigel Twose, international
director of the British charity Actionaid. After blaming the French for
restricting the number of flights, the UN has now taken control of the
airstrip at Goma, only to find it is the Zairean authorities which have
imposed a limit of 20 flights a day. One of the most urgent priorities is
therefore to 'persuade' them to relax that limit, and to put in an expert
team to maintain the runway so the strip can take flights around the clock.
It is clear that humanitarian aid is not enough to cope with this situation.
Indeed, it may make matters worse if it is concentrated on or close to the
borders, and thereby encourages the population to gather there in large
concentrations where they will become permanently dependent on international
relief. It is vital to get people back to their homes quickly.
This is also what the new government wants, and it therefore has a strong
incentive to co-operate with the UN in reassuring people that they will not
be massacred. But mere verbal assurances will hardly be enough. Aid should
be made available inside the country to returning refugees, and there will
have to be a visible presence of foreign troops to reassure them.
The French deserve credit for saving thousands of lives in the area they
have occupied. But many of the people who carried out the genocide against
the Tutsi in April and May have taken refuge in that area, which the French
now propose to leave by August 22, taking all their equipment with them. If
they are to be replaced by ill-equipped African troops, it is vital that
they be persuaded either to leave or to replace their equipment, and that
other countries with well-equipped armed forces make good on the promise to
provide equipment which they gave back in May. It would be even better if
some of those countries were willing to send their own troops.
Troops are necessary, but should be there only to stabilise the situation
during a political reconciliation process, which may be easier at local
level, given strong community leadership, than at the top. Clearly the RPF
will not forgive the main instigators of genocide, but it should be helped
by external powers to set up an unimpeachable judicial process; and it must
be persuaded to limit retribution to the main instigators. If every Hutu
with blood on his or her hands were to be hunted down, much of the
population would choose to remain in exile and prepare for yet another 'war
of liberation'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940723

