FT944-10918

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (31): Vicious circles of violence - Shiraz
Sidhva considers India's sensitivity over charges of human rights abuse


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


Mr Shankarrao Chavan, India's Home minister, is indignant when questioned on
India's human rights record, particularly if the criticism comes from
international human rights groups.
'This is part of a disinformation campaign by Pakistan,' he says
dismissively. 'We have a very long tradition of tolerance. The attack on our
human rights record is coming from across the border - they should examine
their own record first, and stop aiding terrorists here.' India's human
rights record has taken a battering in the last decade, mainly because
Pakistan has worked at internationalising the dispute over Kashmir. Reports
of the excessive use of force, particularly against armed insurgencies, in
Punjab, Kashmir, and the North-East, have tarnished India's image
considerably.
Earlier this year, top diplomats and politicians worked overtime to salvage
India's reputation as one of the world's greatest democracies. One issue on
which the ruling Congress(I) party and Indian opposition parties are agreed
is that Pakistan's attempts to discredit India at international fora have to
be countered effectively.
'The best way to counter what the Indian government calls Pakistani
propaganda would be to improve the situation in Kashmir,' says Mr Abdul
Ghani, a leader of the All-party Hurriyat Conference, an umbrella
organisation of political parties in Srinagar, Kashmir's capital. 'But there
are killings and torture in custody every single day, there are rapes of our
mothers and sisters, and there are disappearances, with young boys being
locked up in jail for months without trial. And India calls itself a
democracy]'
Pakistan, which has fought two wars over Kashmir with India, and has itself
been accused of arming and instigating separatists in Punjab and Kashmir,
threatened to introduce a draft resolution at the UN Human Rights Convention
in Geneva this March. But the hotly-contested draft was dropped at the last
minute, and India won a temporary reprieve.
But human rights violations continue unabated. The US Human Rights Watch, in
a report released in September, urged potential arms suppliers to 'pay close
attention to the government's record in Kashmir and Punjab, since it is in
these states that government forces have committed some of the worst and
most regular violations of human rights and humanitarian laws'.
'It's no use if India concentrates on diplomatic games instead of actually
improving its human rights record,' admits a senior Home ministry official.
'Even when there is a political will to to curb excesses, we find it
impossible to combat an insurgency situation without force, especially with
Pakistan pumping in money and guns to fuel the militancy.'
India has always maintained that its democratic systems adequately monitor
its own human rights record. It has consistently refused permission to
Amnesty International to visit Punjab and Kashmir. But Amnesty's problem of
access has more to do with its own rules, which do not allow fact-finding
teams to visit countries or trouble-spots without formal permission from the
governments concerned. Organisations such as the New York-based Human Rights
Watch/Asia and the Boston-based Physicians for Human Rights or journalists
and other individuals not seeking formal permission have never been stopped.
'India genuinely upholds democratic values,' says Mr Rajesh Pilot, minister
of state for Home affairs. 'But sometimes things do happen here that are
beyond our control.'
'Over the decades, a political culture inimical to human rights achievement
has developed,' explains Mr Upendra Baxi, professor of law and former
vice-chancellor, Delhi University.
'The impunity of leading political players, who defy even the criminal law
of the land; the unredressed despotic use of public power; abuse of national
security laws; regime-tolerated or sponsored violence victimising hapless
citizens; torture and inhuman treatment in penal institutions; the excessive
use of fatal force or 'encounters'; custodial assault or violence against
women and the abuse of discretion to prosecute are all manifestations of
this.'
Tired of the constant criticism, the Indian government appointed a National
Human Rights Commission last year. The Commission, headed by a former chief
justice of the Supreme Court, has been accused of being a 'toothless
watchdog'. Excluded from its purview are the armed forces and the
paramilitary, against whom grave allegations of excesses in Kashmir, Punjab
and the North-eastern states have been made. This has eroded the
Commission's authority to conduct independent investigations of human rights
abuses.
The Home minister says that this is done to protect the morale of the armed
forces, already operating under extenuating circumstances. 'We are forced to
take extraordinary measures in extraordinary circumstances,' says Mr Chavan,
defending the government's refusal last month to withdraw the Terrorist and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA), in the face of strong
criticism at home and abroad.
Introduced in 1985 to combat terrorism in Punjab, TADA provides for special
'designated' courts with severely curtailed rules of procedure, reducing the
rights of the accused, and reversing the burden of proof on to the accused.
TADA prohibits bail and allows the death penalty to be imposed for certain
offences committed by 'terrorists' - a term so broadly defined that it may
include people who non-violently express their political opinions.
The Act also permits 'confessions' to the police as evidence, legalising
torture in custody. In September 1991, paramilitary forces burned down rows
of wooden houses destroying entire villages in rural Kashmir because TADA
empowered them to destroy any structure used to shield terrorists.
This year, the government was forced by human rights activists and
politicians to review the Act, which has been termed 'draconian'. But the
Supreme Court validated the Act in March because of its stated objective of
dealing with terrorism, and the Home minister ruled out its repeal last
month.
'TADA has no place in a democratic society, it is tailormade for abuse,'
says Mr Ravi Nair, executive director of the South Asia Human Rights
Documentation Centre. 'TADA is more deadly than any law imposed during the
South African or Pinochet regime (in Chile).'
Recent studies have revealed that out of 47,434 cases registered under TADA
till March this year, not a single individual involved in a terrorist act
has been convicted so far. The only convictions have been for illegal
possession of arms.
One reason why TADA has failed to combat terrorism is that it cannot counter
the fear of terrorists among witnesses, prosecutors and even judges, who
have been known to let off offenders in the face of glaring evidence.
In Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, where there have been few terrorist incidents,
the Act has been widely misused to silence political opponents. It has also
been used to harass members of the minority Moslem community, or even to
settle landlord-tenant disputes. In some states children, and even mothers
of suspected terrorists have been locked up without trial.
Mr Chavan says he has written to chief ministers in all Indian states asking
them to review TADA cases and ensure that there is no misuse. 'Ultimately,
the Centre can't do anything, because jurisdiction has been given to the
states to tackle an extraordinary situation.'
The National Human Rights Commission has strongly opposed the Act. Justice
Ranganath Misra, its chairman, has asked for the Act to be repealed, and is
filing a review petition at the Supreme Court challenging the Act's
constitutional validity.
'India will never be able to better its human rights record if it continues
to accord impunity to those in power,' says Mr Nair.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

941108

