FT942-12470

FT  29 APR 94 / Arts: The Tate muscles in on Bankside - The gallery's
audacious plan to house its modern art collection on the south bank of the
Thames should impress the trustees of the Millennium Fund


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The Tate Gallery has stolen a march over its rivals for Millennium Fund
money by announcing that it has selected the Bankside Power station, on the
south bank of the Thames opposite St Paul's Cathedral, as the home for its
new Tate Gallery of Modern Art.
The gallery is pressing ahead on the assumption that the Millennium
trustees, so impressed by the audacity of the project and the commitment of
the Tate, will select it next year as one of the half dozen or so major
construction projects which will celebrate and commemorate 2001, and
onwards. Nick Serota, director of the Tate, hopes that the Gallery of Modern
Art will open in 2000.
Dennis Stevenson, chairman of the Tate trustees, anticipates the cost of
converting the derelict power station into a museum at Pounds 80m. Current
thinking is that the Millennium Fund, using money raised from the National
Lottery, will contribute Pounds 40m (Pounds 10m for four years) and that the
Tate will make up the remainder. The Millennium Fund should have at least
Pounds 70m a year to distribute in the run up to 2001.
Bankside, the last great building designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, was
only completed in 1963 but was redundant by 1981. It covers 8 1/2 acres and
offers 6m cubic feet of potential gallery space, and with its towering brick
chimney and a roof the size of a football pitch, gives tremendous scope for
the yet to be chosen architects to convert it into one of the most exciting
new galleries in the country.
The Tate's confidence that the project will get the go-ahead must have been
strengthened by a supportive letter from Peter Brooke, national heritage
secretary and chairman of the Millennium trustees, and Peter Gummer, who
heads the lottery committee at the Arts Council, another prospective source
of funding - the little mentioned joker in the pack who will pay the running
costs of the museum.
The City of London is doing its bit by planning to build a bridge across the
Thames to link the gallery with the steps of St Paul's, giving access for
the City's 4m office workers. The owners of Bankside, Nuclear Electric, are
good friends of the Tate and are probably delighted to have a prospective
buyer for the site.
But perhaps the most powerful argument in the Tate's favour is that the
visual arts are of increasing public interest, and a gallery devoted to art
of the 20th century and beyond dovetails perfectly with the futuristic plans
for the millennium. Also some of the richest lovers of art, American and
Japanese as well as British, are committed to the modern and the
avant-garde. Dennis Stevenson believes that the existence of the gallery
will be enough to persuade Japanese financial institutions to settle in the
City rather than Frankfurt.
The Tate has been clever in getting its project up and running ahead of
rivals for lottery cash, such as the South Bank Centre and the South
Kensington museums. It has the local authority, Southwark, on its side, and
can depict the new museum as the heart of a cultural and commercial
regeneration for the south bank of the Thames, with the re-creation of
Shakespeare's Globe theatre now rising alongside; a new tube station coming
to Southwark in 1998; and a pier planned for the existing Tate, which will
become a gallery devoted to British art, to provide a river connection.
The Tate has also answered the tricky question about how to remove the vast
quantities of rusting machinery from Bankside - through the wall at the west
end. At Battersea Power Station the roof had to be removed to take out the
generators, which is a major cause of its current dereliction.
Even with the new museum the Tate will still not be able to show more than a
minority of its vast collection, but Serota believes that all the major
works will be on display at the two London outlets. The Tate is also
fortunate in that Bankside is not a listed building. This would allow
architects to put windows into its solid brick 120 foot high facade,
allowing light and river perspectives into the gallery space. As is obvious,
everyone is working on the assumption that the Tate Gallery of Modern Art
will be a millennium project. If it missed out, the reaction of London's art
world would be both apoplectic and apocalyptic.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940429

