FT943-754

FT  28 SEP 94 / Japan lays its cards on UN table: A look at a new approach
that may win friends


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Japan, until yesterday a timid aspirant to the top table of world powers,
has at last brought its international diplomatic ambitions into the open.
Foreign minister Yohei Kono's address to the United Nations, unprecedented
in its directness, leaves no doubt that Japan, like Germany, believes the
Security Council needs enlarging to reflect the growing importance of
pacifist, non-nuclear powers in a post-cold war world.
If Japan's hitherto tentative bid to become a permanent member of the
council comes off, it promises to offer a different model of leadership to
the present six members.
Japan's dovish new government sees itself as no international policeman, but
rather the champion of a global welfare state, in which rich countries
concentrate on refugee relief, overpopulation, arms control, the environment
and fighting Aids.
This contrasts with the more assertive international presence favoured by Mr
Ichiro Ozawa, the political opposition's main strategic thinker. Mr Ozawa
believes Japan's pacifist constitution should be changed to enable it to
take part in UN military peacekeeping activities like a 'normal country'.
The government and foreign ministry lean towards interpreting the existing
constitution flexibly, to make the maximum non-military contribution to the
UN's growing activities. Either way - the government's gentle line or Mr
Ozawa's assertive one - both lead Japan to assume international duties more
commensurate with its economic weight.
Japan's new straightforwardness is partly a consequence of the growing
chorus of international support for its desire to join the UN club. They
include, over the past month, a visit from Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general, who helpfully underlined that he saw no problem in Japan
assuming non-military permanent membership of the Security Council; and
visits from senior ministers from 40 countries including the US, Britain,
Australia, the Philippines and Malaysia.
Mr Kono's speech is a success for the foreign ministry, which has been
waging a patient behind-the-scenes campaign for UN membership since the end
of the cold war and through three changes of Japanese government over the
past year.
As a symbol of its resolve, the ministry appointed its most senior diplomat,
Mr Hisashi Owada, an avid advocate of membership, as its UN ambassador early
this year.
The arrival of the current government at the end of June, under a socialist
prime minister, at first looked like a setback for the ministry's UN
ambitions. But the Social Democratic party's subsequent abandonment of its
traditional rigid anti-UN pacifism meant that for the first time in post-war
history the full political spectrum supported membership.
The ministry's main argument is that Japan deserves more influence in
international affairs, as the world's largest aid donor, with a budget of
Y1,063bn (Pounds 6.8bn) this year, and the UN's second largest contributor,
paying just over 12 per cent of its budget.
Moreover, Japan increasingly has something - even if it is delicately shaded
 -to say, contrary to its reputation for having no foreign policy, argue
officials. It was Japanese influence, for example, that ensured that the
Khmer Rouge was involved in Cambodian peace talks in 1991, they maintain.
Today, Japan has clear feelings on the importance of exerting more gradual
pressure on North Korea, over its nuclear ambitions, than does the US. As a
non-permanent member, it has to rely on other means to influence UN policy
on this potentially explosive problem on its doorstep.
Stung by the criticism it attracted for making a merely financial
contribution to the 1991 gulf war, Japan has since stepped up its human
contribution to helping the world's trouble spots.
Two prominent Japanese, Mrs Sadako Ogata, UN high commissioner for refugees,
and Mr Yasushi Akasahi, UN special envoy to former Yugoslavia, have played
leading parts in Bosnia. Japanese troops have helped keep the peace in
Mozambique and Cambodia, and recently embarked on a new mission, to help
Rwandan refugees in Zaire, where a lightly armed Japanese contingent is now
trying not to flinch at nearby gunfire.
All this, Tokyo hopes, will be sufficient to persuade the requisite
two-thirds of the UN general assembly and all five permanent council members
that Japan has the credentials to join the top table.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940928

