FT942-12431

FT  29 APR 94 / UK Company News: Gerrard & National to buy rest of GNI


   By DAVID WIGHTON


Shares in Gerrard & National rose 39p to 448p after the discount house and
financial services company announced better-than-expected annual profits and
the buy-out of the minority shareholders in its fastest growing business.
The group also said it was pulling out of gilt-edged marketmaking.
Gerrard is issuing shares worth Pounds 38.4m, after yesterday's rise, in
return for the 32.4 per cent minority in GNI Holdings, its derivatives
broker and fund manager.
GNI's profits leapt 75 per cent to Pounds 12.5m last year, helping peg group
pre-tax profits at Pounds 25m (Pounds 25.2m) in the year to April 5. The
previous year's results were boosted by the fall in interest rates following
the UK's withdrawal from the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Mr Brian Williamson, chairman, said the announcements represented the
successful completion of the first phase of the company's strategy to
improve the quality of earnings by expanding into broking and fund
management.
'We have been trying to get away from being a specialist money dealer with
volatile earnings and last year our efforts came to fruition. For the first
time the dividend was covered by earnings from the broking division.'
Earnings per share slipped from 38p to 34.7p but dividends edge up to 22p
(21.5p) with a proposed final of 16p.
Profits from the trading division, which includes the Gerrard & National Ltd
discount house, fell from Pounds 11.3m to Pounds 4.3m with the gilt-edged
marketmaker contributing Pounds 1.2m (Pounds 2.7m). Mr Williamson said the
marketmaker had been generally profitable since Big Bang in 1986 and its
return on capital, at more than 15 per cent, had been higher than most of
its competitors.
However, the group has decided 'the obligations and risks of gilt-edged
marketmaking exceed the benefits and rewards'. It will continue to trade in
gilts and there are no staff cuts planned.
Profits from the broking division rose by almost 50 per cent to Pounds
20.7m, fuelled by GNI Holdings which since 1985 has increased its profits by
an average of 45 per cent a year.
Gerrard Vivian Gray, the stockbroker and fund manager, made profits of
Pounds 4.17m (Pounds 2.44m).
COMMENT
Group profits were better than the City expected and more heavily-weighted
towards the broking businesses which have been the focus of its efforts over
the last few years. There was also some relief that the gilt-edged
marketmaker had coped with the market downturn rather better than it handled
the bull run. The withdrawal from marketmaking should further improve the
quality of group earnings while the acquisition, at a pretty good price, of
the GNI minority should enable Gerrard to offer integrated services in areas
such as fund management. Earnings per share should show some recovery this
year, cutting the multiple below 13, while the yield is still more than 6
per cent. The rating looks well behind the times.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940429

