FT944-2676

FT  16 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Sutherland warns over growing recourse to
anti-dumping actions


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


Mr Peter Sutherland, Gatt director-general, yesterday warned that the
achievements of the Uruguay Round global trade accords could unravel if
governments abused fair trade rules to protect special interests.
In a review of developments in the trading system since spring 1993, Mr
Sutherland said confidence in the new system depended on a willingness to
abide 'by the letter and spirit' of the World Trade Organisation, which
succeeds the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade next month.
Nearly 60 of Gatt's 125 members have now ratified the WTO accords and Mr
Sutherland is predicting that up to 100 nations will be WTO members from
January 1.
Presenting the review to Gatt's governing council yesterday, Mr Sutherland
urged 'judicious use' of countries' room for manoeuvre in implementing the
Uruguay Round accords in order not to erode the benefits for world trade.
His anxieties, and those of many Gatt members, centre on the growing use of
anti-dumping actions to keep out cheap imports, and the proliferation of
regional trade groupings. Though both are permissible in principle under
international trade rules, they are increasingly seen as stretching those
rules to the limit and beyond.
Of 91 requests for consultations between 1989 and 1994, the first step in
Gatt's disputes settlement procedure, a quarter related to anti-dumping
actions, the report notes. This partly reflects the rising numbers of such
actions and partly 'an increasingly wide gap in perceptions of the
acceptable limits of actions'.
After a peak of 251 cases in 1992-93, the number of anti-dumping
investigations launched by the 25 members of Gatt's anti-dumping code
dropped back to 226 in 1993-94. However, this drop mainly reflected the
earlier surge in suits brought by US and Canadian steel producers.
Investigations initiated by the European Union and Brazil have risen
sharply, leaving the EU and the US joint 'leaders' in 1993-94 with 47 cases
each, followed by Australia and Brazil. The US had by far the largest number
of anti-dumping measures in force - 306 in June 1994, up from 279 a year
earlier - while the EU came second with 157, down from 185 the previous
year.
However, the report points out that the most frequent users of anti-dumping
actions are also frequent targets. EU companies head the list (89 cases in
the two years to mid-1994), with almost half the cases concerning Germany
and France. China was the biggest single country subject to investigation
(58 cases), followed by the US (45). The last couple of years have also seen
more anti-dumping suits against imports from eastern Europe, notably Russia
and Ukraine.
The Gatt report says 11 new regional trading arrangements - all in Europe -
were notified to Gatt between April 1993 and November 1994, bringing to 40
the total notified over the past five years.
It is generally admitted that Gatt's procedures for examining the
consistency of free trade pacts with fair trade rules are inadequate.
Virtually none of the working parties set up to examine regional trade
arrangements has been able to agree on their Gatt conformity.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941216

