FT943-13122

FT  21 JUL 94 / MPs condemn Younger's conduct over Pergau aid


   By JAMES BLITZ


Lord Younger, former defence secretary, was yesterday condemned by a
prominent committee of MPs for 'reprehensible' and 'wholly inappropriate'
conduct when making an offer of aid for Malaysia's Pergau dam in the late
1980s.
In one of the toughest official criticisms of government policy in recent
times, the all-party Commons foreign affairs committee accused ministers of
a 'serious failure' in the co-ordination of policy over the Pergau dam in
the late 1980s.
The report on Britain's offer of Pounds 234m of aid for Pergau, which has
taken six months to complete, did not entirely spare Lady Thatcher, the
former prime minister, who refused to give evidence to the committee earlier
this year.
It says that ministerial replies - several of which were made by the former
prime minister - were 'literally true, though less open and less informative
than the House has a right to expect'.
In one instance, a written parliamentary answer from Lady Thatcher's office
was judged as 'not fully answering the questions' raised by MPs on funding
for the dam.
There was strong criticism, too, of the tactics used by a consortium of
companies - including Balfour Beatty and General Electric Company - when
they tried to win a contract for the dam in March 1989. The report says the
consortium put pressure on Lady Thatcher to make a firm offer to the
Malaysians to build the dam 'on the basis of information which was
incomplete'. Within days, the government found that the consortium's costs
had jumped, requiring substantial additional expenditure for the Overseas
Development Administration's budget.
At the heart of the committee's inquiry was the issue of whether the British
government had offered aid on condition that Malaysia bought Pounds 1.5bn of
British defence equipment. Such a link would be contrary to British
government guidelines.
The committee agreed that a protocol signed by Lord Younger linking the two
deals 'was the only instance of which we are aware where the policy
proscribing conditional linkage . . . has been breached'.
The MPs judged it 'reprehensible' that the Ministry of Defence had conducted
negotiations on the protocol which were within the remit of the Foreign
Office without informing Lord Howe, then foreign secretary.
It was 'very regrettable' Lord Younger did not feel it 'appropriate to
consult, even to inform, London before concluding the agreement with
Malaysia'.
According to the MPs, Lady Thatcher and Lord Howe successfully disentangled
the link between aid and the arms deal after Lord Younger's return.
But, surprisingly, the committee did agree that a mathematical formula
linking the size of the two deals was an enduring feature of all the
contracts signed between the two governments between 1988 and 1991.
The committee welcomed reforms made to Aid and Trade Provision since the
Pergau episode, but said difficulties remained.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940721

