FT941-16937

FT  07 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Administration unveils proposals to help
domestic air industries


   By NANCY DUNNE


The Clinton administration yesterday unveiled a package of legislative
proposals, including one to increase foreign ownership of US airlines, which
are designed to reinvigorate the ailing US airline and aircraft industries.
The initiatives, announced by Mr Federico Pena, transportation secretary,
and Dr Laura D'Andrea Tyson, head of the Council of Economic Advisers, grew
out of recommendations prepared by a presidential commission last summer.
The proposals will provoke much controversy in Congress. However, the White
House is presenting them with much fanfare as 'the most comprehensive
government aviation strategy since deregulation of the industry in 1978.'
President Bill Clinton has moved swiftly on the problems of the US airline
and aircraft industries, which have lost more than Dollars 10bn (Pounds
6.7bn) since 1990. The commission he appointed in April was given 90 days to
make recommendations. It found, among other things, that the US air
transportation system was being 'hobbled by self-imposed and
government-mandated attitudes and policies that are dysfunctional.'
It said the system must be made 'efficient and technologically superior,'
and that the FAA must be 'reinvented.' Furthermore, it must have the
financial strength to respond to rapid change.
Mr Pena said the new proposals will encourage carriers into the market,
heighten scrutiny of airline financial fitness and promote employee
ownership. They propose a change in US law to let officials negotiate
bilateral agreements by which foreign investors could hold up to 49 per cent
equity in US airlines.
Foreign investors can now own 49 per cent of a US carrier's stock but only
25 per cent of its voting stock.
The commission advanced two conditions for increasing the share of foreign
companies: bilateral agreements would have to contain equivalent
opportunities for US investors and the change would have to advance the US
national interest and the development of a liberal global regime for air
services.
The US administration has rejected one commission recommendation - a
reduction of air ticket taxes from 8 to 5 percent - on the grounds that the
airline industry is recovering with the rest of the economy and no longer
needs such help.
Other steps advocated in the initiative include:
a thorough review of all aviation regulations to lessen industry burdens
wherever possible;
a requirement that airlines seeking approval for international routes and
other big changes outline plans to protect any displaced workers;
accelerated use of satellite-based navigation and completion of an
aeronautical research and development plan to support technological
advances;
evaluation of modifications to the high-density rule, which limits flights
at busy airports, to use airport capacity better.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940107

