FT944-14411

FT  22 OCT 94 / Outdoors: Stormed off the mountain - FT Ski Expedition


   By ARNIE WILSON


Arnie Wilson and Lucy Dicker are trying to ski every day of 1994. They are
in New Zealand
October came in like a Canterbury lamb but it is going out like the All
Blacks. As we prepare for the last leg of our adventure - back to the US -
we have had some of the fiercest weather of the year.
At Mount Hutt, on New Zealand's South Island, we were caught in a ferocious
hail storm which arrived from nowhere and closed the mountain.
Visibility was reduced to nil, ice balls blasted our faces and thunder
roared above us as we tried to find our way back to the base lodge. The
eight-mile drive down to the town of Methven was fraught: roads to most NZ
ski fields are unpaved and have hairpin bends and sheer drops without
barriers.
At Porter Heights, howling gales which peppered us with more ice balls shut
the lifts one by one until the resort admitted defeat and closed.
Ohau - New Zealand's smallest commercial ski area, although claiming the
country's longest T-bar - also had to close for a day or so but the owners,
Mike and Louise Neilson, obligingly helped us ski with the aid of their snow
cat. When that broke down, we walked up. Booked in for two nights, we stayed
seven, skiing deep snow off the Ohau's challenging High Traverse when
conditions allowed.
With most ski fields in NZ closing around us, Ohau, Porter Heights and Mount
Hutt have all gone out of their way to keep the FT ski odyssey on track.
Jenny and John Fairbrass, managers at the Alpine Lodge at Porter Heights -
where we also spent seven nights instead of the two allotted  - kept our
morale high with piping hot meals, squeaky-clean accommodation and good
conversation.
Porter Heights, the closest commercial ski field to Christchurch, the South
Island's biggest town, has some of the best ungroomed terrain in the
Canterbury ski fields. Big Mamma, a two-mile descent, is one of the longest
and steepest off-piste runs in the country.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941022

