FT941-12924

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (15): A different kind of market place - Goods
swapping has been hit by economic changes, such as the fall of Soviet
communism, writes Paul Melly. But it is far from dead / Counter trade focus
/ Developing world


   By PAUL MELLY


Talk to any trade finance house in the late 1980s and you were likely to
find that it had a specialist countertrade department. Although very much an
affair for experts, the technique was an important part of the banking
repertoire, when it came to financing exports to the Third World or eastern
Europe.
But changing economic policies, above all the loss of faith in centralised
socialist systems, have pushed the whole concept of barter out of the
limelight. Many bankers hardly ever handle countertrade deals now, and many
developing countries are wary of the technique - Sudan even banned it late
last year.
One could be forgiven, therefore, for thinking that countertrade was hardly
used at all today in most of the developing world. The truth is more
complex. Straightforward barter arrangements, with basic commodity exports
shipped abroad in return for imports of industrial goods, are now probably
less common, but there are still circumstances where countries opt for
countertrade in some form: when they do so, this is often to support broad
trading objectives rather than simply because they have run short of foreign
exchange to pay for imports in cash.
In recent months a number of institutions took steps to encourage certain
forms of countertrade. The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) has invited
companies to propose deals in its member states, while Spain's official
export credit insurer, CESCE (Compania Espanola de Seguros de Credito a la
Exportacion) has designed a special form of cover for these deals.
Several factors underlie the declining popularity of traditional barter
among many Third World countries. They all reflect one basic fact - intense
financial pressures that drive countries to maximise the foreign exchange
they can earn from their exports.
That usually means selling them on world markets, for payment in hard
currency. For example, Ghana, which used to swap cocoa for manufactured
goods from eastern Europe no longer tends to do so.
The World Bank tends to discourage barter because it conceals the real costs
entailed in trade. It is hard for an African country to know whether it is
getting a fair price for its exports of, say, coffee, cocoa or bauxite, if
payment is made in the form of goods. It is even harder to ensure that the
goods obtained in return represent good value for money.
Changed political circumstances come into play as well, particularly the
disintegration of the communist system in eastern Europe, and the declining
popularity of so called-socialist systems in the developing world.
Fluctuations in the price of commodities have also conspired to undermine
the popularity of barter arrangements. During the 1980s, Uganda arranged
large deals exchanging coffee for various imports. Several of these
collapsed when the coffee price declined sharply, leading to disputes over
whether Uganda was obliged to provide extra shipments to compensate for
their reduced value.
Practical problems also led Nigeria to abandon attempts at oil countertrade
in the 1980s. However, while such simple barter arrangements have fallen out
of favour, there has been a steady growth in the use of 'pre-export
financings'. These are bank loans made to countries which are secured
against expected outbound commodity exports. They give countries access to
hard currency much earlier in the production cycle. The money is often used
to meet the costs of production and export - payments to farmers, purchase
of fertilisers and so on.
Alternatively, it may be reserved for an essential import need, such as fuel
oil. Proceeds from sales of the Third World exports - typically cocoa, oil
or coffee - are paid into an escrow account in a Western financial centre
and used to pay off the original loan.
Bankers Trust was a pioneer in the field, arranging several facilities for
Tanzania; Grindlays is active in Zimbabwe. Other banks thought to have been
involved include Union Bank of Switzerland, Chemical Bank, BHF (Germany) and
ABN-Amro. Many others have been arranging minor transactions.
So far, the larger syndicated transactions have only been arranged for a
limited number of countries with a strong export track record - such as
Ghana and Zimbabwe. There are still risks, of course, even if these are less
than in a traditional barter deal. Bankers are particularly worried about
current oil price fluctuations. One says that he now looks for a 40-60 per
cent safety margin on oil-based deals compared with only 25 per cent a year
ago.
The Third World exporter's reliability and the quality of the promised end
buyer also come into play. Countries with a patchy record may find that they
are limited to relatively low levels of financing; on the other hand, a
country with many other difficulties, but a strong reputation for reliable
exporting, may be able to borrow funds on a scale it could certainly not
obtain for conventional import finance. Take Nigeria. Says one banker:
'Nigeria has a fantastic record in meeting its crude oil delivery
commitments.'
New versions of countertrade are also emerging in transactions between one
developing country and another. These are partly a reflection of Third World
nations' attempts to reduce their dependence on imports from the
industrialised world. They are also born out of force of circumstances:
sometimes a country has to import from whoever is prepared to supply on
barter terms, because it lacks the foreign exchange to buy on the open
market, or because it is trying to export products which are not yet fully
competitive in international terms.
Many countries are unwilling to barter their traditional commodity exports
because they know they can sell these for hard currency. However, as they
develop an industrial base, they may use barter as a way of securing sales
of manufactured goods which they know many world buyers would not yet be
prepared to pay for in hard currency.
The IDB has begun to help with funding and guarantee arrangements for
countertrade deals between countries in its member states, to assist them
develop cross-border trade in manufactures and broaden their economic bases.
Another variant on the countertrade theme, popular among the more
industrialised developing countries, is 'offset'. Normally, this is
associated with the supply of advanced technology or military equipment from
the West.
Countries buying aircraft or other high-tech goods on a large scale will
often insist that this is counterbalanced by the injection of new foreign
investment to develop their own industrial base. The technique has been
widely used in south-east Asia and the Middle East.
For example, Malaysia is acquiring Swiss light aircraft know-how, as part of
an offset related to purchases from British Aerospace. Hughes Aircraft
Company of the US has promised offset production of components as part of a
deal to supply Indonesia with two satellites. There is also an offset
element to the recent sales by German-Dutch group Fokker of 15 passenger
jets to Indonesian regional airlines.
In Saudi Arabia, British companies have become closely involved in
industrial developments, as part of the offset programme related to the
Al-Yamamah project, under which British Aerospace provides aircraft and
support for the Saudi airforce. In the United Arab Emirates, agreement has
been reached on the first batch of offset projects associated with France's
sale of 399 Leclerc tanks and armoured vehicles to Abu Dhabi.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940127

