FT942-15884

FT  13 APR 94 / No champagne until after take-off: Air France's rescue
package has won staff approval. But, the hard work lies ahead


   By JOHN RIDDING


When Mr Christian Blanc took control of Air France last October, the chips
appeared to be stacked heavily against him. A violent strike in protest at a
restructuring package had brought the airline to its knees, prompting a
humiliating climbdown by the government of Mr Edouard Balladur and forcing
the resignation of the previous chairman, Mr Bernard Attali.
Six months on, Mr Blanc is turning the odds in his favour. A referendum on
his package of reforms, completed on Monday, showed that more than 80 per
cent of the company's staff endorse his plans to cut 5,000 of Air France's
40,000 jobs, freeze salaries and increase working hours. It is a victory,
but only a first step in the daunting process of reform.
The vote followed an exhaustive campaign of consultation. Mr Blanc held
hundreds of meetings with staff and union representatives to drive home his
message that Air France must reform to survive. It also reflected the plight
of the state-owned carrier. Losses last year are estimated at FFr7.5bn
(Dollars 1.28bn) while total debts stand at about FFr38bn. 'Many of the
staff believe this may be the last chance for Air France,' said an official
of Force Ouvriere, the airline's largest union.
The result will strengthen Mr Blanc's hand as he seeks to push through the
reforms he believes are necessary for the survival of Air France. But the
implications spread beyond the fate of the airline.
The successful outcome of the referendum suggests that it may be possible to
implement reform in France, after a series of government climbdowns in the
face of protests had suggested otherwise. Mr Blanc's triumph could also
encourage other state-owned companies to appeal directly to employees in an
attempt to overcome union opposition. Concerned by the prospect, the
opposition Socialist party yesterday warned of the risks involved in
weakening union intermediaries.
On the part of the government, the relief is clear. Last October's turmoil
at Air France set the precedent for government concessions to fishermen
protesting against cheap imports and, more damagingly, to students demanding
the scrapping of a new law which undercut the minimum wage for young
apprentices. Rejection of the rescue plan at Air France, which Mr Blanc said
would prompt his resignation, could have pushed the company into bankruptcy
and presented Mr Balladur with the most serious problem of his
administration.
Mr Bernard Bosson, transport minister, said he was 'delighted by the
decision'. He described it as an endorsement of the Balladur method of
seeking reforms through consensus and praised Mr Blanc's strategy of
negotiations with staff and their representatives.
Not surprisingly, the verdict of Air France's staff prompted less
celebration among trade unions. The communist Confederation Generale du
Travail, condemned the referendum and its result. 'This is not the solution
to Air France's problems,' said one official.
Some union groups expressed satisfaction with the result. Force Ouvriere
which, unlike the CGT, signed the rescue package, declared the result of the
referendum a victory for itself as well as for Air France. 'Exceptional
situations require exceptional methods,' said Mr Marc Blondel, the union's
general secretary.
For all of the airline's unions, however, the referendum suggests that they
have become the followers rather than the leaders of the workforce they
represent. Last October, they were caught wrong-footed by the depth of
opposition to Mr Attali's plan. 'We were surprised by the strength of
feeling,' admits Mr Francois Cabrera of the CFDT, the third biggest union.
Mr Blanc exploited this situation through the use of a referendum, the
biggest ever held in a French company. By appealing directly to the
workforce the chairman has outflanked the eight of the airline's 14 unions
which refused to sign the restructuring package. He has also cleared the way
for a government capital injection of FFr20bn over the next three years. Mr
Balladur had made staff acceptance of the recovery package a condition for
releasing state aid.
Celebrations at Air France and the government, and obituaries for Mr Blanc's
union opponents, may, however, prove premature. If Mr Blanc has won a
battle, he is still a long way from winning the war. He must now negotiate
with employees and union representatives about how to implement his
restructuring package and attain his goal of a 30 per cent increase in
productivity by the end of 1997. Union resistance cannot be discounted. CFDT
yesterday warned Mr Blanc against believing he would now have a 'state of
grace'.
The subsidies promised by the French government must also be cleared by the
European Commission. More broadly, the question remains whether Mr Blanc's
proposed remedies are sufficient to turn it around. 'We have the hardest
part still to do,' said Mr Blanc, after announcing the referendum result.
The next hurdle for Mr Blanc's rescue plan lies in Brussels. The European
Commission is already investigating a FFr1.5bn capital increase for Air
France, which was raised through a bond issue taken up last year by the
Caisse des Depots, the state-owned financial institution. This sum pales
beside the amount currently proposed.
Air France's rivals are expected to mount a campaign against the new
injection of state aid. But most observers believe it will ultimately be
approved, even if it requires concessions such as increased access to the
French market for foreign carriers. 'I can't see Brussels refusing the
capital,' says Mr Bertrand d'Yvoire, president of Consultair, the
Paris-based aviation consultancy.
This view was supported yesterday following talks in Paris between Mr Abel
Matutes, European transport commissioner, and Mr Balladur. After the
meeting, Mr Matutes said he was optimistic that agreement could be reached,
but he linked approval of the package to liberalisation of the French
market.
The capital injection is a necessary but not a sufficient condition of
recovery. Mr Blanc now has to implement his plan and fill in the blanks of
the framework agreement approved in the referendum. Some specific proposals
have already been advanced. The airline's fleet, for example, is to be
reduced from 166 to 149 aircraft over the next five years. Assets, including
the Meridien hotel chain, are to be sold to raise cash and strengthen the
balance sheet. But other elements of the plan, such as the job cuts, have
yet to be clearly defined.
Many industry observers believe the measures should also be extended. 'The
plan is a good first step, but it will have to go further,' said Mr
d'Yvoire.
Mr Blanc is aware of the need for fundamental reform. He has outlined plans
to divide the group into separate profit centres to increase accountability.
He has also said he will move to eliminate inefficiencies in the operation
of the company's fleet. The airline's services to Hong Kong, for example,
use three different types of aircraft, requiring long staff stopovers on the
island.
The problem for Mr Blanc is that time is against him. Air France's main
rivals long ago realised the need to increase efficiency and are unlikely to
stand still in the run-up to the liberalisation of the European airline
market. At the same time, Mr Blanc must be careful not to alienate his staff
by forcing the pace of reform.
The Air France chairman can take some encouragement from signs of
improvement in the airline market. The company's load factor  - the ratio of
passengers to seats  - also rose to 72 per cent in the first quarter this
year, from 63 per cent in the same period in 1993. 'The trend will ease the
pressure, but he certainly can't count on that alone for recovery,' said an
industry observer.
Mr Blanc is unlikely to. After his success in the referendum he is already
preparing for the next round of negotiations with staff and union
representatives. Monday's victory makes his task easier, but it will be a
long time before he can open the champagne to drink with his cigar.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940413

