FT943-722

FT  28 SEP 94 / Tube chiefs confident of short ride for militants: RMT
members voting for Friday's strike are a small minority in the union


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


There is little sign that Friday's planned 24-hour disruption on London
Underground by members of the RMT transport union will lead to the kind of
prolonged and solid action carried out by signal workers in the past four
months.
It is possible the RMT's national executive council could call further days
of action on the Underground in coming weeks. But yesterday London
Underground management was confident that the militancy would be
short-lived, with many of its 7,700 staff in the RMT coming to work
normally.
Union officials were also sounding less than confident that there was much
mood for conflict among their Underground members.
However Mr Pat Sikorski, one of the most leftwing members of its executive,
comes from London Underground and he is leading the charge.
London Underground hopes half its services will be running normally, but 40
per cent of its drivers belong to the RMT, which also has members among
signal workers, and station and maintenance staff. If they heed the strike
call large parts of the network could be paralysed.
Only 37 per cent of RMT members voted to support strike action and reject a
2.5 per cent pay offer when they were balloted earlier this month. While
2,072 supported disruption, 809 did not.
Only slightly more than one in four RMT members supported the union strike
call. A senior London Transport official said: 'The union lacks a democratic
mandate.'
The other five unions working on the London Underground, with 7,000 members
between them, agreed to the improved 2.5 per cent offer after negotiations
at Acas, the conciliation service, and called off their strike threats.
London Transport said yesterday: 'We have told the RMT there is no question
of re-opening negotiations on this year's pay claim.'
The RMT's behaviour has baffled London Transport senior managers. On Monday
this week they met RMT negotiators at the union's request, expecting that
this meant they would accept the 2.5 per cent pay offer. Union officials had
intimated at the end of last week that they wished to discuss the position
with London Underground 'in order to resolve the issue'.
But Monday's meeting lasted less than an hour. The RMT demanded at least a 4
per cent pay rise for its members. Ms Ann Burfutt, London Underground's
human resources director, said she was 'mystified'.
She said the RMT had already accepted a 2.5 per cent wage improvement for
its members employed at British Rail, and had said at a meeting with London
Underground in June that a 2.5 per cent rise 'could be justified'.
Certainly the union will find it hard to explain to its members why they
should go on strike.
Management estimates that station assistants stand to lose Pounds 60 in pay
for striking on Friday, train operators Pounds 91 and senior signal workers
Pounds 94.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940928

