FT941-16892

FT  07 JAN 94 / People: Old guard moves on at Simon


John Barker, 57, the man responsible for building Simon Engineering into the
world's biggest producer of powered access equipment, is the latest casualty
of the boardroom shake-out at the troubled engineering group.
Barker, who joined Stockport-based Simon in 1974, has resigned from the main
board and been replaced as managing director of Simon Access, Simon's second
biggest business, by Ron Wheeler, a US citizen, who joined Simon in 1988
after it took over Telelect, a leading US manufacturer of digger derricks,
telescopic aerials and cranes.
Wheeler, 46, who joined Telelect in 1969 and has been president since 1991,
has not been given a seat on the Simon board. Barker, a past president of
the International Powered Access Federation, will continue to be employed by
Simon in a consultative capacity.
Barker is almost the last of the old guard to lose his seat on the Simon
board following last summer's arrival of a new management team headed by
Maurice Dixson, a former GEC executive director. Only Peter Cook, 58, who
has been a director of Simon since 1977, remains on the board and he has
been relieved of his responsibilities as managing director of the industrial
services division, the biggest part of Simon's business.
Simon has dismantled its old divisional operating structure and the
executives in charge of the main operating companies now report direct to
the chief executive. Cook has been given responsibility for handling Simon's
disposal programme which is designed to reduce the group's heavy borrowings.
Dixson has also installed one of his old GEC colleagues, Guppy Dhariwal, 44,
as financial director of Simon Access which last year had a turnover of
Pounds 135m. Dhariwal, who is an engineer and an accountant, spent 17 years
with GEC and was financial director of its Satchwell division before joining
Simon; he takes over on the departure of Brian Horner.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940107

