FT943-977

FT  27 SEP 94 / Adams raises prospect of fresh IRA threat


   By DAVID OWEN


Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, raised the temperature in the Northern
Ireland peace process last night by appearing to threaten the emergence of a
new IRA leadership if a settlement was not reached soon.
In a veiled warning to the government he said Ireland's traditional cycle of
one paramilitary force replacing another could recur if there was no
progress towards peace.
He told the Boston Herald newspaper during his US visit: 'None of us can say
two or three years up the road that if the causes of conflict aren't
resolved, that another IRA leadership won't come along. Because this has
always happened. The history of Ireland is filled with phases of armed
struggle and then of quiet.'
Mr Adams, who is on a tour of the US, tempered his warning with a
reaffirmation of his hope there would be a lasting peace. 'I want to see the
gun taken permanently out of British politics. I mean that is our intention.
Who's interested in temporary? We live there.'
Mr Michael Mates, the former Northern Ireland minister sent by the
government to shadow Mr Adams's tour, said the Sinn Fein leader's remarks
about a permanent peace 'take us a little further. I happen to believe that
the intention is that the end should be permanent, but he cannot say it'.
The government has promised to start preliminary talks on how to admit Sinn
Fein to the political process within three months of a permanent end to IRA
violence.
David Owen writes: Conservatives from Northern Ireland are moving to rock
the boat before next month's Tory conference by urging the party 'actively
to persuade' the people of the province that their best future lies within
the UK.
They are trying to force a vote on this by canvassing support among Tory
constituency organisations.
Their amendment to the motion on Northern Ireland that will be debated at
the conference also calls for the deletion of a reference to the courage of
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister. A letter to constituency
chairmen from Mr Leonard Fee, the senior unpaid Tory in the province, argues
that it would be 'distasteful to ask the party conference to praise Mr
Reynolds'.
Tory party rules vest the 'absolute right' to decide whether to call
amendments with the conference chairman, making it unlikely the Northern
Ireland amendment will be voted on. However Mr Fee, chairman of the Tories'
Northern Ireland Area Council, believes the party's high command could be
embarrassed if a significant number of constituencies write in to express
their support.
He points out that although most motions submitted on Northern Ireland are
concerned with 'strengthening the union and governing Northern Ireland as
the rest of the United Kingdom,' these sentiments are not reflected in the
motion selected for debate.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940927

