FT942-15812

FT  13 APR 94 / International Company News: BHP to sell some mining assets
to Western Metals


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


Broken Hill Proprietary, the large Australian steel and natural resources
group, has agreed to sell certain mining and exploration interests in the
Kimberley region of Western Australia to Western Metals. The assets for sale
include a 58 per cent interest in the Cadjebut mine.
Western Metals is a privately-owned company, in which Ausgold holds a 13 per
cent stake. Ausgold, which asked for its shares to be suspended yesterday,
said it had made an offer to acquire the remaining 87 per cent of Western
Metals. It said it planned to raise ADollars 30m (USDollars 21.7m), via an
underwritten public share offering, to fund the Cadjebut deal and the
development of other assets included in the BHP transaction.
The interests involved include BHP's stake in the Cadjebut zinc/lead mine,
which was developed in 1987 and has about another 18 months of life. Total
production at Cadjebut last year was 102,000 tonnes of zinc concentrate and
29,000 tonnes of lead concentrate.
Also included in the package are undeveloped ore bodies at Blendevale,
Twelve Mile Bore and Kapok, and interests in a number of joint ventures in
the region. Ausgold said it hoped 'to bring on stream the development of the
next ore body, 12 Mile Bore, before the existing reserves at Cadjebut are
depleted'.
BHP, which did not disclose the sale price, said the assets involved in the
transaction no longer 'fitted our profile'.
BHP's partner in the Cadjebut mine, with the remaining 42 per cent interest,
is Shell Australia. The interest forms part of Shell's Australian metals
portfolio, which the oil company has talked of floating on the stock market.
CRA, the Australian resources group, yesterday announced it had agreed a
'farm-in' deal with Carpenter Pacific Resources (CPR), under which the
latter can earn a 49 per cent interest in CRA's Hidden Valley gold project
near Wau, in Papua New Guinea, for K35m (USDollars 36.9m).

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940413

