FT944-5923

FT  01 DEC 94 / Work begins on new wing: Nato is being urged to speed up its
eastwards expansion


   By BRUCE CLARK and GEORGE GRAHAM


If Mr Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, has his way, the family
quarrels in the house called Nato will soon be replaced by a breezy,
pioneering spirit as its residents set about adding a new wing to the
battered but well-constructed old building.
After an outburst of unusual rudeness between senior politicians on opposite
sides of the Atlantic over Nato policy on Bosnia, Mr Christopher will today
urge his European counterparts to stop bickering and start thinking hard
about opening the 45-year-old alliance to new members.
At a meeting of Nato foreign ministers in Brussels today, he will call for a
sharp acceleration in the process of bringing ex-communist nations in
central and eastern Europe into membership.
He is not expected to name countries, but those knocking loudest at the door
are Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia - known as the Visegrad
states after the Hungarian town where they sealed a loose alliance.
Mr Christopher wants Nato's 16 members to hammer out the criteria and
procedures for incorporating newcomers by next spring, or autumn at the
latest. These would include the amounts they would have to spend on
reconfiguring their armed forces to integrate them into the alliance, and
how much help they could expect from Nato.
Once that process is complete, Nato should be able to make a detailed
presentation of the results to potential members. If all goes according to
the US plan, negotiations on a timetable for enlargement could start very
soon after.
On the face of it, the notion of Nato 'projecting stability eastwards' seems
absurd. The US and its European allies have been engaged in a fierce
transatlantic war of words following Serb advances in the north Bosnian
enclave of Bihac. After a US effort to win support for massive airstrikes to
defend Bihac found little backing, a disturbing note of recrimination has
entered the atmosphere. Enthusiasm for Nato appears to be dying among US
conservatives such as Senator Robert Dole, who have denounced European
faint-heartedness in Bosnia.
In the past, the global Soviet threat concentrated the allies' minds and
limited the intensity of their quarrels, but this is no longer the case.
'This is obviously not the first crisis there's been in Nato,' says Mr
Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a veteran US foreign policy official, 'but we don't have
the ultimate discipline of the Soviet threat to push people into
compromise.'
This week, however, there were signs that the current phase of the quarrel
over Bosnia is dying down - at least temporarily. Even as legislators and
opinion-makers in the US and Europe have traded insults, the US
administration has quietly moved closer to its European allies over some key
questions on Bosnia.
Administration officials have acknowledged the impossibility of military
solutions in former Yugoslavia. They have also praised the European
contribution to UN ground forces, while offering to help with the messy
business of withdrawing them if that proves necessary. The US has thrown its
weight behind the peacemaking efforts of the five-nation contact group on
Bosnia - the US, Russia, the UK, France and Germany - and will make
proposals for an international conference on Bosnia when the group convenes
tomorrow.
Mr Arnold Kanter, a former under-secretary in the state department, says
that a reasonable interpretation of the administration's change of line 'is
that the US has decided that it is more important to save Nato than to save
Bihac'.
All this has soothed European tempers, and rescued enlargement to the east
from the realm of absurdity where it was languishing a few days ago. There
is a feeling that Nato has looked into the abyss of complete disintegration
and taken half a step backwards.
As one Nato official says, cooler heads in the alliance have realised that
'if Nato breaks up over Bosnia, that won't help the Bosnians - and it will
take away an instrument of security that is needed for other things'.
And Mr Peter Tarnoff, under-secretary of state for political affairs,
believes that enlargement could help to avert future Bosnias. In his words,
the focus of today's meeting will be 'a Nato which is reaching out to the
east, which is trying to prevent . . . repetition of what has happened in
the former Yugoslavia.'
Yet even if the name-calling over Bosnia is dying down, there are doubts as
to whether enlargement will work as the unifying enterprise for Nato members
that Washington would like to see.
All Nato members are committed in principle to enlargement, but most west
European governments are nervous about the potential damage to relations
with Russia. They hope Mr Christopher's proposals will not be too specific.
There is only one senior politician in Europe who matches, and often
outdoes, the US administration in his enthusiasm for early enlargement: Mr
Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister. He has given the impression he
does not particularly care how strongly Russia objects to this idea.
Russia's recent pronouncements suggest that opposition to the idea of its
former satellites joining Nato is hardening, at least so long as Russia
itself is excluded.
Some western politicians talk optimistically of 'reassuring' Russia and
gradually reconciling it to enlargement. But Moscow's increasing toughness
is likely to be seen by many as an argument against rapid incorporation by
Nato of the Visegrad countries.
The US has done its bit to soothe Moscow by floating some ideas on how the
53-nation Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) could be
upgraded into the kind of European security umbrella that Russia wants so
much. But this seems unlikely to be enough to reconcile the Russians to the
idea of Nato engulfing its former satellites.
At today's Nato meeting in Brussels, and at next week's CSCE summit in
Budapest, Russia will be watching closely to see whether Nato really means
what it says about earlier enlargement.
If Russia seems uncharacteristically quiet, that could be a sign that Moscow
does not believe enlargement will happen: it expects western legislators in
more than one Nato country to balk at the financial and strategic
implications of amending the founding treaty.
If Russia calculates that this is the most likely course of events, it is in
good company: there are many western foreign policy experts who make a
similar prognosis. Desirable though enlargement might be as a unifying
project, there is a long way to go before the US can convince its allies of
the wisdom of the project.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941201

