FT942-12833

FT  28 APR 94 / Major retreats over press ban on Smith hospital visit


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, was embroiled in an election row
last night after Mr John Major, prime minister, was forced to apologise for
a health department ban on media coverage of a hospital visit by Mr John
Smith, Labour leader.
The row broke out after Mr Smith was told that reporters would be banned
from a planned visit today to St Bartholomew's, a leading central London
teaching hospital which is being run down under the government's NHS
reforms.
In a letter to Mr Major, Mr Smith said the health department had ruled that
no reporters could accompany him because political activity was not allowed
on NHS premises in the run up to the local elections on May 5.
Mr Smith said that under the Representation of the People Act, the
pre-election period began on March 25. But Mr Major had visited a maternity
unit in Basildon, Essex 'in a blaze of publicity' on April 5.
'This is, in my view, a gross abuse of government power,' Mr Smith said. 'I
consider this discrimination between a visit made by the prime minister and
one made by the leader of the opposition to be totally unacceptable.'
Mr Smith said the government appeared to be afraid of 'damaging publicity
about your systematic destruction of London's health service'.
The government's plans to close the accident and emergency unit at Bart's
were opposed 'not just by staff and patients at the hospital, but by people
throughout the capital', he said.
In a response, dictated immediately after the end of his summit meeting with
Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, Mr Major said the Representation of
the People Act did not apply to his Basildon visit.
But he said the ban on coverage of Mr Smith's visit to Bart's was based on
'over-scrupulous reading' by the health department of guidance on political
activities from Sir Robin Butler, head of the home civil service.
'In these circumstances, I would be content for your visit to be covered by
the media,' he said. The row was seen at Westminster as a substantial own
goal for Mrs Bottomley who appeared to have succeeded merely in drawing
attention to Mr Smith's visit.
The episode will also draw unwelcome attention to a Commons debate on the
health reforms called by Labour today to highlight growing public concern
over the government's plans for large-scale closures of London hospitals.
Several Conservative MPs have already expressed concern about the plans for
London.
Major backs Kohl, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940428

