FT941-16853

FT  07 JAN 94 / Fuel companies offer scheme to avoid VAT on domestic bills


   By MICHAEL SMITH


Electricity and gas companies are making arrangements for householders to
pay hundreds of millions of pounds in advance to avoid the value added tax
the government is imposing on household fuel bills from April.
At least three regional companies - Manweb, Norweb and Midlands - believe
that up to 10 per cent of householders will want to pay at least a year
ahead to reduce their bills.
If their highest expectations of 10 per cent were achieved, advance payments
for future gas and electricity bills would exceed Pounds 1.25bn. Britain's
households pay about Pounds 7bn a year for electricity and Pounds 5.65bn for
gas.
As well as achieving savings for themselves, gas and electricity buyers who
pay in advance would boost the profits of suppliers who would be able to
earn interest on the money. Many of the companies are already cash positive.
However, the government would be deprived of considerable funds. If the
pre-payment total reached Pounds 1.25bn, the tax avoidance in the year from
April, when VAT on household power and fuel will be 8 per cent, would be
Pounds 100m.
For 1995-6, the avoidance would be even greater as VAT on fuel rises to 17.5
per cent in that year. Fewer customers are likely to want to commit
themselves so far ahead even though returns would be greater.
Since the government announced the imposition of VAT in last March's budget,
financial advisers have alerted clients to a legal loophole which would
enable tax avoidance through early payment.
As the law stands, payments in advance for goods to be supplied incur the
VAT charge applicable at the time of payment rather than at the time of
supply.
Electricity and gas companies say they are not actively exhorting customers
to pay in advance but most are offering advice.
'We are not encouraging householders to pay in advance but we have to tell
them that facilities are available if they want to do it,' said
Hydro-Electric, serving north Scotland.
Several companies are sending out special leaflets with quarterly bills
explaining how VAT will affect them. Some, including East Midlands
Electricity, have provided a payment form for customers who wish to pay in
advance.
Few customers have so far taken advantage, although Yorkshire Electricity
says one customer has paid for 10 years.
Manweb, distributor in north Wales, Cheshire and Liverpool, said only 13
customers had made payments.
Northern Electric, serving the north-east of England, said it had received
just Pounds 10,000 from 17 customers and Swalec in south Wales said it had
received Pounds 15,000. However, most money is likely to be paid in the
weeks immediately before April.
Manweb said it expected up to 10 per cent of its 1.3m household customers to
pay in advance while Norweb forecast early payments of anything between
Pounds 10m and Pounds 50m, compared with an annual bill of Pounds 500m to
Pounds 600m.
British Gas and Swalec are among companies which said it was not possible to
predict likely pre-payment levels but both said they had flexible
arrangements which would enable them to cope.
Northern Electric said it doubted whether it would receive more than Pounds
1m in pre-payments.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940107

