FT942-12256

FT  30 APR 94 / Angst of Croydon Man: James Blitz tests Tory support in a
London borough


   By JAMES BLITZ


Could concrete-clad Croydon, in the suburban heartland of London's southern
commuter belt, prove John Major's nemesis?
Like many outer London boroughs, it is a citadel of Tory rule. For the past
30 years, people of the borough - the sixth-largest metropolis in the UK -
have only elected Tory councils.
Much of the population is made up of the aspiring middle-class voters - the
so-called 'C2s' - who, like their counterparts in Basildon, Essex, were
solid supporters of Mrs Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s. In the south of the
borough, home-owners predominate. In Croydon town centre, with its towering
office blocks and streets full of chain stores, the main industries are
those which should be providing natural Tory supporters: banking, insurance
and retailing.
And yet, the Conservatives may be on the verge of an historic defeat. At the
last local election in 1990, Labour made impressive gains on the council,
coming within six seats of taking control. On Thursday, only 500 Tory voters
have to switch allegiance in the right wards and Labour will take power. 'If
we lose it would be very serious for Croydon,' says Sir Peter Bowness, who
has been the council's dapper and energetic Tory leader for the past 18
years. 'And I have no doubt that it is something that would have to be taken
very seriously on the national level too.'
In an intense campaign, Labour is focusing on local economic problems.
Several banks in the town centre have recently announced redundancies.
British Gas, with its large regional headquarters, is in the throes of
restructuring its national operation, which may lead to job losses in
Croydon. And, as in all London suburbs, the property depression has brought
misery to those with large mortgages.
'The shake-out in financial services and mortgage lending has taken its
toll,' says Mr Jeff Dixon, who is masterminding the Labour party's campaign.
'We may have the largest shopping centre outside Oxford Street but few have
been going there recently.'
For the Tories, Sir Peter is still 'cautiously optimistic' of victory. In
spite of the apocalyptic scenario painted by Labour, unemployment in the
borough has fallen in the last year, he says. Only one of the office blocks
in the town centre is empty. Yesterday, there was speculation in a local
newspaper that a large US insurance company might open a regional office in
the town.
The Tory vote ought also to gain from the energy of Sir Peter's
administration in recent years. It has pushed through numerous civic
projects with success: a large library in the town centre opened recently, a
building programme for museums and art galleries is under way and a 18-mile
overground tram link between Croydon and neighbouring boroughs is planned.
In the run-up to polling day, that record should help the Tories win votes.
But even all this might not be enough to compensate for what many local
voters regard as the biggest issue in Thursday's contest: the performance of
the Conservative government at the national level.
Worries about Mr Major's leadership credentials and the impact of this
month's income tax and value added tax increases, may - to the embarrassment
of Tory Central Office - overshadow local Conservative achievements. As one
local resident puts it: 'If Tories like us vote out a council like ours, it
can only be because of discontent with the nation's leadership.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940430

