FT942-12214

FT  30 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Equity market picks up in the wake of
gilts rally - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


Transatlantic influences remained the dominant factor affecting London's
stock market which lost ground in the wake of another choppy performance by
UK gilt-edged stocks, before staging a good rally in line with US bonds.
The latter responded immediately to news of intervention by the US Federal
Reserve in global currency markets, stemming an earlier steep decline in the
dollar and earlier weakness in US Treasury bonds.
The US authorities' intervention saw longer-dated gilts, which fell around
3/4 at the outset of trading, rally strongly behind an improving US bond
market and a firmer Dow Jones Average to end a busy session a net  3/16
higher as the market closed.
At the close of what had been expected to be a subdued session, the FT-SE
100 index posted a 4.6 fall at 3,125.3. Over the first week of the first of
a three-week account which takes in the May Day Bank Holiday, the index has
recorded a fall of 8.4.
The late rally in the FT-SE 100 stocks failed to carry over into the second
line stocks which closed around the day's lowest levels, as measured by the
FT-SE Mid 250 index which settled 16.3 off at 3,781.1.
Turnover was regarded as disappointing, at the second lowest this week at
574.9m shares with non-FT-SE 100 stocks accounting for 632 per cent of the
total.
It was a sharp retreat by US bonds overnight, in response to worrying
inflationary pressure in the US and a disappointing response by
international investors to the auction of US Treasury bonds that triggered a
big slide in overnight US markets and induced the opening weakness in gilts
as the London market began trading.
Trading in the equity market got off to a very slow start, affected by the
losses across European equity and bond markets and reflecting thin
attendance around the City as many dealers began their extended Bank Holiday
break.
The FT-SE 100 kicked off almost 12 points lower, in very quiet trading but
then staged a rally, partly, dealers said, in the wake of a modest buy
programme and a temporary rally in gilts which drove the 100 index briefly
into plus territory and to the session's high point of 3,130.0 in
mid-morning.
But with gilts slipping back and the market beginning to worry about renewed
weakness in US markets, the FT-SE began to fall away, eventually hitting a
session low of 3,105.6, down 24.3 shortly after Wall Street opened. The
subsequent Fed intervention produced big rallies in markets across the
globe.
Apart from the Fed intervention there was some big action in the FT-SE
future where one very big buyer, rumoured to have represented a big US
institution, moved into the market during the late afternoon and onwards to
the close.
Dealers were disappointed at the market's performance over the week, given
the emergence of the much rumoured takeover bid for Lasmo. The frantic
activity in Lasmo shares and options over recent sessions was much reduced
yesterday but traders remain convinced that a counter to Enterprise's
all-paper offer for the UK exploration company may yet appear.
The bank sector provided one of the day's big features in Royal Bank of
Scotland whose shares made rapid progress early in the session amid reports
 -quickly denied by the bank - that RBOS was about to follow Lloyds in
acquiring a big UK building society.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940430

