FT943-13217

FT  21 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Aid to Rwanda


Even by Africa's grim record, the horror of Rwanda defies belief. In an
exodus without precedent, up to 2m refugees have fled to neighbouring
Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda and Zaire since early April, and as many again are
now pouring across the frontiers. Perhaps a quarter of Rwanda's population
is now outside the country. This tragedy demands an international response,
with an urgency and on a scale well beyond the current efforts.
The tide of fleeing humanity must be fed. But it neither can nor should be
housed in refugee camps on foreign soil. The flow must be reversed, and the
relief effort must strike a careful balance between immediate needs and
longer-term objectives, while not exacerbating the refugee problem itself.
As it is, there is a danger that the exodus could take on a logic of its
own. As more people flee to Goma and other points across the borders, so
more supplies from the outside world will arrive. As more aid arrives, so do
more refugees.
Calls for large-scale military intervention need to be treated with caution.
The lesson of Somalia is that soldiers are not enough. Their intervention
should be accompanied by a carefully thought-out programme of political
reform and economic reconstruction. In Somalia the absence of such a
framework proved fatal. Rwanda, with its history of bitter ethnic conflict,
will be no easier.
Yet there is a way in which additional, limited military assistance and more
relief supplies can be combined, in an exercise aimed at stemming and then
reversing the exodus. While the harrowing plight of the refugees in Goma
requires immediate medical and food aid, the bulk of assistance should be
directed to centres established within Rwanda. The additional troops, under
UN supervision and reinforcing the French presence, should carry out these
operations, protecting the relief centres and, where necessary, helping to
distribute the supplies.
The presence of foreign soldiers should reassure the remaining local
population, and encourage the refugees to return, by allaying their fear of
revenge killings by the victorious Rwanda Patriotic Front. There is no
evidence that this fear is justified. Rumours of reprisals seem to have been
spread by broadcasts from the retreating government, determined to leave
chaos in its wake.
But once short-term relief has been provided, the world should take stock of
Africa's deepening crisis. Unless a co-ordinated attempt involving African
and other governments, the United Nations and aid agencies is made to help
Africa help itself, the continent may be heading towards a catastrophe on an
even greater scale. Horrific though it is, Rwanda is only one symptom of
Africa's decline, as it pays the price of 30 years of disaster, man-made and
natural.
Conflicts in Angola and Sudan drag on; states like Zaire are in chaos;
others hitherto seen as stronger, such as Nigeria and Kenya, are under
increasing political and economic strain. More than 4m children in Africa
under the age of five die each year from preventable diseases.
It is more and more difficult to get Africa's crisis on to the agenda of an
international community which has been discouraged by the Somali experience,
and by Africa's evident marginalisation: a falling share in the world
commodity market, stagnant share of trade, and tiny share (barely 1 per
cent) of world investment. Before long, the more fortunate parts of the
world will have to decide whether to ring-fence Africa or accept a share of
responsibility for it. Rwanda should at least concentrate the mind.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940721

