FT942-12787

FT  28 APR 94 / South Africa Votes: Civil servants cling to the last
barricades - White bureaucracy remains a bastion of the old South Africa


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


'A lot of things are going to change, but everything will remain the same.'
That might, in general, be the motto for the new South Africa. But in this
particular case, it is the reflection of a senior minister in the outgoing
government on the future of the country's 1.7m strong public service:
administrator of apartheid, employer of the last resort for poor Afrikaners,
and bastion of the old South Africa.
The public service is about to get a new boss, almost certain to be Mr
Nelson Mandela. And he knows that the real power in South Africa lies not in
the parliament in Cape Town, which his African National Congress will
dominate, but in the civil service and the security services, which remain
the preserve of white Afrikaners, many of them conservatives.
Mr Mandela's ANC has made big sacrifices to ensure the loyalty of the public
service - which includes employees of central government, 'homeland'
bureaucrats and the staff of public corporations.
Indeed, one of the main reasons for agreeing to share power with the
long-ruling National party in a government of national unity was to ensure
that the white-dominated public service did not sabotage a new black
government from within.
To that end, the ANC and the National party struck a deal in the last days
of constitutional negotiations in November last year to protect the pension
rights of (white) civil servants while providing for affirmative action in
the highest echelons of the service. National party negotiators were
ecstatic: they had made it too costly to sack large numbers of top white
civil servants by guaranteeing they would receive full pension payouts.
In return, black South Africans are to be brought into director-general
level positions; but the process of black advancement will be gradual and
continuity in the civil service will be guaranteed.
Only the taxpayer will lose. The only conceivable way in which whites can be
retained and blacks advanced will be by adding to the already bloated civil
service payroll. Several forces are likely to swell the payroll in the near
term: affirmative action, the creation of nine new provincial bureaucracies,
and the demands of the ANC's 'reconstruction and development programme',
with its education, health care and service provisions demanding more
teachers, nurses and other government employees.
Any rise will reverse a recent trend toward containing the size of the civil
service. From 1980 to 1992, public service employment rose by 31 per cent,
nearly four times the rate of the private sector. But between 1991 and 1992,
the rise slowed to only 0.05 per cent.
The ANC's reconstruction programme says that by 1999 the civil service must
reflect the racial composition of South Africa: Black Africans 76 per cent;
whites 13 per cent; indians 2 per cent and coloureds 9 per cent according to
the latest census.
Overall, the composition is not too far from that now. Although the
government no longer publishes a racial breakdown of the service, 1992
figures show half the service was already black African. That figure is
estimated to have risen to 60 per cent and only a quarter of the service is
now estimated to be white.
However, almost all power within the service lies in white male Afrikaner
hands. Figures from the South African Institute of Race Relations show that
in 1992, only 0.6 per cent of the top 3,200 positions were held by black
Africans. The situation has improved since then, but not dramatically.
Changing the balance radically will be a slow process, because apartheid has
deprived Africans of the experience they need to be appointed to senior
levels.
Few ANC officials are qualified to run government departments - except in
foreign affairs, where their years in exile will help - though some have
recently been trained at British government expense. And the large pool of
bureaucrats from black homelands provide few technically competent
individuals - and far too many who rely on nepotism and corruption to
survive.
With an estimated 15 per cent of South Africa's economically active
population - and nearly one quarter of economically active whites - employed
in the public service, its fate is central to the country's future.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940428

