FT941-17016

FT  06 JAN 94 / International Bonds: Abbey National launches Dollars 1bn
three-year offering


   By SARA WEBB


Abbey National was the focus of attention yesterday as the UK bank launched
a Dollars 1bn, three-year deal.
Abbey National is a fairly frequent borrower and has already launched large
five-year and 10-year deals in the Eurodollar sector.
However, Mr Gareth Jones, Abbey National's treasurer, said that he was keen
to tap investor demand for the US currency by launching a short-dated issue,
given the current uncertainty over the direction of US interest rates.
'We believe this will be the new three-year benchmark issue,' said one
syndicate official, noting good demand from institutional investors on the
continent.
The proceeds of the bonds, which have a 5 per cent coupon, were swapped into
floating rate dollars to provide funding at 'a few basis points above
Libor', Mr Jones said.
The market continued to see plenty of post-holiday activity with new issues
in a wide range of currencies, particularly the Eurolira sector.
Yesterday saw the launch of a total of L650bn of Eurolira deals, following
Tuesday's total of L950bn.
Syndicate officials are also expecting a L1,000bn issue soon from the
European Investment Bank.
From the issuers' point of view, the flood of Eurolira issues reflects the
relatively attractive swap opportunities, mainly into US dollar floating and
fixed rate.
Eurolira specialists point out that the sector had been practically devoid
of new issues since early December, and in the secondary market Eurolira
issues are trading well above par.
Some syndicate managers admitted that demand was slack, which they
attributed to the holiday mood.
However, they hope investors will be lured by the high coupons available and
the prospect of a cut in Italian interest rates.
In the other higher-yielding European sectors, Goldman Sachs is expected
next week to bring a substantial global bond issue, denominated in Finnish
markka, for Finnish Export Credit. The initial tranche will be for between
FM1.5bn and FM2bn, with the issue increasing to about FM3bn later in the
year.
The bonds, which will have a maturity of between five and seven years, are
expected to offer a relatively high coupon, combined with the prospect of
declining interest rates and an improving economic background.
Total Eurobond issuance in Finnish markka in 1993 amounted to Dollars 70m
equivalent.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940106

