FT944-11070

FT  08 NOV 94 / Letters to the Editor: UK bankers right to worry about
directive


   From Mr ROGER FINK


Sir, I was interested to read Norma Cohen's article, 'Weighty tome sends
investment banks reeling' (November 2), on the effects of the EU's capital
adequacy directive and, in particular, bankers' fears that French and German
regulators will not enforce the rules as rigorously as do those in the UK.
An interesting comparison is the rigorous way the UK authorities have
brought the money-laundering directive into force and, in particular, its
application to solicitors, in contrast to other member states.
The principal aim of the money-laundering directive was to ensure that
'credit and financial institutions' introduced administrative procedures for
the purpose of identifying and preventing money laundering. Member states
were also required to extend the provisions of the directive to professions
and other businesses which engage in activities 'particularly likely' to be
used for money-laundering purposes.
The relevant UK legislation, the 1993 Money Laundering Regulations, came
into force in April this year. As well as applying to financial
institutions, the regulations cover professions such as solicitors, to the
extent that they can, on 'investment business' (as defined). Solicitors now
have to introduce and maintain time-consuming administrative procedures,
including obtaining identity evidence of new clients, training employees in
the law of and how to detect money-laundering and appointing a
'money-laundering officer'.
This is in contrast with the way the directive has been brought into force
in other member states. In some of them, no legislation has yet been
enacted. In other member states, including France and Germany, legislation
has been brought into force but it is nowhere near as rigorous as the UK
regulations. In neither of those countries is the legal profession subject
to the full rigours of the directive - in Germany only to the extent that
lawyers receive cash payments over a certain amount and in France not at
all.
I believe, therefore, that the bankers' fears could prove to be well
founded.
Roger Fink,
Biddle & Co, 1 Gresham Street,
London EC2V 7BU

The Financial Times


London Page 16

941108

