FT942-16059

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Packer TV network buys 15% of
Optus


   By Agencies


   SYDNEY


Nine Network, the Australian television network controlled by Mr Kerry
Packer, has agreed to buy a 15 per cent stake in Optus Communications for
ADollars 318m (USDollars 224m), agencies report from Sydney.
Optus, which is establishing Australia's second telecommunications carrier
and also operates communications satellites, is to issue 265m new shares to
Nine Network, which will fund the investment through bank financing.
Current shareholders in Optus are BellSouth, of the US, and Cable &
Wireless, of the UK, each of which own 24.5 per cent. The balance is owned
by Australian companies Mayne Nickless, Australian Mutual Provident Society,
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia, and AIDC.
The investment by Nine Network increases the Australian shareholding in
Optus to more than 58 per cent from 51 per cent. The current shareholders
will dilute proportionately their interests to accommodate Nine Network.
The Optus group will be restructured by August so that all shareholders have
direct equity in Optus Communications. Currently, some have indirect stakes
through a separate entity, Optus Pty.
'The restructure of the Optus group will facilitate a listing of Optus
Communications on the Australian Stock Exchange in due course,' said a
statement from Optus and Nine Network.
The TV network has entered a strategic alliance with the telecommunications
company under which Nine Network will support and participate in the
development of multimedia operations at Optus. Nine Network has agreed to
maintain its shareholding for at least five years and to limit its holding
in Optus to a maximum 20 per cent for this period.
Optus, formed in January 1992 as a competitor to Telecom Australia when
telecommunications were partly deregulated, has spent ADollars 1.2bn
building a telecoms network. It plans to spend another ADollars 5bn over the
next four years.
Analysts say Optus has 20 per cent of Australia's mobile telephone market
and 18 per cent of its overseas traffic but only 7 per cent of domestic
long-distance calls, or 13 per cent of the combined ADollars 4.5bn a year
market. Telecom retains the local call monopoly.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940412

