FT941-4017

FT  14 MAR 94 / Electricity pool price falls in chase for market share


   By MICHAEL SMITH


Prices in the electricity pool, the wholesale market for power in England
and Wales, have hit record lows as National Power and PowerGen, the two
largest generators, engage in a fierce battle for market share.
The price falls are an unexpected bonus for several thousand industrial
users of electricity. These include Imperial Chemical Industries, whose
power bills are related directly to pool prices and which has long
complained about increases.
Domestic consumers, whose power supplies are protected by long-term hedging
contracts, will not benefit unless prices stay at such low levels for some
months, which is unlikely.
In the pool system generators offer the National Grid a series of prices for
electricity from each of their power stations. The National Grid then
chooses which plants will supply electricity the next day. Electricity from
the pool is bought by large energy users, and regional electricity companies
which distribute it to the public.
The biggest loser from the price fall is Nuclear Electric which earns more
of its income through selling to the pool than the two largest generators,
and is less protected by hedging against unexpected price fluctuations.
Ironically, the record low prices come at the end of a financial year in
which Professor Stephen Littlechild, industry regulator, threatened to refer
National Power and PowerGen to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission after
earlier price rises.
Last month he decided against a referral after the generators agreed to keep
the pool price below 2.4p/Kwh on average over the next two years.
This suggests that the main component of prices, the so-called system
marginal price, should be 2.1p at most. The SMP is the bid price of
electricity from the most expensive power station needed to meet all
demands.
Last weekend, March 5 and 6, SMP was 1.1p, the lowest daily average since
the pool was set up in March 1990. The average for all days this month
including yesterday was 1.5p, compared with a peak of 2.6p last May and 2.1p
in February. If the March trend were to continue the SMP would be the lowest
for any month since December 1990 when the first power companies were
privatised. The previous lowest was 1.8p in August 1991.
Market analysts were hesitant to draw conclusions on long-term pool prices.
Most believe prices will rise at the start of the new financial year next
month.
They point out that prices often change at this time of year as companies
seek to ensure that profits and market shares are in line with their
expectations, although this year's fall is exceptional. Both National Power
and PowerGen have seen their market shares cut as Nuclear Electric's plants
have improved their performance and new generating companies have come on
stream. Both companies also have policies of reducing coal stocks, which
analysts believe has contributed to the price fall.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940314

