FT943-13209

FT  21 JUL 94 / Enter, looking for the trap-door: A look at the political
and institutional challenges that Santer would face as European Commission
president


   By LIONEL BARBER


Europe is about to discover whether there is life after Mr Jacques Delors.
In Strasbourg today, newly elected members of the European Parliament will
size up Mr Jacques Santer, the safe but uninspiring choice to succeed Mr
Delors as president of the European Commission.
The vote in the parliament, though not binding, will in practice determine
whether Mr Santer takes over the most powerful non-elected post in Europe
next January. It also offers the long-serving prime minister of Luxembourg
the chance to dispel doubts about his stature and set out his own agenda for
the next five years.
Speaking to Socialist MEPs on Tuesday night, Mr Santer showed he is walking
a tightrope. His remarks that his policies were no different from those of
Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Belgian prime minister, were calculated to pre-empt
parliamentary criticism of his last-minute emergence as a compromise
candidate. But they provoked an uproar in the UK, which vetoed Mr Dehaene as
president on the grounds that he is a centralising federalist who flirts
with protec-tionism.
A more substantive point is whether Mr Santer's appointment signals a
weakening of the Commission, which Mr Delors turned into the driving force
behind European integration, following his arrival in Brussels nearly 10
years ago.
As president of the Commission, Mr Santer would take charge of a body whose
morale is low and whose mission needs rethinking. His challenge is both
political and institutional: how to preserve the Commission's role as
umpire, power-broker and political catalyst, and how to stand up to an
increasingly assertive European Parliament and a Council of Ministers in
which majority sentiment leans towards cutting the Commission down to size.
Many in Brussels are mourning the imminent departure of Mr Delors, but it is
easy to forget that his legacy is double-edged. Against the grand designs of
the European single market, the European Economic Area and the plans for
political and monetary union must be set the polarisation of public opinion,
Euro-disenchantment and his own admission that he may have overreached
himself in his final years. The argument over the direction of European
integration remains unresolved among member states: 'The president of the
Commission must reconcile the irreconcilable,' says a fellow Luxembourger
and former senior Commission official.
The immediate tasks facing a Santer Commission are the preparation of the
1996 Inter-Governmental Conference, which will review the Maastricht treaty,
possibly streamline decision making in an enlarged Union, and examine the
use of national vetoes. Some fear a rerun of the Maastricht debate, with a
polarisation of views and the British Conservative government held hostage
by its Euro-sceptics. 'The conference could be disaster,' says one
Maastricht negotiator. 'It would be better to put it off until 1998.'
Other practical tasks for the Commission include the absorption next year of
up to four new EU member states (Finland, Austria, Sweden and Norway) as
well as planning for the next round of enlargement in eastern Europe, Cyprus
and Malta; monitoring and eventually judging whether member states have met
the strict criteria for joining a European monetary union; and preparing for
the next five-year budget when the present Delors II package expires in
1999.
Sir Leon Brittan, the senior British commissioner, has argued in his recent
book on the future of the EU that many of these issues are linked, and may
be resolved only through a series of trade-offs, in which the Commission
could play a pivotal role in identifying and brokering compromises.
For instance, the degree to which the 'Club Med' states of Greece, Portugal
and Spain can preserve their privileged status in the next EU budget
negotiations may determine their support for membership of the Czech
Republic, Poland and Hungary at the turn of the century.
In the same vein, German enthusiasm for swapping the D-Mark for a single
European currency may depend on French agreement to expansion of the EU
eastwards and a political union far more ambitious than the present loose
co-operation among governments over foreign and defence policy. 'There must
be a compromise on these matters,' says a German official.
Mr Delors showed on several occasions in the past 10 years - notably in his
two budget packages, his early support for German unification and, latterly,
in his white paper on competitiveness, jobs and growth - that the Commission
has a special role in nudging member states towards Europe's collective
interest.
Yet Mr Delors' powers of persuasion have clearly ebbed in the past two years
as suspicion of the Commission has grown - not just in the UK, but also in
France, where officials rail against its pretensions in foreign policy, and
work to weaken its primacy in trade policy. Others in Brussels detect cases
of 'creeping unilateralism', as countries invoke their own national
interests ahead of the common interest, most notably in Greece's imposition
of a trade embargo on neighbouring Macedonia.
In seeking to maximise his authority, Mr Santer starts off with two
disadvantages: he comes from the smallest state in the union and he was
nobody's first choice as Commission president. Better-known candidates such
as Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of the Netherlands, Prime Minister Dehaene of
Belgium, and Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain either were blocked or
declined to enter the race.
Much depends on whether he could grow in his job, like Mr Delors, who, as Mr
Santer pointed out this week, was also everybody's second choice in 1984. It
will also depend on his ability to reform the Commission.
It is symptomatic of the mistrust of the Commission by member states that,
35 years after the foundation of the European Union, the president still
does not have the power to choose his own team. Commissioners are still
regarded as national representatives and therefore national appointments.
Sir Roy Denman, a former EU ambassador in Washington, says: 'Governments do
not like appointing people to the Commission who are too good. They want to
control things from capitals and are happy to send second-raters to
Brussels. The exception is France, which is why the French effectively run
the Commission.'
Mr Delors has always been at pains to dispel the notion that he was a
creature of the French government. Occasionally, as in the final stage of
the Gatt trade talks, he even distanced himself discreetly from Paris. But
the French language and culture still permeate the Brussels bureaucracy, so
much so that the Balladur government's minimum requirement was that Mr
Delors' successor should be a Francophone.
A Santer Commission would be likely to contain hold-overs from the Delors
era. Advocates of an open, free-trade-oriented Commission will welcome the
desire of Sir Leon Brittan to stay on in his job as chief EU trade
negotiator. And despite the odd mis-step, Mr Karel Van Miert, the Belgian
competition policy commissioner, remains one of the most popular and
effective operators in Brussels.
Less appealing for overworked Eurocrats is the prospect of another five-year
term for Mr Martin Bangemann, the talented but relaxed German industry
commissioner. Many will regret, however, the expected departure of Mr Rene
Steichen, the Luxembourger who has done yeoman work on implementing the
Common Agricultural Policy reforms and laying the ground for further changes
in anticipation of enlargement into eastern Europe.
Finding enough work to keep Mr Santer's colleagues busy may be the toughest
job for the new Commission. Thanks to the prospective enlargement of the EU
next year, the number of individual commissioners should rise from 17 to 21,
with one extra representative from the Scandinavian states and Austria.
Moreover, each commissioner has his or her own cabinet, which leads to
political appointees creating rival power-centres to the career civil
servants in the bureaucracy.
'The next Commission president has an awesome task,' says a senior EU civil
servant. 'He must give back the organisation a sense of pride. He must get
rid of the abuse and restore morale. It's anarchy at the moment.'
One logical reform would be a triumvirate at the top, with power divided
between the president and two vice-presidents, one responsible for the
single market and one for external affairs. Each would have 'junior'
commissioners who could take over specific portfolios such as
telecommunications and the environment, or Russia and eastern Europe,
external trade and development policy.
This leads into dangerous territory. When Mr Delors suggested streamlining
the Commission in early 1992, he was accused of harbouring plans to rule
Europe. The prospect of smaller member states losing their commissioner or
having obviously second-rank appointees provoked an outcry.
Another unresolved question concerns the Commission's monopoly right to
propose legislation, its willingness to use it to complete the single
market, and its ability to develop as a regulator and co-ordinator now most
of the legislation in the 1992 programme is complete. The desire to exercise
these functions sits uneasily alongside the post-Maastricht emphasis on
subsidiarity - the devolution of decision-making to the lowest appropriate
national, regional and local level - a principle to which Mr Santer has
declared he is committed.
A senior Commission official warns that there are risks in applying
subsidiarity too rigorously: 'The credibility of the European Union depends
on delivering the practical results of what it has decided to do. The
internal market exists in theory, but it must be created in practice, and
you do not do that through an act of God.'
Thus EU governments face a conundrum as they brace themselves for the next
phase of the single market in areas such as telecommunications and energy.
This will require member states to make significant adjustments, either by
applying mutual recognition of national rules or by agreeing to a second
burst of Euro-legislation to harmonise competing systems, which in turn will
require a strong central regulator.
The lesson of the Delors era is that member states are uncomfortable with an
overactive legislative programme and with the idea of the Commission as a
government-in-waiting in Brussels. Countries such as the UK and France are
particularly resistant to the idea of the Commission developing a separate
foreign policy-making function. The high-water mark for EU legislation may
turn out to be the 1992 single market programme.
The temptation is to restrict the Commission's ambitions to its traditional
tasks: principally conducting trade policy, monitoring the Common
Agricultural Policy; enforcing the Treaty of Rome in areas such as
competition and state aid; and dispensing regional aid.
Yet as Mr Niels Ersboll, the outgoing secretary-general of the European
Council, pointed out in a recent article in the foreign policy magazine
International Affairs, the Commission role as an 'implementing government'
is under threat not only from member states, which have an interest in
deciding how lightly or strictly EU law is applied, but also from the
European Parliament as co-legislator.
In Strasbourg this week, MEPs blocked the Council's decision to liberalise
the market in voice telephony by 1998 - the first use of such powers under
the Maastricht treaty. Mr Ersboll argues that the institutional
power-struggle could become even more acute in an enlarged Union.
Some member states such as the UK might relish the prospect of the
Commission in retreat, but the price could be high if this means lax
enforcement of existing rules or a condominium between integrationist-minded
member states led by Germany. 'We are not entering a trap-free zone,' admits
one British official.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940721

