FT944-10923

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (26): Brains at bargain wages - Software
skills attract world-wide interest


   By PAUL TAYLOR


Over the past decade India has built up a solid reputation for software
programming and semiconductor design.
According to the National Association of Computer Software and Services
(Nasscom), the Indian software sector grew at a compound rate of almost 30
per cent between 1987 and 1992.
Last year, the industry generated Dollars 600m of revenues, 50 per cent more
than the previous year, of which Dollars 330m represented exports, mostly to
the US and Europe. Nasscom's 273 members, who include the Indian
subsidiaries of companies such as Microsoft as well as indigenous companies,
account for about 97 per cent of industry revenues. 'This year's revenues
will reach about Dollars 1bn and we estimate 50 per cent growth for the next
50 years,' says Mr Dewang Mehta, the executive director.
Several factors explain the success of the Indian software industry. Among
these India has a large pool of relatively low wage skilled people who speak
English and have been taught mathematics and science. The salary for a
qualified Indian graduate, although rising rapidly, is still only about a
tenth of that in the US. As a result, when labour shortages began to appear
in the mid 1980s many western high tech companies set up software and
semiconductor chip design operations in India, particularly around Bombay,
Bangalore and Delhi.
Others went 'body shopping' - contracting with Indian start-ups that could
supply cut-price programmers.
Among the industry pioneers TCS (Tata Consultancy Services) was started 26
years ago and won its first overseas contract in 1974. Today TCS employs
4,000 professionals (average age 26 1/2 ) of whom 1,700 to 1,800 are working
for foreign clients including 800 abroad.
'We think of ourselves as software engineers,' says Mr Faquir Kohli, deputy
chairman of TCS whose customers have included many foreign giants including
insurance companies Life and Prudential and US banking group JP Morgan.
Mr Saurabh Srivastava, managing director of International Informantics
Solutions (IIS), another Indian software consultancy, cites several reasons
for using a company like his. One is cost - using an Indian subcontractor
can cut costs by about 25 per cent for the same quality or better work.
According to Mr Srivastava, the Indian software industry is entering a new
phase. Having developed programming expertise and confidence, IIS and other
companies are beginning to invest in the research and development of their
own products. 'There are a lot of companies doing R&D today,' he says.
Mr R Ramachandra, science editor of the Economic Times newspaper, estimates
that, despite tax an other incentives for industry, around 75 per cent of
Indian R&D expenditure is undertaken by the government.
In part this has reflected India's strategic requirements. With access to
western technology restricted, India has developed indigenous expertise in
key areas including defence, space and nuclear power. These programmes have
had mixed success. For example, the space programme, conducted under the
auspices of the Indian Space Research Organisation, has suffered a number of
technical setbacks.
Meanwhile, the country's nuclear industry was branded a 'dangerous failure'
by western scientists earlier this year during an investigation by America's
CBS network and the country has been without an indigenous semiconductor
fabrication capacity since the semiconductor plant at Chandigar burned down
in 1989.
In other areas, India's attempts to protect and encourage domestic high
technology companies have come unstuck. In aerospace and defence, the
state-controlled companies which dominate industry have failed to make any
inroads into the commercial sector. In areas such as pharmaceuticals,
however, there have been successes.
The Indian pharmaceutical industry is well established and the government's
decision earlier this year to sign the Gatt agreement on intellectual
property rights is expected to stimulate further research and development.
In addition, several national research laboratories such as the National
Chemical laboratory in Pune have developed a high level of expertise in
process technology - for the petrochemical industry, for example - and are
acknowledged to be world-class institutions.
Historically, private sector R&D spending in India has been fairly limited.
Small private sector businesses have relied on the state laboratories for
technology such as materials substitution and testing, while larger scale
manufacturers have been protected by trade barriers and often lacked the
finance and the confidence in future government industrial policy to
undertake R&D.
Overall expenditure on research and development in India is reckoned to be
running at around 0.8 or 0.9 per cent of GDP - down from about 1 per cent
during the 1980s. The decline reflects the impact of the current
administration's economic liberalisation programme which includes
restricting state spending.
As a result many state-run research laboratories which have so far failed to
win foreign or private sector contracts are close to collapse. The
government hopes that eventually its more open economic, financial and trade
policy will encourage industry to invest more in R&D and establish more
technology transfer joint ventures with foreign multinationals.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

941108

