FT941-12896

FT  28 JAN 94 / Row may cloud Murdoch's move into Polish TV


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI and RAYMOND SNODDY


   WARSAW, LONDON


A row last night threatened to cloud Mr Rupert Murdoch's breakthrough into
eastern European television after a consortium in which he has a minority
stake won the licence for Poland's commercial channel.
The licence for the new national channel was awarded yesterday to Polsat, a
Polish-owned satellite television company which has been broadcasting into
Poland from the Netherlands.
Mr Murdoch, who has been trying to expand his television interests
worldwide, is believed to have taken a stake that could be up to 33 per cent
in the new consortium - the maximum allowed for foreigners under Polish
regulations.
The decision to award the 10-year licence for the national channel was taken
unanimously by the Radio and Television Council, the broadcast media
regulatory body.
But last night the council appeared not to know of the interest of Mr
Murdoch's News Corporation in Polsat. Mr Marek Markiewicz, the council's
chairman, explaining the decision on television last night, said: 'Polsat
showed that it is almost 100 per cent based on Polish capital, that it is
independent and has real money at its disposal.'
One bidder said there would be 'grounds for taking the decision to court' if
the News Corporation involvement had been kept from the council.
Another said 'every legal means' would be used to have the decision
overturned 'if this is the case'.
The 33 per cent limit on foreign investment suggests that the foreign input
would be valued at around Dollars 23m (Pounds 15.3m). The initial outlay for
the channel is expected to be Dollars 50m-Dollars 100m, while the Polish
market's total television advertising revenues are estimated at Dollars 130m
a year.
Polsat fought off competition from mixed Polish and foreign groups which
included Bertelsmann, Time Warner and CLT, the Luxembourg-based broadcaster,
to win the licence.
Mr Piotr Nurowski, a Polsat executive, said his company planned to raise its
250bn zlotys (Pounds 7.7m) capital to 1,000bn zlotys through private
placements among domestic investors.
It is not clear what role News Corporation will play in the Polish channel,
although the company holds considerable film and television rights through
Twentieth Century Fox studios and Fox Television, the US network.
Mr Murdoch's previous moves into eastern Europe have involved newspaper
investment, in particular the ill-fated Super, a tabloid newspaper aimed at
the former East Germany.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940128

