FT943-12848

FT  22 JUL 94 / Italian coalition in disarray as talks on economy falter


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


Hopes that the Berlusconi government would reach a quick comprehensive
agreement on economic policy collapsed last night over serious differences
on spending cuts and how to raise funds to hold down the budget deficit.
The major casualty was the much-promised shake-up in the costly state
pensions scheme proposed by the Treasury and designed to save at least
L8,000bn (Pounds 3.3bn) next year. After serious reservations from Mr
Clemente Mastella, the labour minister, and threats of a major confrontation
from the unions, the cabinet indicated it was willing to let the matter rest
until September.
Failure to agree on pension cuts was accompanied by a row among the main
partners in the rightwing coalition over the introduction of a pardon for
people who have constructed buildings built without proper permission and
without paying the appropriate fees.
As tensions between partners in the government coalition grew, a fist-fight
broke out in the chamber of deputies between a League deputy and a deputy
from Mr Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia. They had earlier indulged in a
slanging match over the way each party had behaved in the withdrawal of the
decree on preventive detention.
Because of the differences the government is now likely to do little more
than repeat the already announced broad economic targets for the 1995 budget
without fully explaining how the money will be found to bridge the budget
deficit.
Mr Lamberto Dini, the treasury minister, last week said the deficit would be
held down to L140,000bn, or equivalent to just below 9 per cent of GDP. This
will be done by finding some L30,000bn in spending cuts and L15,000bn in new
revenues. The key areas identified for spending cuts were pensions and
health.
The main new revenues will be an amnesty on a backlog of 3.2m disputed tax
assessment cases and the pardon on illicit building. Both items will come
into effect this year and will cover the L5,000bn shortfall in the 1994
budget revenue projections.
The postponement of any serious discussion on pensions is likely to be
viewed negatively by the financial markets. Pension cuts are widely seen as
the test of the Berlusconi government's resolve to take unpopular measures
to restore Italy's public finances to the criteria laid down by the
Maastricht treaty.
Yesterday Mr Mastella, who is also responsible for pensions, was reported to
have said the maximum realistic sum to be raised from changes in pensions
was L4,000bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940722

