FT942-14583

FT  20 APR 94 / Bank loan problem 'over the peak'


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


The problem of non-performing loans which has weighed down Japan's banks
over the past few years and contributed to economic slowdown is about to
peak, the country's central bank governor said yesterday.
Mr Yasushi Mieno, Bank of Japan governor, said that while Japanese banks
were still mid-way in their efforts to clear bad debts, the write-offs they
have made and a slowing rate of emergence of new loan difficulties indicate
that 'the bad debt problem is over the peak'.
Speaking to the press before a meeting on Sunday of finance ministers and
central bankers from the Group of Seven leading industrial countries, Mr
Mieno indicated he expected this turning point in bank bad debts to help
sustain economic recovery in Japan by making banks more open again to
extending loans.
'The experience of US commercial banks shows us that even if the problem of
non-performing loans is not completely resolved, when about half of the
banks' bad debts have been written off, and they begin to see light at the
end of the tunnel, they begin to take a very positive lending stance. We
believe Japan's financial institutions will take a similar path,' Mr Mieno
said.
Mr Mieno pointed out that the amount of bad debts Japanese banks have on
their books amounted to Y14,000bn (Pounds 91.7bn) at the end of March, or
just 3 per cent of their overall loans.
The top 21 banks had annual net earnings of Y3,000bn to Y4,000bn and
unrealised income on equity of Y21,000bn.
Mr Mieno's remarks add an encouraging note to recent evidence that Japan's
economy may be near to to recovery.
Although he was cautious about whether recent positive indications would
lead to inflation-free growth, he noted 'the foundations for recovery are
being laid'.
Mr Mieno said he had no intention of lowering the official discount rate
from its historically low level of 1.75 per cent and warned that additional
macroeconomic measures might lead to inflation and overheating without
solving Japan's persistent current account surplus.
Japan's benchmark money supply grew 2 per cent in March from the previous
year, marking the twelfth consecutive monthly rise, according to a
preliminary report from the Bank of Japan. M2 - measuring cash in
circulation and demand and time deposits - showed the fastest expansion
year-on-year since December 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940420

