FT941-4040

FT  12 MAR 94 / Travel: Biblical moments in muddy Madeira


   By GILES WHITTELL


An accordianist wandered among the tables. He smiled benignly as the rain
slammed against the glass wall. The waiter in his turquoise tux brought the
crab and crevettes as the wind whined through the leading. We asked to move
tables. No trouble at all. The wine and ice-bucket followed us like shadows.
We sipped 1906 Malmsey after coffee and stumbled happily back to the hotel
over decorative cobbles, thinking that the wind always made Madeira's palm
trees dance like dervishes.
Next morning, Funchal's esplanade was under an inch of mud. The famous tidal
pool at Reid's Hotel had rocks in it. The previous night's wind was being
called a typhoon. Eight people had died trying to save their boat and a
Mercedes sports coupe had surfed out of its showroom and down a flooded
river-bed to the beach.
You expect a bit of rain on Madeira as the price of its almost unnatural
greenness. (It is on the same latitude as Saharan Morocco.) Even if the
brochure chose not to mention it, the umbrella stands in every shop are a
giveaway. But this was more than a bit. This was biblical.
We had come to walk the levadas - irrigation channels which contour
Madeira's terraced inland slopes. Easy paths along the channels give
spectacular views and the illusion of taking exercise, we had been told, in
return for minimal effort. But the levadas, too, were blocked or flooded, or
both. Poor old 'Pearl of the Atlantic'.
National service cadets shovelled mud off the seafront. Human chains
baled-out shops. Old men and young women looked on enthralled and rescue
helicopters danced dangerously in the wind. We slithered to the market. The
overnight catch seemed to have been a bumper one. Whole tuna lay on marble
slabs being cut into steaks by brigands with scimitars, which they slid
along the fish until the buyer said 'cut'.
Tuna are handsome, fish-shaped fish, their reputation much harmed by tins.
Espada are not. Long, black, eel-like and ugly, they are nevertheless
Madeira's staple protein, caught close inshore with the help of powerful
lights to attract them. Espada taste of little, which may be why they are
often cooked with local bananas.
Out of the fish-hall, through a separate market full of mangoes, guavas,
passion fruit and custard apples, still it rained. The kind of laden clouds
that race in off the English Channel to test your compass skills on Exmoor
were wrapped round Funchal's upper suburbs.
In the cobbled old town, the Madeira Wine Company was doing rain-proof
tastings. We toured the old wine lodge, breathed its sweet, alcoholic air,
and glugged full glasses, not mere soupcons, of the century's choicest
vintages. Then we repaired through the rain to the deserted but immaculate
English Church.
Madeira is part of a strange archipelago: 150 miles south of the main
island, usefully extending Portugal's territorial waters to within 100 miles
of the Canaries, are the Selvagens - three tiny desert islands where Sir
Ernest Shackleton believed Captain Kidd buried his treasure.
Within sight of Funchal to the south are three more uninhabited lumps and, a
10-minute flight away on the eastern horizon, there is Porto Santo. Joao
Goncalves Zarco arrived there in 1418 after being blown off course while
exploring the West African coast for Prince Henry the Navigator.
Incredibly, he took a year to discover Madeira. It must have been a foggy
year because on a clear day you can see one island from the other. The best
view Zarco had was of a mountain of grey cloud which he thought presaged the
end of the world.
On our way to Funchal airport the taxi-driver had said: 'Porto Santo - good
for one day.' In the circumstances, he was right. Where Madeira is green,
Porto Santo is khaki. Where Madeira rises sheer from the ocean, Porto Santo
tilts out of it like a listing wreck. Where Madeira has a bustling and
lucrative life beyond tourism, Porto Santo just has its beach.
We arrived in a twin-engined Dornier turbo-prop, diving alarmingly towards
the runway that bisects the island. The beach was being pounded by breakers.
Yachts en route to Venezuela from Southampton were battened down in the lee
of the sea wall, lucky to have made it there.
The young bloods of Porto Santo raced their mopeds along the front, leaning
into the cross-wind. We walked to a chapel on a hill with views of pure
Atlantic, then returned to Funchal in the Dornier with the under-16 football
team, which had a Sunday fixture.
A miracle had been performed in our absence. The clouds were gone. The roads
had been cleared. The air was still and warm. Madeira looked like an
emerald. We took a bus over the Camara de Lobos, Europe's highest cliff and
a subject of water-colours by Winston Churchill.
His preferred viewpoint is now a cement works but beyond the cliff, squeezed
into the mouth of a gorge, the town of Ribeira Brava cannot have changed
much since the 1950s. This is the last stop for coffee, petrol and obeisance
(at the 16th century church of Sao Bento) before the grand trans-montane to
the north.
'Grand' is not too grand a word, even though Madeira is no bigger than the
Isle of Man. The road is a miniaturisation of those that climb from the
Amazon into the Andes. The vegetation is as thick and the slopes are as
steep. From the pass, called Encumeada, the ocean is visible north and south
and the path along the levada del norte wriggles away through conifers to
the west.
Coach-loads of day trippers go there but so do serious walkers. You can tell
them by their miners' lamps, which are switched on in the 30 miles of
tunnels the levadas use. (Fearing vampires, we tried scrambling round one
mountain-side instead, and came terrifyingly close to falling off it.)
What they say about Madeira, to attract the young and the young-at-heart, is
true: there is more to it than bridge and tea-dancing and strong, sweet
wine. Just be sure to pack a torch and an umbrella.
Madeira: The Complete Guide, by John and Susan Farrow, has been updated and
issued in paperback by Robert Hale, Pounds 9.99.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

940312

