FT942-15315

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: Credit Lyonnais confident on
capital adequacy ratio


   By JOHN GAPPER and ALICE RAWSTHORN


   LONDON, PARIS


Credit Lyonnais, the troubled state-owned French bank, should achieve a
capital adequacy ratio comfortably in excess of the minimum international
standards before it is privatised, Mr Jean Peyrelevade, president, said
yesterday.
Mr Peyrelevade, speaking to analysts in London, said he believed Credit
Lyonnais would raise its current tier 1 ratio of core capital to
risk-weighted assets to about 6 per cent, compared with the current figure
of 4.4 per cent.
He said he hoped the bank would be able to negotiate share swaps with the
government to reduce equity holdings, such as its 20 per cent stake in
Usinor-Sacilor, the steel maker.
Mr Peyrelevade said he believed the bank should have stakes of no more than
between 5 and 10 per cent in companies to improve the spread of its
portfolio, and to give it greater liquidity and flexibility in selling
equity.
He said he would accept a price of Dollars 2.5bn for MGM, the Hollywood
studio owned by the bank, if such an offer was made 'today'. However, the
price could rise by spring 1996, which was when he expected to be selling
MGM.
Mr Peyrelevade said the bank should achieve a 6 per cent tier 1 ratio -
above the 4 per cent minimum in the Basle accord, but increasingly viewed as
a comfort level by ratings agencies - by raising fresh capital and
constraining asset growth.
The government is participating in a FFr44.9bn (Dollars 7.6bn) rescue of
Credit Lyonnais, after the bank reported a FFr6.9bn net loss for 1993. Mr
Peyrelevade was appointed five months ago to succeed Mr Jean-Yves Haberer at
the head of the bank.
As part of the rescue, the government and other public sector shareholders
will subscribe to the rights issue next month.
The bank hopes to follow this with a rights issue of matching size for other
shareholders later this year.
Mr Peyrelevade said he hoped to raise the tier 1 ratio by 0.5 percentage
points a year until the target was reached. He was still working on plans to
increase banking income while holding assets steady.
Mr Dominique Bazy, who is heading the sale of industrial assets, said FFr3bn
in disposals had been agreed, and he was confident that FFr10bn would be
sold this year. The bank has set a target of selling FFr20bn of its FFr55bn
portfolio.
The bank's unions plan to stage a day of action today against Mr
Peyrelevade's plans to accelerate the group's return to profit through
cost-cutting. The chairman last month unveiled proposals to shed 3,800 jobs
over three years.
Mr Peyrelevade said yesterday he expected Credit Lyonnais' staff to accept
the proposed cuts. The bank's four unions plan to mount a demonstration
against the plan today.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940415

