FT942-12802

FT  28 APR 94 / Caracas under fire as governor quits: Latin American central
banks pushed to centre stage


   By JOSEPH MANN


   CARACAS


The administration of Venezuelan President Rafael Caldera is facing serious
questions about the credibility of its monetary policy following the abrupt
resignation on Tuesday of the president of the central bank, Mrs Ruth de
Krivoy. Three members of the six-strong board of directors also quit.
The resignations have raised doubts about the future independence of
Venezuela's central bank, which achieved a high degree of autonomy under a
law promulgated only 16 months ago.
The reaction from bankers and economists yesterday was generally negative.
'A lot of investors were sceptical about the Caldera government's economic
programme even before this happened. Ruth de Krivoy's resignation under
pressure is a serious blow to investor confidence,' said an economist at a
large investment bank in New York.
Mrs de Krivoy, a widely respected economist, was appointed to a five-year
term as the central bank's chief executive by President Carlos Andres Perez
in April 1992. She took over in the midst of a political crisis and left as
the Venezuelan economy, now in the second year of a recession, faces a host
of problems.
Mrs de Krivoy and the other board members resigned because they felt the
administration was trying to deprive the bank of its independent status. In
her letter of resignation to President Caldera, the outgoing bank head said
she believed 'the autonomy of a central bank is indispensable for monetary
stability, economic development and the welfare of the population.'
The executive has pressed the central bank to participate in an agreement
which included the obligatory reduction of interest rates on commercial
loans every two weeks, and to eliminate high-yield zero coupon bonds which
set the ceiling for commercial bank interest rates on loans. These moves are
part of the administration's efforts to reduce inflation, which was 46 per
cent in 1993.
But since taking over as the central bank's chief two years ago, Mrs de
Krivoy allowed real interest rates to remain high to protect hard currency
reserves. She argued that while high interest rates were painful for the
domestic economy, they were necessary to avoid capital flight.
Venezuela's gross international reserves fell by 14 per cent during the
first quarter of this year, compared to a decline of only 4 per cent for
full-year 1993. The failure of Banco Latino, the country's second largest
bank, last January and an ensuing crisis in the financial system have
contributed to Venezuelans' rush to buy dollars.
Mrs de Krivoy's departure halted, at least temporarily, an agreement
announced last Sunday night by the executive branch to reduce commercial
bank interest rates.
President Caldera, who began a five-year term last February, was highly
critical of the central bank's policy on interest rates and its 'crawling
peg' devaluation of the Venezuelan currency, the bolivar, during the 1993
presidential campaign. While he publicly supported the idea of an
independent central bank, he apparently considered that the institution
should work with the executive and that its policies on interest rates and
devaluation should change.
The bolivar, which has been falling steadily against the dollar for several
years, depreciated by 25 per cent in 1993, and has fallen by 9 per cent thus
far this year.
Following the announcement of Mrs de Krivoy's resignation, officials of the
Caldera administration tried to reassure investors and citizens in general
by saying neither exchange controls nor a major devaluation were planned.
Taking over as head of the central bank, at least temporarily, is Mr Omar
Bello, the bank's first vice-president.
Mrs de Krivoy's departure places Mr Caldera in a quandary. If his
appointment to replace her as central bank president is perceived as a
personality willing to follow the executive line on monetary policy,
investor confidence will fall once again. If he appoints someone viewed as
independent to restore confidence in the bank's autonomy, the government may
find it difficult to influence policy in areas it considers crucial.
Ironically it was a respected executive from the private sector and a strong
advocate of free-market policies, Mr Gustavo Roosen, who was chosen by
President Caldera to pressure central bank officials on a host of delicate
issues such as interest rates and devaluation.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940428

