FT944-10938

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (9): Embarrassment of riches - The capital
market is feeling the strain


   By RC MURTHY


Overseas investors are finding ingenious ways to tap the buoyant Indian
capital market. The growth of dedicated mutual funds in New York and London
this year caused India's stock markets to groan under the weight of large
capital flows.
More than 200 foreign institutions bought stocks worth Dollars 2.56bn over
the year to last September, boosting India's foreign exchange reserves to
more than Dollars 18bn.
However, the overworked custodial services rang alarm bells, saying they
were unable to handle the massive inflows.
Cumbersome share transfer procedures brought the delivery mechanism to a
virtual halt. The authorities had to devise a modus vivendi of 'jumbo'
certificates to cover the bulk share transfers and reduce the FIIs' paper
work.
To avoid the hassles, overseas investors negotiated their stock purchases
directly with companies through so-called 'preferential allotments'. The
Securities Exchange Board of India, the market watchdog, intervened and set
a five-year freeze on such transactions, stirring a hornet's nest.
Mr SS Nadkarni, SEBI chairman, justified the freeze, saying 'it was an
effort at establishing a level playing field'.
The justification for the freeze was that companies offered discounts to the
market price that were not available to other investors. That made the
preferential allotments less attractive to overseas investors. 'Any
investment with a freeze is not a saleable product. FIIs want an
unencumbered exit route,' said Mr NJ Jhaveri, chairman of I-Sec, a JP
Morgan-ICICI merchant bank.
The new route for the overseas investors and mutual funds is India paper
floated by the corporate sector on the international market. That
eliminated, albeit temporarily, the hassles in accessing the local stock
markets. Some half a dozen India-dedicated mutual funds mobilised Dollars
l03bn in the first quarter this year, Morgan Stanley accounting for half of
it.
The Euro-issue route would be the mainstay for overseas investors as the
Indian authorities grappled with structural reforms at the stock markets and
created new institutions to handle the capital flows.
The exit of overseas investors was seen as a blessing: pressures eased and
there was less chance of the stock market overheating.
The BSE 30-share index is hovering around 4400 after hitting a peak of 4500
on August 31.
The launch of the National Stock Exchange in Bombay exacerbated tensions
between the NSE and the Bombay Stock Exchange, India's largest. Opposition
to reforms at BSE is subdued and the authorities are to computerise trading
and settlement procedures.
Acknowledging the slippages, Mr N. Shankar, BSE general manager, said that
the computerisation would be completed in four stages by the end of next
year. But the automated NSE has fallen short of expectations. Against a
target of Rs10bn of trades a day, the debt instruments traded in the first
four months were less than Rs300m a day.
There is not enough business for the 95 brokers. But the NSE's strong point
is transparency, which makes it attractive to institutional investors. If
the BSE modernises quickly, competition between the two exchanges should
sharpen, benefiting the investors. A decision on admitting the corporate
members at the BSE would be hastened.
Local brokerages, which are partnerships with unlimited liability, resisted
the entry of corporate members with limited liability into their exclusive
club. The entry of corporates would pave the way for foreign brokerages.
In the meantime, Jardine Fleming and Australian-owned Marlin Partners, who
have set up shop in Bombay, have started making purchases with the help of
local brokers. India opened its doors to nine foreign brokers 15 months ago.
The State Bank of India and ICICI are establishing custodial facilities,
which should be ready in about a year. The scenario for investment banks has
changed. Most merchant banks have set up shop in India.
There is friction between local and overseas merchant banks as they consider
the ideal ideal structure for overseas merchant banks.
The joint venture between Peregrine of Hong Kong and ITC Classic, a
subsidiary of ITC, the Indian affiliate of BAT Industries, floundered on the
issue of management control. It was an equal joint venture and ITC Classic
was not ready to part with the key one percentage point equity.
Salomon Brothers quietly told its Indian partner, Ind-Global Financial
Services, that it would open a branch in Bombay next April. The tenuous
relationship between Merrill Lynch and DSP Financial Services is continuing.
Capital market modernisation should gather speed next year as competition
softens resistance.
Global depositary rates: Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941108

