FT943-12896

FT  22 JUL 94 / Management: Lessons for water babies - John Authers looks at
a project which helps schools


   By JOHN AUTHERS


North West Water is taking an extremely long-term approach to water
conservation.
It has set up its own fully-fledged 'school' by the shores of Worthington
Lakes, a reservoir near Wigan, to which it invites children from local
primary schools for day-long sessions in the importance of water and its
conservation.
The entire project is funded on a scale which few companies outside the
utilities sector could dream. The impressionable seven-year-olds who attend
are unlikely to waste water again.
The teacher, a water company employee, tells them how much water goes into
an average bath, and then to gasps from the pupils shows them this is 119
litres. They are even more astonished when she demonstrates that a shower
will only use nine litres.
This turns to amazement when they are told that if they are naughty about
the way they brush their teeth and leave the tap running, they could use up
to 18 litres.
In the long term, these lessons, repeated to a different school in the area
each day, should reduce the amount of water which is wasted in the north
west.
While a public relations exercise to a large extent, the company has
resisted the temptation to ram home its brand identity. Its logo is scarcely
visible in its education centre.
Teachers' responses are positive. Pupils have a day out and a valuable
learning experience tied to the national curriculum. As the expense is met
by the company, it is an excellent deal for schools.
North West Water has taken a lead, but all the water companies have launched
big investment programmes since privatisation. They have gone far beyond the
crudest educational links, which provide companies with good publicity in
return for resources and now provide schools with a package which teachers
are happy to use.
Severn Trent Water, which is opening a regional network of educational
centres similar to Worthington Lakes, admits that they are aimed primarily
at solving its image problem. According to Derek Allder, who co-ordinated
the programme: 'Post-privatisation we weren't the most popular of companies.
We were seen as a virtual monopoly. The profitability of the company was
denounced, while our infrastructure investment was ignored.'
It was therefore vital for a company facing this kind of criticism to prove
itself a good corporate citizen. It also needed a way to show people what it
was doing without arousing the ire which glossy commercials might have
provoked.
According to Allder, the company's defence is that it would not feel able to
bring schoolchildren (or adults at visitors' centres) on to their sites
unless they were confident their business would withstand scrutiny. As he
put it, used car dealers are not likely to launch their own education
programme.
Sir Desmond Pitcher, chairman of North West Water, takes a similar view:
'Our business is so bound up with the day-to-day lives of our customers,
that it is vital we are closely involved with the communities which we
serve.
'The education programme allows us to communicate directly to children and
teachers. There is so much misinformation about our industry that this
communication is the most effective way to open people's eyes to the real
issues and challenges we face.'
The newly privatised water companies may each have monopoly status in their
own areas. But their massive spending on educational and community
programmes suggests that they do not feel able to abuse that status. In
their education programmes, they seem to be providing more direct help to
state schools than any UK industry.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940722

