FT941-16821

FT  07 JAN 94 / International Company News: Mission begins to salvage rump
from wreck - Metallgesellschaft's financial plight could have been worse


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


It was a little bit like waking up after a car crash and finding you could
still move your arms and legs.'
A Frankfurt-based banker, recovering yesterday from shock revelations from
Metallgesellschaft of a DM1.8bn (Dollars 1.1bn) group loss last year and a
call for a DM3.2bn transfusion into new equity and credit lines, had checked
the damage and found it could have been far worse.
Others echoed his diagnosis. 'All in all they came up with good proposals.
No-one liked them, but they mean that no bank will take a hit,' commented
another participant at Wednesday's meeting with the new management of the
debt-ridden metals, mining and engineering group.
By yesterday morning, the positive response the group claimed to have
detected the previous evening at its meeting with 40 to 50 creditor banks,
appeared to be developing into a general commitment - part-resigned,
part-enthusiastic - to join the rescue. In spite of some cloudy language,
there was no mistaking the tendency at Commerzbank, for example, which is
owed some DM200m. 'We will do all we can to help develop a rational
concept,' officials said.
However, other creditors, such as Credit Lyonnais (with loans to the group
of almost DM250m) refused any comment on their attitude. The French bank is
the third biggest creditor behind Deutsche Bank and the Bayerische
Landesbank.
Although the result of the appeal will not be known until next Wednesday,
when the banks' responses are due in, Mr Kajo Neukirchen, the new group
chairman, appeared yesterday to have a good chance of winning the financial
foundations necessary to underpin the reconstruction of Germany's 14th
largest corporation.
'If the proposals are accepted I feel the company can pay off its debts and
generate profits. I have no idea how long it will take. But those banks
which do not join in will be making a mistake,' said one participant. 'The
question we have to ask ourselves is: is the company so far gone that it is
not possible to save it? Bankers are not stupid, no matter what some might
say.'
The consensus appeared to be that the financial community's need to be
convinced of the possibility of salvaging a viable rump from the wreckage,
had been fulfilled. Lenders had been convinced at the meeting that its
crisis had been brought on by a one-off case of over-speculation in oil
which had gone badly wrong. The previous management had mis-reported the
facts to its supervisory board, but that had been corrected, one banker
said.
Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, large shareholders and house banks to the
group, had 'stitched up a deal in their own best interests', but that was
only to be expected. The alternative to a rescue package, as Mr Neukirchen
said on television yesterday, was insolvency.
The alternative to early signs of commitment from the banking community, as
one observer said, would be a loss of confidence in core operations in plant
construction and environmental engineering which rely heavily in
international contracts, often government funded.
Although the group has said all creditors are required to help, there was
little concern in Frankfurt that withdrawals by faint-hearted peripheral
lenders would bring the whole deal down.
'Deutsche and Dresdner will do everything to make this work. I am sure they
will take up the slack if there is any,' said one German bank official.
If that proves to be the case and the financial supports are put in place,
Mr Neukirchen, credited with saving engineers Klockner-Humboldt-Deutz and
FAG Kugelfischer, can set to work on rebuilding the corporation.
He had a list of potential disposals, he said yesterday, mentioning a
Canadian mining company and vehicle components.
Bankers suggested the oil business and smelting as other candidates, but
remarked that businesses named as sell-off candidates at Wednesday's meeting
were relatively few in number and would probably have been earmarked for
sale even if the oil markets disaster had not happened.
'The main thing is that his record suggests he'll manage this affair in good
order, which is what we all need at the moment,' one said.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940107

