FT942-15700

FT  14 APR 94 / British worries over works councils eased


   By DAVID GARDNER


Only about 90 British multinationals will be directly affected by the
European Union works council directive following publication of its final
draft yesterday.
The British government and employers' organisations had feared that up to
300 UK-based companies could be drawn into the directive, which requires
companies to set up a forum to consult employee representatives at least
once a year.
Overall, more than 1,000 pan-European companies will have to set up elected
works councils under the proposals adopted by the European Commission
yesterday, which are expected to pass into European law by October.
The plan, beset by controversy for nearly 20 years, affects companies with
more than 1,000 employees, including more than 100 in at least two member
states. They will be required to consult workers' representatives on
cross-border business decisions affecting the workforce.
But the final draft of the directive makes it clear that UK employees of UK
multinationals will not count towards the thresholds at which the directive
becomes applicable. There is also no requirement on pan-European companies
to invite their UK employees to participate in the councils.
This was welcomed last night by Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the
Confederation of British Industry, who said: 'That in itself is a good
thing, but we are still opposed to the principle of the directive.'
EU labour and employment ministers will start discussing the proposal next
Tuesday, after which it will get a fast-track first reading from a
supportive European Parliament. Ministerial approval is expected in June,
with formal adoption in October after a second reading.
The UK - which has an opt-out from the social chapter of the Maastricht
treaty - will not have to put the EU directive on its national statute book.
But because many transnational companies will respond to union pressure for
common practice, the number of UK firms affected could still be near 300, EU
officials believe.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940414

