FT944-5958

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Economy growth to continue at 4%


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


Britain is set for several years of good, steady growth and still has spare
capacity in the economy, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, said yesterday.
Mr Clarke, briefing journalists the day after his second Budget, said some
parts of the economy were 'extremely flat'.
In this context, he mentioned 'anything to do with the housing market, for
instance'.
The chancellor indicated that the economy could continue to run at about its
current growth rate of 4 per cent for the time being, with the government
'keeping a close eye on things'.
He said the government's duty was to prolong the upturn and minimise
downturns.
Mr Clarke, looking rather subdued after two strenuous days of speech making
in the Commons, refused to be drawn on whether the time was approaching for
a new rise in bank base rates from the 5.75 per cent set in September.
He said, however, that inflation forecasts had tended to be extremely
pessimistic.
The chancellor was also reticent about the prospect for tax cuts in future
budgets. He underlined that he would not cut taxes until it was economically
prudent to do so, and that he would not take risks with inflation.
Mr Clarke stressed that the government did not have a target for the public
sector borrowing requirement that would trigger tax cuts. The timing of any
cuts was a matter of judgment.
Mr Clarke said the government's objective was still to bring the public
finances to balance in the medium term. The PSBR would be less cause for
concern, however, after it ceased to exceed the government's net capital
expenditure.
Mr Clarke said in his Budget speech on Tuesday that borrowing would be
'approximately equal' to capital spending by 1996-97.
He also explained why the government had decided to limit its scheme for a
one year employers' national insurance 'holiday' to cases where the employee
had been jobless for more than two years.
To pitch the scheme, which is due to take effect from 1996, at those who had
been out of work for less than two years would have picked up a lot of 'dead
weight' of people who would have got a job anyway, he said.
If a person had been out of work for two years then he or she was getting
'seriously stuck' in the labour market.
Limiting the scheme to those without jobs for two years enabled the
government to make it attractive to employers and 'get them to do something
they otherwise would not do', he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

941201

