FT941-5454

FT  07 MAR 94 / Militant settlers vow to resist Hebron evacuation


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


Militant religious settlers in Hebron vowed a campaign of civil disobedience
yesterday after Israeli cabinet ministers said the government was
considering evacuating the 400 Jewish settlers who live in the West Bank
town.
Ministers said the cabinet could decide next Sunday whether to evacuate the
settlers from the heart of Hebron - a Palestine Liberation Organisation
demand for resuming peace talks after the Mosque massacre of worshippers by
a Jewish gunman 10 days ago.
Although ministers stressed that such a move would reflect government
security concerns for the settlers rather than a concession to the PLO, it
would be bound to provoke a storm of protest from right-wing settlers and
religious parties.
Rabbi Shlomo Goren, former chief army rabbi who last year told soldiers not
to obey orders to evacuate settlements, said settlers preferred to be killed
than leave Hebron. However, he also said Jewish settlers should not fire on
soldiers.
Up to 110,000 Palestinians live in Hebron, the burial place of the Biblical
patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, sacred to both Arab and Jew.
The PLO, which suspended peace talks after the massacre, says it would
return to negotiations only after Israel takes more measures to protect
Palestinian lives, disarm settlers and evacuate some ideological settlements
such as the ones in Hebron.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, who has so far ruled out
evacuating any settlements, drew fire yesterday from cabinet colleagues
opposed to his steps to broaden the coalition by including the far
right-wing Tsomet party.
The left-wing Meretz faction, Mr Rabin's most important coalition partner,
said they would quit the government if Tsomet joined. Political observers
said the Meretz ultimatum would effectively kill off Mr Rabin's overtures to
Tsomet, which is against evacuating settlements, the peace process and a
Palestinian state.
However, Mr Shimon Peres, foreign minister, said that, despite Meretz and
Labour party opposition, Mr Rabin would go ahead with negotiations with
Tsomet because it was vital to broaden the coalition during the current
crisis.
The International Monetary Fund has praised Israel's economic reform
programme as laying the conditions for sustainable growth but warned the
government against complacency over inflation.
In a report released yesterday, the IMF backs Israel's central bank which
has clashed with the finance ministry over increasing interest rates to meet
inflation targets.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940307

