FT941-17017

FT  06 JAN 94 / Government Bonds: Traders' hopes for German rate cuts fade


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN and FRANK MCGURTY


   LONDON, NEW YORK


After rallying sharply in the last weeks of 1993, European bond markets have
started the new year on a sour note, and continued their recent slippage
yesterday as traders scaled back expectations for imminent German monetary
easing.
Before the Christmas break, the Bundesbank had been widely expected to cut
key lending rates early in the year, said Mr Stephen Dulake, bond strategist
at PaineWebber International.
However, 'there was an air of speculation about the December rally', and the
latest correction in European bond prices might be seen as a shake-out of
short-term speculative positions rather than concerted investor selling, Mr
Dulake said.
Amid D-Mark weakness and a lack of fresh economic data, few market
participants expect the Bundesbank's central bank council to cut official
interest rates at today's meeting.
'The most we can expect is a fixed-rate repo at a slightly lower rate,
around 5.90 per cent,' said Mr Stuart Thomson, senior economist at Nikko
Europe.
However, such a move would leave the repo rate only 15 basis points above
the discount rate, which is 'too tight for comfort,' he said.
Others felt the Bundesbank might hold the repo rate unchanged at 6 per cent,
but lower the discount rate to make room for future easing. Since early
December, the Bundesbank has held the repo rate at 6 per cent.
Meanwhile, Bundesbank council member Mr Jurgen Koebnick said in a radio
interview that 'the level of short-term interest rates is too high for the
recession that we find ourselves in,' and that the Bundesbank would continue
to lower rates in the course of 1994. However, he stressed that the
Bundesbank must ease cautiously in order to maintain exchange-rate
stability, as Germany relies heavily on capital inflows.
The March bund futures contract ended at 100.81, down 0.15 point from
Tuesday's close.
Rate cuts in Denmark and Austria led their bond markets to outperform
Germany. After the Danish central bank lowered its discount rate by 25 basis
points to 6 per cent, the Danish 10-year yield spread over its German
counterpart narrowed to 50 basis points, from 55 on Tuesday.
Austria cut its Gomex rate by 10 basis points to 6 per cent and its 10-year
yield premium over bunds shrank to around 21 basis points, from 25 at
Tuesday's close.
French bonds tracked bunds lower, leaving the 10-year yield gap over Germany
unchanged at 10 basis points. The notional futures contract on Matif fell
0.04 point to 130.38.
UK gilts also weakened as the market paused after its year-end rally. 'Gilts
haven't had a significant correction during their recent run, and many
investors are taking a breather,' said Mr Jan Laury, head of gilts sales at
Daiwa Europe.
The March long gilt future fell by  9/16 to 118 13/16 .
Having flirted with optimism the previous session, the US Treasury market
turned gloomy yesterday amid further signs of economic acceleration and
higher oil prices.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  3/4 lower at 97
31/32 , with the yield rising to 6.398 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was down  1/16 to 99 29/32 , to yield 4.283 per cent.
Prices ebbed in early trading as profit-takers capitalised on a burst of
buying late on Tuesday.
The upturn, the first in seven sessions, had followed news suggesting that
sales growth in the car and retail sectors was easing.
However, yesterday's economic news was stronger than expected and undercut
any confidence on inflation that had been restored the day earlier. The
Commerce Department reported that November factory orders rose 1.4 per cent,
against forecasts of 1.3 per cent and an October increase of 1.2 per cent.
Rising oil prices in the afternoon put further pressure on the long end,
which is most sensitive to developments that could trigger higher consumer
and producer prices.
Traders expect no significant movements until Friday, when December
employment figures are due.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940106

