FT941-13063

FT  27 JAN 94 / Arts: Love that dares not speak its name - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


THE AGE OF INNOCENCE (U)
Martin Scorsese
MRS DOUBTFIRE (12)
Christopher Columbus
DECADENCE (18)
Steven Berkoff
In Martin Scorsese's The Age Of Innocence the director's fondness for
full-steam-ahead visuals - see Taxi Driver, Raging Bull, Goodfellas -
collides with novelist Edith Wharton's icy prose: that 1920s irony looking
back on 1870s social etiquette. The result is something like the alarm-bells
sounding on the Titanic. The viewer's imagination pushes the melodramatic
possibilities forward. But the SS Scorsese is stuck on the ice and - more
remarkably - it seems to be enjoying its state of suddenly ordained stasis.
While the audience tries to will the characters into Scorsese-ish excess,
the casting (mainly British) and the film's ornately deliberate style (James
Ivory meets Luchino Visconti) tell us to stop or slow down.
It takes half an hour, by my watch, to adjust the aesthetic metabolism. By
then such magic as the movie boasts - a lot, allowing for some tricks that
fail - is working. And we realise that the tension between energy and
stillness is the essence of both the film and Wharton's tale. Here is Mr
Newland Archer (Day-Lewis), affianced to the demure and lovely May Welland
(Winona Ryder), but dazzled by the aureate ringlets and wide-lipped Cheshire
Cat allure of Ellen Olenska, the Countess with a Past (Michelle Pfeiffer).
This woman has come over from Europe, vaguely bent on divorcing the Polish
husband we never see, and spins an amorous web all around our hero. Will his
family stand for it? Will society impose pariahdom? Or will decency and
dynastic imperative turn Day-Lewis back to dull virtue?
Edith Wharton's world was one where snobbery and puritanism dined at the
same table. While the writer's gelidly ironic prose is served to us by
Joanne Woodward's novel-quoting voice-over (each cadence shaped to
perfection), her equally icy supporting characters, played by a rich cast of
Brits including Alec McCowen, Richard E. Grant and Michael Gough, are seated
round the meal-board or hearth, recounting scandal and tittle-tattle.
Scorsese collaborates with co-scenarist Jay Cocks in bleeding the dialogue
of spontaneous drama; then he injects that drama straight back  - but subtly
 -into the images. No savagery in people's words or gestures. But look at
the painted screen just behind Pfeiffer depicting a pelican biting her own
breast, or the picture at the top of a staircase of an Indian scalping. No
incendiary bursts of feeling in the scenes of revelation or confrontation.
But look at the firebomb impact Scorsese builds into close-ups of cigars
being lit] This is emotional 'displacement' transmuted into cinematic
symbolism.
And transposed feeling is apt. For the romance at the story's heart is one
that never happens. Newland's trysts with Ellen stumble on through the weeks
and months, the screen alternately cracking with the slow-thawing emotion of
their encounters and then re-freezing under the influence of social protocol
or prohibition.
It is in the 'love' scenes, though, such as they are, that the film goes
askew. Day-Lewis's wry, delicately suffocated hauteur is perfect for Newland
 -this man raises repression to an art form - but Pfeiffer's Ellen is a
disappointment. She comes across as a rent-a-minx who has been to elocution
lessons. The breathy precision of her consonants reminds us of Monroe in
pretentious mode; the actressy coquetry of her fan play and head-turns is
too studied. The artifice numbs the movie's heart. There is no chemistry -
let alone any credible urge to biology - in this ill-mated pair.
So the story about a love that dares not speak its name comes most alive
when the lovers are off the screen: when Scorsese's camera roams or soars
across banquet-tables or opera houses, seeking the poignancy of personal
intimacy in the majestic ceremonies of its absence; or when Day-Lewis's
haunted, handsomely hollow-cheeked face, alone on screen, re-lives over and
over the dream that he never had.
If Scorsese's film is a tragedy of what-you-never-had-you-always-miss, Mrs
Doubtfire is a comedy of once-you've-had-it-you'd-better-hold-on-to-it. At
last, in this film, the solution to the much-discussed single mothers
problem. Dress estranged Father (Robin Williams) in female garb; pad out his
chest so that it resembles two footballs trapped under a duvet; give him a
high-pitched Scottish burr - somewhere between Jean Brodie and Lord Reith -
and then smuggle him into his (ex)wife's house to nanny the children.
There he will pass undiscovered until the fateful day when Sonny wanders
into the bathroom and - but enough] Surprises are not so plentiful in this
comedy, at least until it reaches its magnificent restaurant climax
(quick-changing compounding cross-dressing), that we should squander them
here. Much of the early stuff consists of Robin Williams doing his
super-schmaltz act: stumbling wet-eyed in the wake of Sally Field (departing
wife) and looking like Mr Pagliaccio without his script or make-up.
But once we are into vesti la giubba - on with the nanny drag - the magic
and merriment steal in. Christopher (Home Alone) Columbus directed; Randi
Mayem Singer and Leslie Dixon co-screenwrote, from a novel by Anne Fine. But
when funny Williams takes over from fey Williams he needs neither director
nor writer(s). He is Hurricane Shtick: omnipotent whether turning his
employer's cooking quarters into a literal Hell's kitchen, or fending off a
lascivious bus driver, or improvising polite insults to Miss Field's new
boyfriend (Pierce Brosnan). 'Your accent's a little muddled' ventures the
bronzed smoothie with the decollete shirt. 'Really?' replies Miss Doubtfire,
'so's your tan.'
Hurricane Shtick has another great asset. Once he starts blowing, even the
threat of renewed sentimentality is turned to matchwood. In one scene our
hero, reduced between nanny hours to a fetch-and-carry job in a TV studio,
wanders onto an empty soundstage and starts to improvise with a pair of
dinosaur puppets. At this point I screamed inwardly. I thought the ghost of
Jerry Lewis had arrived. But whimsy turns to wit, and then becomes for the
cue for the film's cracking comic climax in the eatery.
This sequence will make you laugh till you cry. Either that or you have seen
too many tired pantomimic drag acts - Hinges and Brackets and Danny La Rues
 -and had your taste corrupted. For the wonderful thing about Williams's
Doubtfire is that he (she? it?) could be real. Even when the stockings are
inadvertently slipping to the ankles, or the false teeth are falling into
the aperitif, or the wig is turning round to face Mecca, the lady's sweet,
purring, buxom feminity continues. In a bad comedy Mrs Doubtfire would be
the nanny of our nightmares. Here she is the nanny of our dreams.
Mrs Doubtfire would have her work cut out cleaning up after Steven Berkoff's
Decadence. In one scene the actor-director throws up all over the camera
lens: that is, over us the audience. We/the camera are situated inside a
lavatory bowl (sic), though for the few seconds before Mr Berkoff lets fly
this seems the nicest, safest, comfiest place in the whole film.
For the rest of the excruciating 108 minutes we are stuck in no-man's-land.
God save us from filmed plays in which the writer-star-director has no idea
how to come at his material in a new medium. Plonked down like disregarded
tots in a series of crowded or uncrowded rooms - luxury apartment, dingy
pad, swank restaurant - we watch Berkoff and Joan Collins spout the blank
verse as they quick-change between their two equally resistible pairs of
characters.
Now they are the high-rolling toffs who play kinky sex games and gorge on
champagne and caviare. Now they are the low-lifers who vary gormless
leg-over sessions (message: the lower classes do not know how to enjoy sex)
with chat about murder and petty crime. It may all have been a hoot on stage
but here on screen it plays like a Ben Jonson comedy modernised by a madman
with logorrhea.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940127

