FT943-795

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (10): A lift from the
Games - City profile: Barcelona


   By TOM BURNS


The dividends from the huge investment made by Barcelona, Spain's second
largest city, to stage the 1992 summer Olympic games would appear to be
paying off.
After interviewing more than 500 senior executives of companies in nine
European countries for its 1994 survey of Europe's top cities, the UK estate
agents Healey and Baker moved Barcelona (population 1.6m) up from 10th place
last year to seventh, in its chart of the bestcities city to locate a
business today.
Barcelona scored particularly highly in the chart measuring the growth of
business over the next five years; the city already ranks fifth - behind
Paris, London, Brussels and Milan - among the centres where the companies
surveyed already have established facilities; and, among the first five, it
was top scorer, along with Brussels, in the projection of increased
representation by 1999.
The Olympics gave the city an image - Mr Lluis Bassat, a leading Barcelona
advertising executive, has valued the television coverage of the games
inauguration ceremony at Dollars 3bn - and it led to a vastly improved
infrastructure. Traffic congestion in what is a compact city boxed in
between mountains and the Mediterranean has, for example, been lightened by
more than 15 per cent, thanks to a four-lane 40km ring road that was built
for the games.
The expansion of Barcelona's airport, which was tripled in size as part of
the Olympics investment, is a yardstick for the city's confidence in its
growth potential. The airport can now handle 16m passengers a year, over
four times the population of metropolitan Barcelona and double the number of
visitors that currently fly into the city.
An airport of such a size will obviously be required if Barcelona achieves
its ambition to become a 'Mediterranean Rotterdam'. Professor Joaquin Muns,
of Barcelona University's economics faculty, is one of several city growth
strategists who argue that Barcelona is destined to become the most
important communications centre in southern Europe.
'We are talking about the motorways we have, the port we are building up and
the high-speed railway that we have been promised. The sum is a practical
and efficient intermodal nucleus, a sort of Rotterdam.'
The ease of access to markets is the most important single factor when
choosing a business location - 71 per cent of the companies surveyed by
Healey and Baker rated it 'absolutely essential' - and Barcelona has a lot
to show off in this respect.
The city is, above all, the axis of Spain's two high-growth areas; for it is
linked by motorways to Zaragoza on the Ebro valley, which meanders across
northern Spain to the Mediterranean, and to the region centred on Valencia,
Spain's third city, on the Mediterranean itself. It is no accident that two
of Spain's sturdiest export-driven companies, General Motors and Ford, are
located near Zaragoza and Valencia respectively.
But Barcelona also projects itself as the main freight distribution centre
for a southern European arc, with a 50m population that stretches from
northern Italy, through southern France to north-east Spain. This arc is
locally known as the 'Mediterranean banana', in imitation of the so-called
'hot banana', the central European business-intensive arc that extends south
from the London-Paris-Amsterdam triangle along the Rhur valley to Milan.
Marine cargo activity and facilities at Barcelona's port have already
outstripped those of Marseilles and Genoa. The number of containers passing
through the port has increased more than threefold since the 1980s, to
nearly 500,000 teu (20-foot equivalent units), and a new container terminal
will raise the harbour's handling capacity to 700,000 teu a year.
Railway connections, which include a high-speed link to Madrid and to the
European network, planned for completion by 2004, play a key part in the
intermodal distribution model. Barcelona's city hall forecasts that the
current 2.8m tonnes of railway freight traffic will rise to 4m tonnes by
2010. The city planners believe that maritime cargoes between the Pacific
Rim and Europe will save up to four days by unloading at Barcelona instead
of Rotterdam.
With such business prospects, two elements about Barcelona add up to a lot
of icing on an already rich cake. With its Mediterranean life-style, its
inner-city architectural beauty and its easy access to beaches and to ski
resorts, the city provides quality of life by the shovelful.
It also happens to cheap at present. Mr Russel Jewel, of Healey and Baker's
Barcelona office, says that prime location rents currently stand at Pta2,500
(Dollars 19) per square metre a month, down from Pta5,500 in 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940927

