FT944-11172

FT  08 NOV 94 / Indonesian labour leader jailed for three years


   By MANUELA SARAGOSA


   JAKARTA


The leader of Indonesian's largest independent trade union was sentenced to
three years' imprisonment yesterday by a court in the northern Sumatran town
of Medan, where workers' demonstrations led to riots in April.
Mr Muchtar Pakpahan was sentenced for allegedly inciting the Medan workers
to riot by encouraging them to call for higher wages. Prosecutors had
demanded that the leader of the Jakarta-based independent Indonesian
Prosperous Labour Union (SBSI) should serve a four-year jail sentence.
The sentence comes a week before leaders from the Asia Pacific region,
including US President Bill Clinton, are due to meet at the Indonesian
presidential palace in Bogor, south of Jakarta, for the Asia Pacific
Economic Co-operation summit. Mr Clinton is expected to raise the issue of
workers' rights with President Suharto and the US embassy in Jakarta said
yesterday that Washington regretted the sentence.
The trial of Mr Pakpahan, who said he would appeal, has drawn strong
criticism from the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and
non-governmental organisations which repeatedly asked the Indonesian
government to drop the charges.
President Suharto and Mr Abdul Latief, manpower minister, insist the trial
is not an attack on workers' rights and that Mr Pakpahan was arrested
because of the activities which occurred during the rioting.
Mr Pakpahan denied he was involved in the Medan riots, which lasted several
days, pointing out that he was in the central Javanese town of Semarang at
the time.
The military blames the SBSI for causing the riots, which left one ethnic
Chinese businessman dead and property damaged. Although other leading
members of the SBSI say they called for workers to strike, they say they did
not incite the rioting.
Mr Pakpahan's trial, which lasted nearly two months, was fraught with
difficulties and his 19 defence lawyers walked out repeatedly during court
hearings in protest at the restrictions imposed by the court on allowing
testimony for their case.
The trial was delayed once after Mr Pakpahan collapsed during an early
hearing in September. 'He was under so much pressure and there were so many
restrictions, so he was not in good condition,' said an SBSI official.
Mr VD Napipulah, the chief judge, told Mr Pakpahan: 'You have shown during
the trial that you do not appreciate this court and have been inclined to
denigrate the importance of the government apparatus,' adding: 'You have
also tried to complicate the process of this court during the trial.'
The US has twice delayed a decision on whether to renew Indonesia's status
under the Generalised System of Preferences which is linked to progress made
in workers' rights.
Washington's main concerns in renewing Indonesia's trade privileges involve
the right of Indonesian workers to form an independent trade union and
reducing military interference in labour issues. Indonesia has two trade
union groupings but only one, run by state bureaucrats, is recognised by the
government.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941108

