FT941-3431

FT  16 MAR 94 / Emotional onslaught against Rover sale


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


Rover group, the last British-owned volume car producer, will officially
pass into the ownership of BMW, the German carmaker, on Friday, but only
after bitter opposition was expressed yesterday by small shareholders in
British Aerospace.
The takeover, which will create the world's largest specialist carmaker,
cleared the two final hurdles yesterday, when it was approved by both the
European Commission and BAe shareholders.
Shareholders attending BAe's extraordinary general meeting voted 111 to 42
yesterday on a show of hands to reject the deal, but it was passed
overwhelmingly by proxy votes of 119.6m to 2.9m in favour of the BAe board.
BMW is paying Pounds 800m cash and taking over Pounds 200m of net debt and
Pounds 700m of off-balance sheet funding to purchase an 80 per cent stake in
Rover.
The BAe board has faced the unremitting hostility of small shareholders to
the sale. Outside the meeting a handful of demonstrators with one
23-year-old Land Rover turned up to protest, armed with a couple of union
flags and two placards declaring 'Sale of Rover Industrial Dunkirk' and
'European Union means death for British industry'.
Inside the meeting the atmosphere was much tougher, and Mr John Cahill, the
departing BAe chairman, floundered as he was bombarded with fierce criticism
and emotional outbursts. Not one shareholder rose to support the sale of
Rover.
The BAe board was accused of 'selling the family silver' and of damaging
Britain's relations with Japan. The sale of Rover to Germany was called
'offensive' and 'objectionable'.
The integrity of the board was attacked, it was accused of telling 'half
truths and untruths', of selling the wrong business, and of failing to win
written guarantees for keeping Rover jobs and Rover's technology base in the
UK.
There was loud ironic applause when Mr Cahill was told, 'you are on your way
back home to the US with a Pounds 3.5m bonus', and the BAe chairman
struggled to control the meeting.
Why did BAe have to increase its borrowing limits when it was receiving
Pounds 800m in cash, wondered one shareholder. 'If I sell half the family
silver, I reduce my indebtedness, not increase it.'
But after two hours of rancour, the BAe proxy votes ensured that by the end
of the week Britain will no longer own a volume carmaker.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940316

