FT943-1004

FT  27 SEP 94 / Viewers robbed of daily OJ dose


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


There were no live television pictures from a Los Angeles courtroom
yesterday as the US murder trial of the year got under way.
How the country will survive without its daily televised fix of the trial of
O J Simpson, the retired American football star accused of the murder of his
former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ronald Goldman, is
doubtful.
The cameras did not roll yesterday because Judge Lance Ito of the
Californian Superior Court began questioning as many as 1,000 prospective
jurors, from whom a panel of 12, with eight alternates, must be chosen. This
process is held in camera, as it were.
Judge Ito must first ascertain which jurors cannot, for business or personal
reasons, take three months off, especially if the jury is sequestered. This
could reduce the 1,000-name list by 75 per cent.
Defence and prosecution lawyers have submitted briefs outlining the
questions they would like to see satisfactorily answered. Since no
prospective juror living in the US can claim ignorance of the case,
selection criteria include sex, race, age, known attitudes and personal
history.
Lawyers, psychologists, DNA scientists, and experts in race relations (Mr
Simpson is black, his wife and Mr Goldman were white) have all had their
disparate views fully aired in preliminary sessions.
A Los Angeles Times poll yesterday found 34 per cent believed him guilty,
and 16 per cent innocent, with the balance undecided. As with other surveys,
far more blacks than whites thought him a victim of racial prejudice.
It may take up to a month for a jury to be empanelled. Even then, there is
no guarantee the trial will be covered live. Last week, the judge, enraged
at press leaks and stories of little apparent substance, said he would
consider banning some or all media.
This is within his power but he is unlikely to impose the extreme sanction.
If he did, the media would go to court to demand that he be overruled. Last
week, a committee of judges recommended that the experiment of televising
federal trials be discontinued - but this is a state case and California is
the home of television.
Beyond its celebrity element - Mr Simpson, after a glittering career on the
field, became one of the most visible TV pitchmen for assorted commercial
products - the trial itself may prove of legal importance as a test of the
usefulness and admissibility of DNA analysis.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940927

