FT944-5947

FT  01 DEC 94 / Technology: Standard rules of procedure - Alan Cane on the
resolution of a row in Europe's telecoms industry


   By ALAN CANE


A dispute over technical standards that has been threatening to split the
European telecommunications industry was resolved last week when a
compromise policy was agreed after more than five years of bickering.
Almost the entire membership of the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (Etsi) voted for the new policy, which ensures that companies will
not have to give up their rights to their own proprietary technology
unknowingly as part of the standards-setting process.
As a consequence, the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers
Association of America, representing large US companies including
International Business Machines, Motorola and Digital Equipment, has
withdrawn a complaint filed with the European Commission.
IBM said yesterday: 'It is a balanced and satisfactory solution for everyone
concerned.' Frede Ask, deputy director of Etsi with responsibility for legal
matters, said he was pleased that an agreement had been reached: 'I was
always in favour of the abandoned policy, which I believed was fair, but as
some of our members were unhappy, it was a clear indication that the policy
had to be changed.'
The dispute centred on the way telecommunications standards are set. Etsi is
one of three officially recognised European bodies responsible for setting
standards. Established by Brussels, it is composed of telecoms operators,
national governments, equipment manufacturers, information technology
companies and consultancies. US companies with European interests can be
members on the same terms as European-owned concerns, but when it comes to
voting, national governments and national telecommunications organisations
are in the majority.
Standards in telecommunications, as in any technical area, are vital to
progress. Setting industry-wide standards promotes competition, encourages
innovation, cuts costs and lowers prices. Europe's rag-bag of standards is
in urgent need of rationalisation. Yet after some years of wrangling, a
standards policy was approved by Etsi last year which proved impossible to
implement.
Intellectual property rights (IPRs) - the rights of a company to own its own
technological advances - proved the sticking point. Standards involve sets
of operational rules that can involve products and processes from a variety
of companies. These companies own the IPRs in their products and have
frequently invested millions in their development. Yet if progress is to be
made, they are obliged to agree to give up their IPRs so new standards can
be developed and broadly licensed. Given adequate compensation, most
companies would agree this is fair and reasonable.
Yet the Etsi proposal last year said that a company had just 90 days to
decide whether to withhold permission for a particular IPR to become part of
a standard. If it did not withhold permission, the technology became
available by default for licensing to Etsi members and non-members.
IT companies, which see their competitiveness linked to their stock of IPRs,
were outraged. Also, such is the rate of technological progress that large
companies, in particular, may not know in detail what IPRs they own or which
ones may be involved in standards Etsi is working on.
The compromise takes a quite different tack. Etsi has to approach a company
to request permission to use a piece of intellectual property it owns in
developing a standard. The company then has three months to decide whether
to give permission. The new policy says: 'IPR holders, whether members of
Etsi and their affiliates or third parties, should be adequately and fairly
rewarded for the use of their IPRs in the implementation of standards.'
If a company refuses to make its intellectual property available, it is up
to Etsi to find another way round the problem, either by investigating other
technologies or taking a different approaches.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941201

