FT944-2958

FT  15 DEC 94 / Standard Chartered to cut staff


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


Standard Chartered, the UK-based international bank, yesterday said it was
to reduce staff by about 3,000 - 10 per cent of its workforce - in the
medium term to cut costs.
The bank, which experienced a 7 per cent rise in operating expenses in the
first half, said it had shed about 1,000 of these jobs this year through
re-structuring of some operations and voluntary severance schemes.
It is also thought to have shed a significant number of jobs in India and
Kenya during 1994, although cuts are likely to affect operations throughout
the world.
The bank said it could not set a precise timetable for reaching its 3,000
target.
Standard Chartered said it believed its plans were in line with those of
other banks. US banks have been imposing cost-cutting programmes recently,
with Chemical Banking announcing plans to shed 3,700 jobs.
Standard Chartered's cost/income ratio in the six months to August 10 was
63.8 per cent. The bank has set a medium-term target of reducing the ratio
to 60 per cent, and wants to cut the ratio eventually to about 55 per cent.
The bank has been trying to reduce costs by moving some of its back office
processing from high-wage centres such as Hong Kong into China and other
lower-cost areas, as well as centralising more processing.
The job cuts were disclosed at a briefing in Hong Kong, and Standard said it
could give no further details. However, it is also likely to shed some
peripheral operations in countries where it has relatively small market
shares.
The bank has been particularly affected by high inflation in some countries,
notably Hong Kong, sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. This raised staff
costs from Pounds 258m to Pounds 285m in the first half of the year.
Mr Patrick Gillam, the chairman, said in his first half statement that the
bank would impose 'rigorous control of costs'. It has been trying to make
operating procedures more efficient as it has brought local operations under
regional control.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941215

