FT944-11077

FT  08 NOV 94 / Arts: Furtive families and flurries of activity - William
Packer visits the Saatchi gallery


   By WILLIAM PACKER


The extraordinary mass of contemporary art that Charles Saatchi has acquired
over the past 20 years seems less a collection than an accumulation: for if
Mr Saatchi sees a show by an artist who interests him, from Andy Warhol to
Damien Hirst, he is inclined to buy the lot.
As we enter that astonishing warehouse space in Boundary Road, we know that
whoever the artists are, we are going to see them represented in
considerable strength. And if at times our expectations are all too
depressingly confirmed, the surprise at others may be both real and
rewarding. The present exhibition, of three British painters in mature
career, makes the case in point.
Paula Rego is the star of the show and commands the first, largest and most
daunting of the galleries. She carries this great space, so it seems,
effortlessly. This is no retrospective, for the collection has nothing even
of the early 1980s, when, from a more generalised imagery of fantastical and
monstrous figures, the work was shifting towards particular narratives with
characters no less monstrous, yet disconcertingly human. What we have are
those narratives as they have been fully and splendidly established since
the later 1980s, with their darkly ambiguous tales of remembered childhood
and adolescence, fraught with burgeoning sexuality, fearful, secret and
excited.
Little girls, Miss Rego reminds us, are not all sugar and spice and all
things nice. Not by chance has she emerged as one of the great modern
illustrators of fairy tales, gleefully unsqueamish in her reading of them.
The Old Woman thrashes bottoms with a will; heads come off; tails come off,
with a carving knife.
Hitherto, her actual painting has been more effective than precious, with a
dry, gouache-like use of acrylic paint on paper that sometimes appears
cruder and more uninflected than in fact it is. In her latest work, however,
represented here by a single large pastel, she has returned directly to the
model and to a method that is much richer and denser on the surface. These
are her Dog Women, to be shown at Marlborough Fine Art later in the month.
John Murphy, who fills the two farther galleries, is represented only by
work of the early 1980s and particularly by an extended suite of 12 panels
that purport to engage with the infinities of space. The black pigment that
supplies the field of heaven is laid on thick like butter, and then inlaid
with white dots that might or might not be constellations. They serve, as do
the specks of resin-dust in aquatint, paradoxically to intensify the optical
sensation of the black. But do they also carry the symbolic charge of the
image they adopt? The portentous clues engraved on their frames, 'The Empty
Night of Error', 'The Long Night of Anxiety', 'The Paradox of the Void' and
so on, suggest that Murphy, too, feels they do not.
Five large paintings by Avis Newman have the side gallery to themselves, and
again they date from the early 1980s. They are curious and at first
unprepossessing, pinned unstretched to the wall, and discursive and
wandering in the marks they carry - a flurry of activity here, some broader
sweeps there, and blots, splodges and accretions anywhere. Is there a hint
at an encompassing image, the profile of a reclining figure perhaps, or a
distant and vestigial landscape? Or are we looking down on a map, or the
earth from an aeroplane, or a battlefield? These flurries of activity could
well be skirmishes.
But it is for us to make of them what we will. These are paintings, like
Chinese landscapes or classical friezes, or the great mural schemes of the
Renaissance, that draw us into themselves by their detail, that the detail
may comprehend the whole. As we look, the roughness and informality fall
away for the illusions they are. The surfaces declare themselves in all
their abstract refinement, paint and mark and line so delicately and
exquisitely worked. Her work is the great surprise and pleasure of the show.
Paula Rego, John Murphy and Avis Newman: Saatchi Gallery, 98a Boundary Road
NW8, until February: Thursday to Saturday 12-6pm.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941108

