FT944-10875

FT  09 NOV 94 / World Trade News: Brittan bids to boost Europe's image in
China


   By TONY WALKER


   BEIJING


When Sir Leon Brittan, the European Commissioner for External Trade
Relations yesterday inaugurated a European-funded management school in
Shanghai, the gesture went beyond the Ecu25m (Dollars 31.75m) being
invested.
Indeed, Sir Leon has been at pains on his second visit to China this year to
emphasis Europe's role as a trade and investment partner, and to dispel what
he clearly regards as a damaging perception of the EU as a trading fortress
unsympathetic to Asian aspirations.
His mission, he says, is part of attempts by the European Commission to
develop a 'sharper focus' on Asia and also to spread the message that Europe
is not only a huge trading bloc, but also a political entity open to the
outside world. 'We are not a fortress,' he says. 'We encourage our people to
follow open trading policies and be involved in the multilateral system.'
Sir Leon's comments reflect concern in the Commission over negative views of
Europe expressed recently by Asian leaders meeting in Singapore. It is also,
of course, a result of the growing importance of Asia, and China in
particular, to EC traders and investors.
Between 1979 - when China opened its doors to the outside world - and 1993
EU-China trade grew 13 times from Ecu2.4bn to Ecu31bn. China, which
registered an Ecu8.2bn trade surplus with the Community last year, is now
the EU's third largest trading partner.
European investment, however, lags well behind that of Hong Kong, Taiwan,
the US, and Japan. Among top 10 investors in China at the end of 1993 the UK
ranked sixth with pledged investment of Dollars 3.3bn and Germany ninth with
Dollars 1.4bn. This compares with Dollars 14.6bn for the US and Japan's
Dollars 8.9bn.
Europe's new interest in the region is also being driven in part by a
recognition that institutions such as the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation
forum (Apec) are beginning to provide a regional focus where none existed
before.
But Sir Leon says that contrary to suggestions that Europe might fear
competition from Apec, it welcomes its emergence as a consultative forum and
force for trade liberalisation. 'We think that a body of that kind, if it
moves towards free trade, will provide greater opportunities for us so long
as it remains attached to a multilateral system and doesn't seek to create
new barriers,' he said.
Sir Leon concedes that Europe has been 'somewhat slow' to recognise the
extent of the change overtaking the Asia Pacific region and thus the need to
respond more actively to the demands of such a dynamic region.
Early this year he proposed a thorough review of the EU's Asia policy, and
this resulted in a series of recommendations circulated within the
Commission in July. These would lead in time to an agreed policy on Asia.
As far as China was concerned the European initiative would involve an
enlarged political and economic dialogue aimed at expanding Euro-Chinese
trade and investment, and assistance to China in its effort to integrate
itself into an open, market-based world trading system.
European support for China's entry to the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade was part of this process, and in ways that may not be entirely subtle
EU officials seek to draw distinctions between their approach and that of
the US.
'The Chinese know, for example, we are playing a very much more positive
role towards their membership of Gatt than some others,' said Sir Leon on
the eve of a meeting on Monday in Beijing with Ms Wu Yi, China's minister of
foreign trade.
Differences between the US and Europe over terms for China's Gatt entry may
not be great - the Europeans appear willing to be more lenient about
transitional arrangements - but the fact that EU officials want it to be
noted that they are predisposed to be more helpful at this stage throws an
interesting light on competition for influence in the world's fastest
growing market.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941109

