FT944-10974

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (8): Dollar's plight
hits investors - Currencies / Philip Gawith discusses the problems facing
fund managers


   By PHILIP GAWITH


In fund-manager folklore, 1994 is likely to be remembered as the year of the
great bond market massacre. For many, though, attempts to get a handle on
the currency markets, and the US dollar in particular, will have been
equally chastening.
On October 25, the dollar was touching a new post-second world war low
against the yen, of Y96.40, and a two-year low against the D-Mark of
DM1.4853. Back at the start of the year, though, it had stood at Y113 and
DM1.74, with most analysts and investors expecting further appreciation, on
the back of rising growth and interest rates in the US.
If the dollar's plight has been a source of painful grief to investors, it
has also been a persuasive reminder of the importance of currencies in
assessing returns on an investment decision. It is a trite observation that
the performance of an investment in an underlying asset, such as a stock or
a bond, can be either totally negated, or significantly augmented, by the
behaviour of the currency in which the investment is made.
This fact gives rise to the need to hedge exposure to currency risk. Or, for
braver spirits, to take the investment process a stage further by engaging
in currency overlay strategies. This allows the investor to create a
currency exposure which may be completely at odds with the underlying asset
exposure.
As an example, Philip Saunders, director of Guinness Flight, notes that in
their global fixed income fund, they have a 65 per cent European bond
weighting, but the currency exposure is about 50 per cent dollar, with a
further 15 per cent in the New Zealand dollar, the Australian dollar, the
Singaporean dollar and the Malaysian ringgit. In terms of European
currencies, the weighting is primarily towards sterling and the lira.
Mr Saunders comments: 'We have these weightings primarily because we think
European bonds are cheap and we think the dollar is cheap.' At Guinness
Flight, the currency decision is not separated from the underlying asset
decision. An integrated approach is taken, in the belief that similar
considerations come into play when composing an international bond portfolio
and taking a view on a currency.
This is by no means the universal approach. Graham Cox, group economist at
Sun Life, notes: 'As a rule we separate the currency and the country. We
hedge the currency risk partially, sometimes wholly, if we have an
expectation of significant exchange rate risk. It has to be large, and for a
fundamental economic reason.'
Explaining the same approach at Legal and General, David Shaw, head of
strategy, comments: 'The economic fundamentals that drive currencies are not
the same set that drive the bond and equity markets.' The decisions are
taken 'separately but simultaneously'.
Reflecting the visceral aversion which those people managing trust monies
have to being branded speculators, Mr Shaw stresses that they have not
reached the point of taking bets purely on a currency. 'What we do is
currency management, and it is the currency management of an underlying
asset.'
Mr Cox says they avoid anything that could be construed as 'speculation'.
But the line between hedging for fundamental reasons, and speculation, is a
fine one.
Mr Cox's own example makes the point: 'The Fed is perceived to be weak, the
Bundesbank is seen to be strong. When you get a trend like that it is
justified to have a hedge on.'
Some fund managers are less shy about actively managing currency risk. Mike
Hart manages Foreign and Colonial's investment trust, the oldest such trust
in the world, with Pounds 1.6bn under management. He says they seek to take
advantage of currency movements by manoeuvring short-term loans. 'We try to
finance borrowings in what we hope will be the cheapest currency. We do it
on a fairly short-term basis, almost week by week. We are constantly rolling
over loans.'
Avinash Persaud, foreign exchange strategist at JP Morgan in London, notes
that currency overlay had its origins in the US. There it has been quite
common - though 1994 has been conspicuously different - to find the bond and
currency markets moving in opposite directions. The former is dominated by
domestic investors, while the dollar is more at the mercy of foreign
investors.
In Europe there has been less scope for currency overlay, as moves towards
economic convergence, albeit with various hiccups, have tended to see
currencies and bonds performing in tandem.
Two areas which have traditionally attracted less hedging, or overlay,
strategies, have been equities and emerging markets. In the case of
equities, the rationale for hedging less is that they are real assets,
supported by the same economic fundamentals which would support the
currency. In the case of bonds, by contrast, lower interest rates are
supportive, but theoretically bad for the currency.
As for emerging markets, there is virtually no currency hedging, owing to
the lack of availability in many markets. But there is a further reason, as
one fund manager comments: 'In nearly all the markets, we invest at a time
when the currency is sure to appreciate. If we are not confident of that
then we are not going to invest. The main economic factors that we are
looking for before we invest in a country are likely to lead to an
appreciation in the currency over a period of time.'
Clearly between equities and bonds, mature and developing markets, and
different institutions, currency exposure will be managed in a variety of
different ways. Just how differently, however, is a tantalising question.
For while there is copious evidence available about the underlying asset
exposure of different funds, no equivalent information exists about their
currency exposure.
The working assumption often made is that they are simply unhedged but,
increasingly, that is clearly not the case.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

941108

