FT942-12472

FT  29 APR 94 / Arts: Discovering Holberg - Fringe Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Roll up, roll up, for London's Holberg revival. The what? Who? Well . . .
Ludvig Holberg (1684-1754), known as the Moliere of the North, wrote 28 or
more comedies for the Danish theatre, which opened in 1722. In both Denmark
and Norway, he is called 'Father Holberg'; statues of him stand beside the
National Theatre of Oslo and the Royal Theatre of Copenhagen; his plays,
Ibsen wrote, were 'almost the only book I never tire of reading'. Oliver
Goldsmith knew his work - but few London theatre-goers today do.
Now, however, the London fringe has two different Holberg comedies. Watching
both in quick succession has made me curious to know more of his work, and
to investigate his importance in the Danish-Norwegian theatrical tradition.
The Gate Theatre - the venue celebrated for introducing foreign classics to
London - has produced his Jeppe of the Hill (1722). Meanwhile the much less
well known Greenwich Studio Theatre (which has started to follow a similar
repertory - of unknown European classics in translation) has revived its
1993 staging of his Erasmus Montanus (probably 1723).
The difference between the two stagings is instructive. The Gate actors
perform Jeppe of the Hill with panache and sophistication, but often as if
condescending to the old play and indeed as if amused by the 18th century.
The Greenwich Studio actors are, by comparison, amateurish; but they absorb
themselves in Erasmus so that it becomes far the more stirring and touching
of the two.
The title character of Jeppe is a henpecked peasant who escapes his shrewish
wife only to drink himself silly. Baron Nilus, coming across his dead-drunk
body, has the whim of (a) putting him to bed in the castle and having the
castle staff treating him as a lord - for a day; and then (b) returning him
(drunk again) to the dung-heap and having him arrested for assaulting the
castle staff. There are moments when Jeppe, as alcohol colours his worldview
rosy, sounds like Falstaff. More often he resembles Bottom, never quite
understanding his visit to 'paradise' and never capable of explaining it.
The play becomes more arresting the more you can believe in poor, passive,
all too human Jeppe. If the play is to have any heart, he must be its most
intensely human character. Jonathan Coyne is pleasant but lightweight. Like
his colleagues, he wastes too much time addressing the audience,
panto-style. Bernadette Roberts has provided an admirable single set that,
with various props, becomes four different locations. Kenneth McLeish, the
translator, has written that Holberg's script was intended as 'a skeleton, a
template for performance . . . to be filled out and expanded by the company
in characteristic commedia dell' arte style'. OK; but, although everyone in
Ben Crocker's direction is charming, nobody seems really to believe that
Jeppe's world could ever be three-dimensional. Or that Holberg might be
worth serious attention.
The title Erasmus Montanus sounds rather learned - but actually is a joke.
Rasmus Berg is a farmer's son who goes to university and comes back so
disgustingly learned that he insists on being called 'Erasmus Montanus'. So
far, the sympathy is all against him. But he also insists that the earth is
round and that it rotates around the sun - which the farm folk regard as
repulsive heresy Rasmus Berg is vilified, and finally has to recant.
Suddenly, for a while, the Moliere of the North seems to have prefigured
Brecht's Galileo; and I watched with tears as well as laughter.
Both these Holberg plays have a highly conservative sting in thir tails.
Jeppe ends with the moral that peasants are best in their place, for, if
allowed to rule, they behave all too boorishly. Erasmus Montanus winds up
more subtly, with the university-educated lieutenant telling Rasmus that
true learning teaches tact, proportion, good manners. What makes Holberg an
artist larger than these conclusions is his humanity, and I loved Julian
Forsyth's staging of Erasmus Montanus far more than Jeppe because it did
more to bring to life its characters.
Jeppe is at the Gate Theatre, W6, until May 21; Erasmus at the Greenwich
Studio Theatre until April 30

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940429

