FT942-14436

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: SGS-Thomson increases chip
stakes - The Franco-Italian group's move will intensify competition


   By JOHN RIDDING and ALAN CANE


Competition in the strategically important microprocessor segment of the
semiconductor business, worth about Dollars 5bn a year, is certain to
intensify after the announcement last week that SGS-Thomson intends to sell
industry standard microprocessors under its own name.
The Franco-Italian concern, the world's 13th largest manufacturer of
semiconductors, makes microprocessors designed by Cyrix, a small,
Texas-based, semiconductor company at its Carrollton, Texas, plant. It
intends to spend about Dollars 300m to equip and commission another facility
in Phoenix, Arizona, to manufacture Cyrix-designed chips under its own name
and in direct competition with Intel, the industry leader. Cyrix chips are
functionally similar to Intel's 80/486 and Pentium chips.
Mr Keith Chapple, Intel's director of strategic development for Europe, said
the SGS-Thomson move would intensify competition, but represented little
threat in the short term: 'We are all for competition if it is fair
competition,' he said.
SGS-Thomson's decision follows the news earlier this month that Internation
Business Machines, the world's largest semiconductor and computer
manufacturer, has agreed to make copies of Intel chips designed by Cyrix.
However, analysts believe that the decision will not lead to a price war of
the kind which has damaged the personal computer business. They point out
the market is large and growing and there is plenty of scope for competitors
to improve market share without cutting prices unduly. Intel has at least 80
per cent of the market for PC microprocessors, while Cyrix has less than 3
per cent.
IBM and SGS-Thomson were encouraged to enter the market for Intel
microprocessor clones after Intel last month dropped patent infringement
claims against the Texas chip designer, opening the way for companies with
licences to Intel's patents to clone its microprocessors. SGS-Thomson
qualifies though its acquisition of Mostek in the 1980s.
SGS-Thomson's decision is part of its strategy to expand in advanced
semiconductors and raise its ranking to the world's 10th largest producer,
the company said.
The group refused to give further details of the size of the investment or
the timing of the launch, but said the company would make copies of Intel's
80/486 chip as the first of a family. It is expected that Cyrix-designed
copies of Intel's top-of-the-line Pentium chips and its successors will
follow.
Mr Bipin Parmar, an analyst with Dataquest, the US-based market research
company, who has been advising SGS-Thomson on its strategy, said while the
company led the world in power semiconductors, too much of its business
depended on products selling for 2 cents to 20 cents a unit.
Microprocessors, by comparison, sold for Dollars 30-Dollars 60 each.
The company is enjoying a sharp increase in profits. Last year's results
have not yet been announced, but Mr Pasquale Pistorio, chairman, confirmed
forecasts that net profits would rise to about Dollars 160m compared with
Dollars 3.4m in 1992. Industry observers expect a further rise in 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940420

