FT941-3518

FT  16 MAR 94 / Gummer aims to reduce car use


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


Local authorities in England will be encouraged to take planning decisions
that limit the scale of out-of-town developments and reduce reliance on
private cars under guidance issued yesterday.
Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, announced planning guidelines
intended to reduce the growth of car and commercial vehicle journeys and to
increase the scope for use of public transport.
The planning guidance note represents the most detailed statement on
transport policy since the government committed itself to an environmental
strategy at the 1992 Rio Earth Summit.
Three main aims of the new planning policy are:
To ensure that new developments which necessitate journeys are built where
there is a choice of transport. Shops, offices, cinemas and leisure centres
should be close together so one journey can serve several purposes.
To provide housing developments with public transport links and nearby local
services so that journeys can be made on foot or bicycle.
To improve the quality of life in towns and cities - which are efficient
transport locations - while maintaining the vitality of the countryside, in
order to reduce the need for long-distance commuting.
Consistent policies to reduce the need to travel could result in a 15 per
cent reduction in fuel consumption and exhaust emissions over 20 years, Mr
Gummer said.
The impact of the new policies will be gradual because only 1 per cent to 2
per cent of the country's stock of buildings is renewed each year. But over
time the new policy, combined with the government's plan to raise fuel duty
by at least 5 per cent a year, will make a difference.
The government is keen to prevent the spread of out-of-town superstores
which can be reached only by car. Sainsbury, the food retailer with many
out-of-town superstores, said it was studying the detail of the government's
plans, adding that food shopping accounted for only 2.5 per cent of total
household car mileage.
Friends of the Earth said traffic growth would not be cut while transport
secretary Mr John MacGregor's 'motorway mania is allowed to continue'. His
department is soon to announce a review of its Pounds 23bn road-building
programme.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England called for a shift in
government spending from roads to public transport. 'We still don't see
evidence of rural communities being given a viable choice of public
transport,' it said.
Planning Policy Guidance Note 13. Transport. HMSO Pounds 4.95.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940316

