FT944-5815

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (1): Services start
to converge - Comment / Microsoft's plans to acquire Intuit, another US
company, which specialises in personal finance software has aroused concerns
about a concentration of power


   By ALAN CANE


Microsoft, the world's largest software house, is facing some delay over
plans to acquire Intuit, another US company, which specialises in personal
finance software.
The deal, worth Dollars 1.5bn and the biggest in the history of the software
business, was struck in October. The most recent delay is because the US
Justice Department has asked for further documents to help it assess the
anti-trust potential of the deal.
Intuit's principal product is Quicken, a Windows-based program which enables
purchasers to manage their personal finances. It gives Microsoft an
immediate passport to the limited world of home banking.
So there is little, one might think, to connect a small home accounting
system supplier such as Intuit (sales of Dollars 120m last year) with the
giants of the accounting package market such as SAP of Germany or Dun and
Bradstreet of the US.
Yet the Microsoft connection was enough to have analysts in Britain asking
Sage, a Newcastle-based group which leads the UK accounting software market
for small and medium sized companies, about the threat to its business.
Sage which strengthened its position in the European market with the
acquisition earlier this month of Saari, the leader in the French market for
personal computer accounting software, discounted the threat from Intuit,
arguing that the two companies were operating in different areas, one in
personal finance, the other in small business software. It compared the
price it paid for Saari, Pounds 18.7m or 64 per cent of sales with
Microsoft's expensive splurge.
Microsoft's chairman Bill Gates, however, rarely makes a move that he has
not considered deeply. Look at the development of Microsoft itself. It has
its origins in the PC revolution; operating systems and simple utilities for
single users. Over the years, its ambitions have had to take account of more
complex systems. Its current flagship operating system, Windows NT,
resembles a mainframe operating system in its size and complexity, not to
mention the time it is taking to become fully robust. It cost Dollars 150m
to develop - the most expensive PC program ever.
In a new book on the development of NT* Greg Zachary notes: 'Microsoft's
rivals grasped the essential importance of NT: the program defined the shape
of software to come. At the very least, NT promised to serve as the
foundation for a variety of ambitious Microsoft programs to be released
through the 1990s - everything from video-on-demand software to corporate
information networks.'
Microsoft has already rolled out Microsoft Network, an on-line service which
it hopes will form a standard technical foundation for interactive on-line
services. It is forming relationships with a diverse group of potential
information providers for the network - publishers, telecommunications
suppliers and entertainments groups.
More of the advantages of the Intuit purchase become clear with this
development. The software house has established relationships with
organisations such as Visa International and the US company Checkfree which
give it access to a system through which individual can pay bills
electronically. It is also the owner of an electronic bill-paying service,
the national Payment Clearing House.
Microsoft is therefore well positioned to offer personal finance management,
electronic shopping and electronic banking on an on-line basis. It is this
concentration of power that is worrying some industry observers and,
seemingly, prompting the Justice Department to look closely at the deal.
Many industry observers believe the deal could prove anti-competitive,
awarding Microsoft a large slice of the electronic future in a whole range
of activities from electronic banking to on-line shopping.
The software packages business has been turned inside out by successive
waves of the PC revolution. Hardly any of the large accounting software
suppliers of a decade ago still exist. MSA and McCormack & Dodge, for
example, have vanished into Dun and Bradstreet software.
Today, the question is how quickly accounting software houses can move to
client-server software designs. SAP with R/3 is a long way along the road,
as is QSP, a UK firm which reckons to have spent some Pounds 16m of its own
money on developing Universal Olas, a client-server based accounting
package.
How many others will follow? The cost of developing these large, integrated
packages means considerable risk for a software house even if the cost is
shared with the customer.
None of which should suggest that Microsoft, or any PC software company, is
going to spring into a leadership position in the big accounting software
business in the near future.
An enduring dream of the computer business, however, has been computing
power on tap - a commodity such as gas or water. The convergence of low
cost, high capacity on-line services, PC programs as complex as those for
mainframe systems and a growing tendency among even the largest companies to
outsource their basic data processing have brought that dream substantially
closer.
*Show Stopper] G Pascal Zachary, Little Brown Pounds 18.99

The Financial Times


London Page II

941201

