FT941-13096

FT  27 JAN 94 / Accountancy Column: Pitfalls in the way of a better
understanding - Andrew Jack considers a book that questions whether
financial reports can ever tell the whole story


   By ANDREW JACK


On September 14 1990, Carr, Kitcat & Aitken, the City investment analysts,
circulated a report recommending that clients buy shares in Polly Peck
International at the current price of 260p. The author predicted a
substantial improvement in pre-tax profits for 1990 and 1991.
Just six days later, Polly Peck, the conglomerate controlled by Mr Asil
Nadir, saw its shares plummet to 108p before they were suspended on the
Stock Exchange. The rest is turbulent history: raids by the Serious Fraud
Office, the appointment of administrators to the company under UK insolvency
law, evidence of enormous misappropriations of funds, and Mr Nadir illegally
jumping bail to flee to northern Cyprus.
Yet while much attention has been given to the machinations of the company,
its executives and investigators since that date, rather less has been paid
to the question of the financial information present in the company's
accounts and whether the warning signs were clear well in advance.
Trevor Pijper, an accountant in the technical department of Ernst & Young in
London, attempts to set that right as part of his book on creative
accounting*. At its core is the question of whether readers of financial
reports will ever be satisfied by the information they could possibly
contain.
In the preface, Pijper says he wrote the book in part as a critical response
to another on creative accounting which was published in 1992: Accounting
for Growth, by Terry Smith, the City analyst. He believes Smith's approach
of grading companies by allocating them 'blobs' for each accounting 'trick'
they used was too simplistic.
He takes readers through the elements of company accounts, suggesting that
there is no single correct way to present information in all circumstances:
how to allocate credits or goodwill, at what point there is dominant
influence or control, the limitations of the components of both the
numerator and the denominator in any gearing calculation. Accounts are crude
attempts to deal with complex problems, he argues.
Pijper cites approvingly an article in 1991 by David Gwilliam and Tim
Russell of Cambridge University. They examined the role of Polly Peck's
analysts, and concluded that they seemed more willing to pay attention to
information provided by the company than the 'danger signs' shown in the
accounts.
He calculates a series of five-year trend ratios on the company which he
says auditors sometimes use to highlight points for discussion with
management. In Polly Peck's case, it suggests concerns such as possible
future financing strains and declining profit margins.
He also recasts the source and application of funds statement into the newer
cash flow format with the aid of footnotes in the 1989 accounts, to show how
far Polly Peck was dependent on new finance from its bankers and
shareholders to run its existing operations. The message is clear. A skilled
reader of accounts could have seen the troubles afoot.
The danger of this approach, of course, is the benefit of hindsight. Many
similar warning signs could be drawn from other companies that have not
collapsed and may not do so. It also neglects the considerable question
marks over the reliability of the figures published, making their
examination far less relevant.
It is nevertheless an important theme to which Pijper returns often in his
book. He cites the case of Trafalgar House, the construction, property,
shipping and hotels group, which triggered the first real confrontation for
the Financial Reporting Review Panel, the enforcement arm of the new
machinery established alongside the Accounting Standards Board as result of
the 1989 Companies Act.
After some initial brinkmanship, the company amended its 1991 treatment of a
revaluation and reclassification of properties between current and fixed
assets under pressure from the Review Panel.
Yet Pijper highlights the fact that all the necessary information was
disclosed in the accounts, though analysts apparently ignored it. He
interprets the episode as a demonstration of the power of the panel, but
more importantly as a reminder of its limitations. All it did was to clarify
presentation, and not, for example, to comment on the appropriateness of the
valuations adopted.
A welcome aspect of the book is that it attempts to consider the new
financial reporting machinery, although this presents a moving target given
the current pace of change. In the case of the review panel, he argues that
it can only deal with external, disclosed factors and not confirm the
correct use of accounting policies.
More generally, he sees the development of new accounting standards as part
of an increasingly regulatory response to concerns over the quality of
financial information in the last 20 years. But - citing the activities of
the urgent issues task force and the intention of standards-setters to
revise even their new regulations every two years - he suggests that there
will always be loopholes and never a watertight rulebook.
While he says there can be no doubt about the enthusiasm of the Accounting
Standards Board, he questions how far its activities are meeting its
objective to 'provide shareholders and creditors with an adequate basis for
understanding a company's accounts and its financial position'.
Pijper is not always able to follow through and connect the different
threads of his arguments. For example, he builds up a good explanation of
the motivations for creative accounting. Manipulating profits can help
companies make acquisitions, gain access to finance and swell directors'
remuneration, he says. He is less able to say whether manipulation takes
place as a result, or how widespread it might be.
After raising a number of important questions, he sometimes lapses into
detailed recitations of new standards and regulations and vague
speculations, rather than providing answers.
Without much exploration, he makes one of his most original and radical
points in a single sentence at the end: that there should be economic
penalties for preparers who fail to provide to informed users the
information needed for sensible decisions.
The most depressing aspect of the text is that it essentially ends up as a
defence of the accountancy profession. The conclusion seems to be that
trained accountants are the best and perhaps the only people equipped to
prepare and interpret financial statements.
As a result, he takes the establishment line in suggesting that education to
combat ignorance of the limitations of accounts needs most emphasis. In a
spirit of defeatism, he also argues that users of accounts other than
controlling shareholders have little choice but to place their faith in the
stewards chosen to manage the finances of the companies in which they have
invested. In that vein, he fails to address the extent to which some greater
standardisation or modification in disclosure requirements might help
improve accounts for a range of different user groups.
Nor does he touch on the potential vulnerability as a result of commercial
pressures on auditors in approving accounts of which they disapprove, let
alone of their potential active complicity in devising treatments which may
not be designed with transparency and disclosure most in mind. Those who
most escape his criticism are the accountants themselves.
But the book is a welcome contribution in the debate on the changing face of
accounting in Britain.
*Trevor Pijper. Creative Accounting. Macmillan. Pounds 75

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940127

