FT941-17166

FT  06 JAN 94 / N Korea relents on nuclear sites


   By JOHN BURTON and GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


North Korea has agreed in principle to a resumption of routine international
inspections of its nuclear facilities and to renewed talks with South Korea
on denuclearisation, a senior US official said.
Ms Lynn Davis, undersecretary of state for international security affairs,
said the agreement was very close to opening the way for further high-level
talks between North Korea and the US on additional inspections of suspected
nuclear waste sites that the Pyongyang government has blocked.
North Korea is now in talks in Vienna with the International Atomic Energy
Agency on the precise terms for resuming routine inspections of its nuclear
sites.
Ms Davis said she believed the IAEA and North Korea would be able to work
out these details 'in the coming few days'.
North Korea has demanded that the US suspend the annual Team Spirit joint
military exercise with South Korea in exchange for its agreement to resuming
inspections.
While Ms Davis said no decision had been taken on Team Spirit, she added
that 'we would look seriously at what the North has seen to be their
security concerns, and among those have been the Team Spirit exercises'.
The US has been increasingly concerned about possible North Korean efforts
to build nuclear weapons since Pyongyang threatened last March to withdraw
from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The North Korean government then complained that the US had broken an
earlier agreement for IAEA inspections by resuming the Team Spirit exercise
in 1993, after a one-year suspension.
It also objected to demands for special inspections of two undeclared sites
suspected of holding nuclear wastes, which the IAEA wants to examine to
determine whether the North has been producing more weapons grade plutonium
than it has declared.
North Korea agreed to suspend its withdrawal from the NPT after two rounds
of talks with the US last summer, but it has continued to block routine IAEA
inspections over the Team Spirit issue.
US intelligence agencies disagree on whether the North has actually made a
nuclear weapon, but estimate that it has produced enough plutonium to build
one or two devices.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940106

