FT942-14922

FT  18 APR 94 / UN Bosnia policy in disarray: Karadzic orders ceasefire and
3km exclusion zone around Gorazde


   By LAURA SILBER and BRUCE CLARK


   BELGRADE, LONDON


Bosnian Serb forces edged back from the centre of Gorazde last night after
sending armour into the heart of the town and leaving in tatters the United
Nations and Nato policy of making the Moslem enclave a safe haven.
Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, said last night that he had
ordered a ceasefire to come into force at 8am today and had approved the
creation of a 3km exclusion zone around the town.
However, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnia's Moslem president, said he remained
deeply sceptical about the Serbs' intentions. He accused Mr Karadzic of
'tactics and manipulation' and called for the resignation of Mr Boutros
Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general.
The Serb withdrawal ended a day in which UN policy seemed be in increasing
disarray. The latest advance followed almost immediately after an earlier UN
claim during talks with the Serbs that it had negotiated a ceasefire and an
agreement to deploy 350 peacekeepers in the town.
US president Bill Clinton admitted last night that the Serb advance had gone
beyond the point where air power was likely to stop it. 'It wouldn't
necessarily be possible now for close air support to have the desired
military effect,' he said. He was referring to the difficulty of bombing
heavy weapons inside Gorazde without hitting civilians.
Mr Clinton also telephoned Mr John Major, UK prime minister, and discussed
prospects for an overall ceasefire in Bosnia. However, the Moslems seem
unlikely to agree to any truce that consolidates Serb advances.
More than 20,000 residents of outlying parts of the enclave took shelter in
the town centre as Serb forces moved into position half a mile away and cut
the town in two by firing on its central bridge over the river Drina.
'In military terms, the Serbs now have Gorazde,' a UN source said. The
latest Serb moves amount to a humiliating reversal for western governments
that had declared Gorazde a safe area but have been unable to prevent its
effective capture.
Last night the UN Security Council, after closed-door talks, condemned the
'escalating military activities by the Bosnian Serb forces', particularly
action at Gorazde and Sarajevo.
At the weekend Mr Yasushi Akashi, Mr Boutros Ghali's representative in
Bosnia, suggested that UN forces might have to withdraw from Bosnia. Efforts
to deploy aircraft over Gorazde were hampered yesterday by the absence of UN
ground troops.
The latest Serb onslaught was in direct violation of promises to Mr Vitaly
Churkin, the Russian peace envoy, to observe a ceasefire. After further
talks with Bosnian Serb leaders at Pale Mr Churkin said: 'I have heard more
broken promises in the last 24 hours than I have in my entire life . . . I
hope something of what was promised is fulfilled.'
In mid-afternoon, scores of panic-stricken people poured into the local
headquarters of the UN High Commission for Refugees, saying a tank was
advancing. Later the tank edged away from the heart of the town.
Virtually all 65,000 residents of Gorazde are now crowded into the town
centre, and a UNHCR official said the food situation might soon become
critical unless there was a ceasefire.
An aid worker in Gorazde said there appeared to be a deliberate Serb policy
of herding people into such a small space that living conditions became
unbearable.
The Serbs' capture of the town will help them to establish a greater Serbia,
one of their key war aims. It will provide an uninterrupted link between
their territory in eastern Bosnia and Serbia proper. They will now be
negotiating from a position of strength, and even if a 3km exclusion zone is
observed, they will control the strategic heights outside the town.
UN troops from Britain, France, Ukraine and Egypt were last night on standby
to enter the town.
Earlier, the Bosnian Serb forces released 19 UN personnel from Canada, who
had been detained for three days in retribution for Nato air strikes. About
150 UN personnel were still being held behind Serbian lines.
UN exposed, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940418

