FT941-12925

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (14): Ensure the goods are not rubbish -
Krystyna Krzyzak offers some advice to small and medium companies
contemplating a move into countertrading


   By KRYSTYNA KRZYZAK


The publicity generated by large military offset and oil barter deals often
gives the impression that countertrading is the preserve of multinationals
and governments. But small and medium sized companies (SMEs) that export
into certain regions may also be offered products or commodities, usually
bearing no relation to their business, in lieu of cash.
For certain export markets, notably the former Soviet Union, a lack of hard
currency may make countertrade inevitable. A number of newly industrialised
countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines, use countertrade as a
means of increasing their own export markets.
Either way, the SME's willingness to countertrade may make the difference
between winning or losing an export contract. Colin Heritage, director of
Stemcor Trade Finance, a London-based specialist financial services company
focusing on barter and countertrade services, believes that countertrade is
both more practicable and more likely to succeed if approached as a means of
trade promotion rather than trade finance. 'Offer to help the importer sell
its products into the West, but get its bank to provide the necessary
letters of credit and guarantees,' Mr Heritage advises. 'But the performance
of each contract must be kept separate.'
This type of initiative can give a company a competitive edge because it can
generate additional foreign exchange for the importer's country. However, it
is just as likely that the exporter will be offered goods with which it is
totally unfamiliar.
How an SME approaches this type of transaction can decide whether it comes
out with a profit. If countertrade, including something as conceptually
simple as barter, was ever straightforward, money would never have been
invented. The pitfalls fall broadly into two groups.
The first concerns the goods taken in lieu of payment. Is the quality high
enough, and if not, who is liable when they are on-sold? Are they subject to
a quota agreement, in which case where is the recipient going to sell them?
Will the official body responsible for the commodity give permission for the
goods to be part of the transaction and at what price? If an exporter sells
these unfamiliar goods to a trading house, how can it be sure that it will
get a fair price?
The second group of problems concerns the standard payment risk associated
with exporting which countertrade magnifies. Government export credit
agencies take differing views on insuring the countertrade leg of a deal,
but no agency will cover the risk of unsaleable goods.
The private insurance market, meanwhile, has scaled down its capacity. It is
feasible for SMEs to arrange their own countertrade transactions - if it is
a fairly straightforward counterpurchase deal and the company obeys the
golden rule of keeping the two sides of the contract separate and ensures
that the counterparty delivers its goods first. Few transactions are that
simple, and not many counterparties that obliging. The do-it-yourself
approach also can incur escalating trading costs. The exporter may well be
offered a commodity that is in oversupply which it will then have to sell at
a discount - the disagio, which may be as high as 25 per cent - into the
market.
This is the point at which many DIY deals turn sour, notes Alan Linger,
assistant general manager at Standard Bank London and secretary of the
London Countertrade Round Table. 'Companies find that they can't afford to
sell the countertraded product at the price they need, and they can't afford
to absorb the disagio,' Mr Linger notes.
This highlights another rule for successful countertrading by SMEs: keep the
cost of the arrangement of the transaction and the subsidy separate. 'In a
lot of countertrade deals the company may not even know at the beginning
which goods will be offered, so they should agree the arrangement fees and
leave the decision on subsidy costs open until later as part of the
negotiating process for the products being offered,' counsels Mr Heritage of
Stemcor.
Most smaller companies are best advised to seek help, preferably at the
beginning before the costs start escalating. Clearing banks are not now very
interested in arranging smaller transactions - nor are many trading
companies - although they can provide the payment mechanisms. There are,
however, specialists who can tie together the financing and trading legs.
Nigel Adams of Adams and Co, a Daventry-based countertrade consultant
specialising in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, believes that
the consultant's role has additional advantages for the exporter. These
include the exporter maintaining direct contact with the customer, which
would not be the case if the transaction was passed to a countertrade house,
and a customised service from the consultant which has a vested interest in
ensuring that the deal is profitable.
There are also a small number of specialist houses offering one-stop
shopping such as New York-based GreficoMees, a joint venture between the
Dutch bank Mees Pierson and the French countertrade specialist Greficomex.
Many of the venture's customers are SMEs, according to Neil Caplan, the
company's president. The company can provide switch agreements for exporters
and importers, obviating the need for hard currency.
However, where the importer cannot come up with the necessary confirmed
letters of credit or bank guarantees, it can arrange pre-export finance
against a suitable guarantee from the exporter.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940127

