FT943-13202

FT  21 JUL 94 / Left MEPs put Santer presidency at risk


   By LIONEL BARBER


   STRASBOURG


The appointment of Mr Jacques Santer as the next president of the European
Commission appeared on a knife-edge last night after the powerful Socialist
group in the European parliament voted overwhelmingly against his candidacy.
The Socialists' stand, supported by Green and Liberal MEPs, fuelled
uncertainty ahead of today's parliamentary vote on Mr Santer's candidacy.
The mood was heightened by a new assertiveness at this week's inaugural
session of the parliament.
Supporters of Mr Santer, the long-serving Luxembourg prime minister, seemed
confident of reaching the necessary simple majority of votes cast in the
567-strong parliament. But they conceded that his last-minute emergence as a
compromise candidate to succeed Mr Jacques Delors had irritated MEPs and
could provoke a large number of abstentions.
The failure of Mr Santer's candidacy would trigger a political crisis
between the member states and the parliament. Last night, Ms Pauline Green,
leader of the Socialist group and a British Labour party MEP, said MEPs were
unhappy at the lack of consultation by the member state governments, and the
UK veto of early favourite Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, Belgium's premier.
She added that the parliament would shortly draw up a short-list of viable
candidates to succeed Mr Delors. 'We are voting against because of the
squalid nature in which the Santer candidacy came about,' she said.
Last night's Socialist group vote was 108 against the candidacy, 38 for, and
4 abstentions. Some 41 MEPs were absent. The Greek and Spanish delegations
reserved the right to vote according to their consciences, but were expected
to come under pressure today.
Mr Klaus Hansch, new president of the European Parliament, made clear in his
maiden speech that MEPs had the power to derail the Santer candidacy.
'Legally speaking this is only a consultation, but politically speaking any
candidate that does not receive majority support from this parliament will
fail.'
Looking for trap-door, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940721

