FT942-14291

FT  21 APR 94 / Wages data spark fears


   By PHILIP COGGAN


News of an increase in the rate of growth in average earnings raised
inflation fears in the City yesterday.
The Department of Employment said that underlying growth in earnings was 3.5
per cent in the 12 months to January, compared with its earlier estimate of
3.25 per cent. In February, the annual rate was unchanged at 3.5 per cent.
The main reason for the increase, according to the employment department,
was bonus payments, particularly in the banking sector.
However, recent figures from Incomes Data Services, the pay analysis group,
have shown that pay settlements have been increasing this year, with the
majority of deals ahead of the inflation rate. Furthermore, the actual -
rather than the underlying - rate of increase in earnings in the 12 months
to February was 4.4 per cent, up from 3.6 per cent in January.
This may indicate that the underlying rate has further to rise, especially
as higher public-sector pay deals, such as those for doctors and teachers,
will shortly be absorbed in the figures.
The underlying increase in service-sector earnings in the 12 months to
February was 3.25 per cent, while that in manufacturing was 4.5 per cent.
Mr Robbie Gilbert, the Confederation of British Industry's director of
employment affairs, said: 'We need to keep a firm hold on pay. Earnings
increases in the UK, after allowing for inflation, remain above the European
average.'
Figures for unit wage costs reflect the rising earnings trend. In the three
months to February, wages and salaries per unit output in the manufacturing
sector were 1.8 per cent higher than they were in the same period a year
earlier. The three-monthly rate has picked up from 1.7 per cent in January
and 1.2 per cent in September.
However, for the whole economy, unit wage costs in the fourth quarter of
1993 were only 0.5 per cent higher than in the same period a year earlier.
Productivity continues to grow; in the fourth quarter of 1993, output per
head was 2.4 per cent higher than a year earlier.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940421

