FT944-5811

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Management Buy-Outs (5): Successful connection -
Small MBOs / Peggy Hollinger on New World Payphones


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


Richard Thompson will be paying a Pounds 1m phone bill this year, and he
could not be happier. The bill is hard evidence that the chief executive of
New World Payphones is making some headway into British Telecom's
stranglehold on the vast public telephone market.
Less than a year ago, however, Mr Thompson's company, which installs and
maintains payphones linked to BT's network, was facing the possibility of
being cut off just when prospects seemed brightest.
New World had won a number of substantial contracts, including one to
install payphones on the London Underground. Yet its parent company, Antah
Holdings Berhad, the diversified Malaysian group, was reluctant to provide
the additional working capital to carry out the work.
For years NWP had been making losses. Antah was now being asked not only to
fund those losses, but to provide additional support to fund the company's
growth until it could return to profit. That required what one of the small
company's eventual backers describes as 'an act of faith'.
'New World needed resources to take it past the break-even point,' says Ian
Hawkins of Phildrew Ventures, the venture capital firm which supported an
Pounds 8.15m management buy-out in May this year. 'The company had a
substantial order book and prospect list. If one was prepared to make that
act of faith, give it all-equity funding and sufficient resources to install
that order book, one could get it rapidly through break-even and into the
virtuous cicle of generating cash to fund its own growth.'
Six months after the MBO, New World is 'profitable, but it is still
investing faster than it is making profits', Mr Hawkins says.
New World is just one of the rising number of smaller management buy-outs
completed in the past year. Smaller MBOs may be getting more popular, but
that does not mean it is any easier for management to find backers.
In general, small MBOs of between Pounds 1m and Pounds 10m take up more
time, require more help through the growth period and are more difficult to
exit than the larger buy-outs.
'With a bigger company the prospect of a float is obvious,' says Paul Jobson
of ECi, the venture capital firm which specialises in smaller buy-outs.
'With the smaller one it may not be big enough and will be more dependent on
the trade sale.'
Smaller MBOs also present greater risk for potential funders. 'Larger
companies have a certain momentum in place,' says Mr Jobson. 'You need to do
more through due diligence to get comfortable with the risk of backing
buy-outs on smaller companies which may not have that momentum.'
One of the biggest risks from the venture capitalists' point of view is
often management.
'A bigger company can afford a bigger and better management team,' says Mr
Hawkins of PhilDrew Ventures. 'Usually, in a smaller company, the chief
executive has taken on a number of responsibilities.' This, in many cases,
means a flawed or overstretched management.
The first demand from potential backers is usually to strengthen the team,
with candidates introduced by venture capitalists.
This does not mean that smaller companies are forced to undergo what the
trade calls a Bimbo - a combined buy-in and management buy-out. Bimbos
generally mean the introduction of a chief executive.
In smaller buy-outs, the chief executive remains and a few 'grey hairs' are
brought in to guide and advise the newly independent management.
In New World's case, Phildrew sought to balance the youthful team - Mr
Thompson is 36 - with the experience of 51-year-old Derek Harris, former
chairman of Linx Technologies. There are also plans to appoint a part-time
finance director.
'It was felt it would be useful to have someone on board who was used to
going through the growing pains,' Mr Hawkins said. 'So when they get
over-excited there will be someone to calm them down and help them to get on
with the business.'
Once the management team is strengthened, smaller companies will be under
greater pressure to produce organic growth than their larger colleagues.
Growth by acquisition is an option reserved for larger companies, where
cashflow can be used to service debt. Small, growing businesses need every
penny to fund their everyday businesses.
Smaller buy-outs are generally structured with these pressures in mind.
Large amounts of debt are seen to be inappropriate for young growing
companies. 'With an already high-risk transaction it is imprudent to add to
the risk by overloading it with debt,' says Mr Jobson.
This is not done merely out of generosity. Venture capitalists need a
profitable exit which is not likely to materialise unless these smaller
companies reach a certain critical size. To do this purely by organic growth
is a challenging task.
Venture capitalists also demand higher returns from smaller MBOs. According
to Mr Hawkins, venture capitalists would expect returns of about 25 per cent
per annum from the very biggest buy-outs of Pounds 100m or more. Development
capital could call for returns of up to 50 per cent per annum.
Yet he disputes that this means there is greater value in the small company
arena. In the end, the larger MBOs are inherently the better bets, he says.
'Higher returns are generated by larger transactions because the degree to
which the pricing falls as you get to the smaller deal is not as great as
the degree to which the risk increases,' says Mr Hawkins.
Mr Jobson of ECi disagrees. 'The big buy-out market is over-farmed so the
pricing gets silly,' he says. 'There is value to be had in the small sector,
but it also means there is more work to do.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941201

