FT942-12745

FT  28 APR 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): After the dust has
settled - Roland Adburgham and Diane Summers look at the impact of Hoover's
ill-fated free-flights promotion


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM and DIANE SUMMERS


For well over half a century Hoover has been the generic term for a vacuum
cleaner. However, after more than 18 months of being linked constantly to
the phrase 'free-flights fiasco', the name may now be as readily associated
in some minds with a disastrous sales promotion.
Last week Maytag, Hoover's US parent company, disclosed that the ill-fated
promotion had cost the company more than Pounds 48m - more than double the
sum originally feared when Maytag took stock of the damage early last year.
The promotion which caused all the trouble closes this week. In reality,
Hoover will feel the reverberations of its free-flights offer for some time
to come. There are also signs that consumer attitudes have hardened towards
'free offers' in general, with companies more cautious in their approach to
sales promotions of every kind.
The problem for Hoover started in autumn 1992 when it promised customers who
spent at least Pounds 100 on a Hoover product two free air tickets to
continental Europe or the US. From the customers' point of view, it seemed
the bargain of the decade. Demand was such that Hoover, which employs 3,500
people in the UK, had to step up production of vacuum cleaners which were
just over the Pounds 100 threshold.
It rapidly became clear that Hoover had grotesquely underestimated the
take-up of the offer. Thousands of customers were infuriated by delays in
obtaining flights. Maytag intervened. Three senior executives lost their
jobs and a taskforce, at its peak employing 250 people, was set up.
Peter le Conte, chairman of the Institute of Sales Promotion (ISP), says
that Hoover could have done 'a lot more a lot earlier' when it became clear
the promotion was going awry.
'Perhaps instead of wriggling, it would have been better to have come clean
and try and do something else,' he says. Le Conte suggests, for example,
that the company might have been able to fulfil its obligations on flights
over a period of years.
The offer itself was flawed, from the first, he adds: 'In my book it doesn't
stack up to be able to buy a product for Pounds 100-Pounds 200 and fly to
America for significantly more than the cost of the product you purchased.'
The sheer scale of the take-up of the promotion has been breathtaking:
Hoover says 220,000 people have now flown or are booked on flights up to
June. The taskforce is now winding down.
'By the end of this month, or by the end of June, Hoover will have fulfilled
its commitments and obligations,' says Hoover spokeswoman, Caroline Knight.
Not so, claims a group of dissatisfied consumers which has organised itself
as the Hoover Holiday Pressure Group. Last week three leaders of the group
flew to Maytag's headquarters in Iowa accompanied by boxes containing what
the group said were 7,000 letters of complaint, and on Tuesday the group's
representatives spoke at the company's annual general meeting.
The group has yet to decide whether it will pursue legal action in the High
Court in London. Hoover has already faced about 70 cases in small claims
courts, all of which it has defended, and about one in five of which it has
lost.
The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), the advertising watchdog, is
currently investigating seven consumer complaints and the ISP has also asked
the ASA to examine whether the promotions industry's voluntary code of
practice has been breached.
The code sets out, in general terms, promoters' responsibilities not to
disappoint consumers and to make realistic calculations of the likely
response to a promotion. However, according to Keith Richards, a barrister
at the Consumers' Association, the code lacks teeth. The association, which
is still dealing with complaints from dissatisfied Hoover customers, would
like to see the ASA, or a similar body, having the power to fine companies
which breach the code.
'I'm sure consumers are now shaken and will not be so readily willing to be
taken in by sales promotions,' says Richards.
Le Conte agrees that the Hoover case has 'caused people to be more cynical,
which is extremely unfortunate'. But he says the ISP has seen a big upturn
in companies seeking legal and copy advice before they go ahead with
promotions. 'Everybody is super-aware that promotions that go wrong can
seriously damage your health,' he says.
Hoover denies that any long-term damage has been done either to sales or to
the company's image. Says Knight: 'Customers are able to differentiate
between a quality product and, regrettably, a flawed promotion. Our sales
figures indicate that the brand has not suffered and we have maintained
market share.'
There does not appear to be any evidence that Hoover sales have been
damaged. Scottish Power, one of Scotland's largest electrical retailers,
says there was a temporary dip in Hoover sales after the offer, which was
promoted particularly hard in its territory and provoked a great deal of
adverse publicity.
It may be, though, that this dip was caused by a glut of second-hand vacuum
cleaners on the market, as people disposed of machines purchased only to
fulfill the conditions of the promotion. Whatever the reason, sales soon
recovered, says the retailer.
Hoover even had enough confidence last year to offer a new travel promotion
and could do so again in the future. Says Knight: 'Travel remains a very key
motivator in sales promotions.'
Although the company must be assuming the worst is over, it looks likely
that the consequences of the offer will drag on for months, if not years. In
the longer term it can only hope the 'free-flights fiasco' will be a
relatively short-lived association and that Hoover will mean vacuum cleaners
for at least another 50 years.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940428

