FT943-13101

FT  21 JUL 94 / Study gives boost to Clinton healthcare plan


   By JEREMY KAHN


   WASHINGTON


The US Treasury yesterday provided ammunition for the administration's
healthcare reform initiative, with a report that 84 per cent of the 37m
Americans without health insurance were from working families.
The Treasury defined working families as those in which at least one spouse
had a permanent full-time job.
'The bottom line: the uninsured are your middle-income working neighbours,'
said Mr Lloyd Bentsen, Treasury secretary, as he announced the results of
the Treasury study.
Mr Bentsen said the administration hoped these findings would dispel the
myth that the 'uninsured are poor, or disabled, or elderly'.
The average uninsured family has an income of Dollars 30,000 (Pounds
19,700), well above the federal definition of poverty, says the report,
which also finds that close to 25 per cent of uninsured Americans are
children.
'Millions of children across
this country have no insurance,' Mr Bentsen said. 'Children don't hire
lobbyists. They don't have anyone to speak for them in this debate, but they
are the ones most vulnerable.'
As Congress nears the legislative phase of healthcare reform, Mr Bentsen and
President Bill Clinton moved to clarify statements made by Mr Clinton
yesterday. Mr Clinton had said that while his goal was for 'universal
coverage' he would accept a reform package that 'moved towards' universal
coverage.
'I don't see the president backing down,' Mr Bentsen said. 'I think
universal coverage, when you define what we are talking about, is
guaranteeing the right to every American of insurance.'
Mr Bentsen also said that the administration 'preferred' to achieve such
coverage by making it mandatory for employers to pay to insure their
workers, but the president would accept an alternative proposal if it still
covered all Americans.
Mr Bentsen was confident congressional leaders could be convinced to pass
healthcare reform this year, but he refused to comment on whether the
administration's initiative could be passed.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940721

