FT944-10906

FT  08 NOV 94 / Rakhmonov to become first Tajikistan president


   By REUTER


   DUSHANBE


Mr Imamali Rakhmonov, Tajikistan's parliamentary chairman and acting head of
state, won the central Asian republic's first presidential election, taking
60 per cent of the vote, according to official preliminary results announced
yesterday, Reuter reports from Dushanbe. His opponent, Mr Abdumalik
Abdulajanov, a former prime minister and at present Tajikistan's ambassador
to Moscow, won 35 per cent in Sunday's contest.
'Despite pessimistic forecasts, the referendum for a new constitution and
election took place,' Mr Kadriddin Giosov, commission chairman, said. 'We
did our best to ensure the election was free and democratic.' Another
official said more than 90 per cent of the 2.6m electorate had voted for a
new constitution which among other things creates a presidential system.
Mr Abdulajanov's team alleged on Sunday there had been cases of ballot boxes
being fraudulently stuffed with votes for Mr Rakhmonov, and that some other
votes had been tampered with. The electoral commission and observers from
the Commonwealth of Independent States said they had seen no human rights
abuses during the vote.
'My opinion. . . is that from the legal point of view, the election went
well,' said Mr Artur Zurimbovsky of the CIS secretariat. The Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and the UN declined to send
monitors. Diplomats said the CSCE was concerned that the government's real
opposition, an alliance of Islamic groups and liberals, did not take part in
the election.
Many opposition leaders are in exile in Afghanistan, from where their
fighters have launched cross-border raids since losing a civil war in late
1992. Some analysts said that, given the opposition boycott, the election
would not help resolve deep problems in Tajikistan, where clan loyalty is
seen as more important than ideology. 'They have the same guy (again) and I
have my doubts that the opposition will accept this,' one diplomat said
yesterday.
Mr Rakhmonov, a former state farm director, comes from the southern-based
Kulyabi clan, which was at the leading edge of the battle to oust the
rebels. Mr Abdulajanov, from the industrialised north, was seen by many
diplomats and analysts as better placed to deal with the exiled opposition.
He served as premier in an opposition-led government but kept his post under
the new administration.
Observer, Page 17

The Financial Times


International Page 6

941108

