FT941-5500

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: Great painters of patronage - William Packer reviews
Gainsboroughs and Reynolds in the Royal Collections


   By WILLIAM PACKER


Contrasts in Royal Patronage may be its sub-title, but the contrasts
presented in this latest exhibition from the Royal Collections are of more
than the one sort. Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds were the two
pre-eminent English artists of the 18th century, more or less
contemporaries, both of them successful in their careers, and patronised
alike at Court. Yet together they were as chalk and cheese, not enemies
exactly but certainly rivals. One was equable in temperament and of steady
application to his work, the other more volatile and inconsistent. Reynolds
was the first President and pillar of the Academy, Gainsborough the
quarrelsome founder member who at last would have nothing to do with it.
How nice the irony that it should have been the urbane and reliable Reynolds
whom the conventional and proper-minded George III and his Queen, Charlotte,
could hardly stand, the more raffish Gainsborough whom they adored. But
personal preference never got in the way of the business of collecting, for
the King bought and commissioned from both artists regardless. The
infinitely more rakish George IV, as Prince of Wales, got on equally well
with both of them and continued to collect their works long after their
deaths.
It was Prinny indeed who acquired from Reynolds' niece, Lady Thomond, the
two important mythological pieces, the 'Death of Dido' and 'Cymon and
Iphigenia', each with its central, voluptuous reclining female nude. He had
long had the small enamel copies of them, by Henry Bone, hanging in his
private bedroom at Carlton House. These are late and unusual works in the
oeuvre, representing as they do the ambition common to so many artists of
the time, to succeed as a painter of history, which was to be considered a
painter of the highest sort. They had been hanging obscurely within the
Royal collection for many years and their reappearance now, newly cleaned,
is the chief surprise of the show.
'Damn him, how various he is', said Gainsborough of Reynolds, and it is
clear that the two men had a real if sometimes somewhat puzzled admiration
for each other. 'He often wondered at Reynolds' equal application', said one
of Gainsborough's daughters, having remarked how her father 'often exceeded
the bounds of temperance and his Health suffered from it, being occasionally
unable to work for a week afterwards.' Reynolds, for his part, thought
Gainsborough 'had a painter's eye but not a painter's mind,' yet had finally
to concede that the painter was there nonetheless. 'It is certain that all
those odd scribbles and marks . . . so observable in Gainsborough . . .
appear rather the effect of accident than design', yet 'this chaos . . . by
a kind of magic, at a certain distance assumes form . . . so that we can
hardly refuse acknowledging the full effect of diligence, under the
appearance of chance and hasty negligence.'
Such contrast, as demonstrated in the work itself, is the true subject of
this exhibition. There is Reynolds, himself magnificently diligent, the
master of the full-length and theatrical machine - 'The Marquess of Granby',
the bald and booted C-in-C, off at the wars; 'The Duke of York' resplendent
in his Garter robes. He is no less impressive on a smaller, more intimate
scale. He was, as some artists are - Rembrandt, Van Gogh, David - a constant
self-portraitist, and the late image of himself, grey-haired, red-cheeked
and bespectacled, is the most delicate and touching painting in the show.
And there is Gainsborough, all light and air, the brush flicking and dusting
across the surface of the canvas, conjuring form and texture, flesh and
blood out of nothing in just the way that Reynolds found so bemusing.
According to James Northcote, a pupil of Reynolds, the lovely state portrait
of Queen Charlotte was 'actual motion, and done with such light, airy
facility'. Even more spectacular in this respect is the three-quarter length
of the Duchess of Cumberland, the head and hair perfectly realised and the
rest, sleeves, dress and bodice, a calligraphic tour-de-force, at once
unfinished and as effectively descriptive as could be.
Gainsborough in 1788, dying of a tumour in the neck, sent word to Reynolds,
begging 'a last favour, which is to come under my Roof and look at my things
. . . if what I ask now is not disagreeable to your feeling . . .' Reynolds
came and the two were reconciled, 'any little jealousies . . . forgotten in
those moments of sincerity.' It is a nice story.
Gainsborough & Reynolds: Contrasts in Royal Patronage. at the Queen's
Gallery, Buckingham Palace SW1, until December 22.
The Zurbaran exhibition previewed in Friday's Arts page opens at the
National Gallery on March 9

The Financial Times


London Page XX

940305

