FT942-12163

FT  30 APR 94 / A black and white issue: Alan Pike describes how the
politics of race and colour is stirring up east London


   By ALAN PIKE


The mayor hammers his gavel to call members to order. In the distance,
demonstrators chant. Police patrol outside the building. The last council
meeting before next week's municipal elections is in session at Tower
Hamlets, east London.
Derek Beackon, the only candidate of the far-right British National Party
ever elected to a local authority, sits silent and ignored by other
councillors. He is the reason for the police presence. Since he won a
by-election in Tower Hamlets' Isle of Dogs neighbourhood on a Rights for
Whites platform in September, demonstrators have pursued him relentlessly.
East London's history contains enough heroes of political and social reform
to fill Valhalla: a whole alphabet of them from Attlee to Zangwill. The
unprepossessing Beackon does not look a natural candidate for the B section
alongside Annie Besant, Thomas Barnardo and William Booth. Yet if the BNP
were to strengthen its position in next week's elections he might well leave
a powerful, if negative, mark on this racially diverse, deprived inner city
area.
East London is immensely attached to its history, particularly an
interpretation of it that projects the area as a melting pot of cultures and
the birthplace of compassionate and progressive causes.
Only this month Tower Hamlets council presented the freedom of the borough
to the Salvation Army, founded by Booth in Stepney; the council is also
appealing to residents' nostalgic affection for their past with a campaign
to downplay the name Tower Hamlets and focus instead on the warm, friendly
old alternative of East End. New road signs tell visitors they are entering
the East End, while town hall telephone operators greet callers with the
response: 'Tower Hamlets, East End.'
The sense of recollection to which such a campaign appeals is inevitably
partial. Memories of East Enders taking to the streets in the 1930s to
resist Sir Oswald Moseley's British Union of Fascists, for instance, fit
more comfortably than the outcome of the 1937 London County Council
elections in Bethnal Green, when the fascists came second to Labour and beat
the Liberals to third place.
Yet both are facts, just like the outlandish fact that since September the
local government ward containing Canary Wharf - the internationally famous
symbol of the new, 21st century East End of the future - has been
represented by a BNP councillor.
Isle of Dogs residents who admit having put him in office, and say they will
vote BNP again next week, often add: 'But I am not racist.' Some are liars.
London dockers, who for generations have populated the Isle of Dogs, were
never among the most progressive sections of the working class; the
entrenched attitudes that barred outsiders from dock work are now exhibited
by some whites against Asian families moving to this predominantly white
part of the borough.
This does not mean that BNP support is based only on innate racism. After
Beackon's victory in September, the national Liberal Democrat party set up a
committee of inquiry under Lord Lester, QC.
Its conclusion that leaflets produced by members of Tower Hamlets Liberal
Democrat party, which controls the council, had exploited racial prejudice
in a bid for the support of white voters remains a matter of controversy in
the local party. But few Tower Hamlets residents would argue with the
committee's analysis of the background:
'It is not surprising that Tower Hamlets should be a potential breeding
ground for racism given the extent of social and economic deprivation, the
high proportion of relatively recent immigrants from rural Bangladesh, the
lack of adequate housing stock, the onerous statutory duties placed upon the
council to house homeless persons, the government's failure to provide
adequate resources to meet the pressing needs of this greatly deprived part
of London's East End.'
Labour and Liberal Democrat councillors - there are no Conservatives on
Tower Hamlets council - certainly endorse the criticism that the government
has failed to provide adequate resources. The question of whether
councillors themselves have inadvertently contributed to the BNP's growing
confidence - whether in their administration of this racially complex
borough, they have fallen short of the proud, progressive traditions on
which their crusade to reinstate the old image of the East End is built - is
a less comfortable one for them.
But concerns about racial bias in Tower Hamlets' housing policies have a
long pedigree. They began before Labour lost control of the council to the
Liberal Democrats in 1986; the Commission for Racial Equality issued a
non-discrimination notice in 1987, and the council's housing activities have
been the subject of continued monitoring and court actions since then.
The Lester report concluded that, since 1990 at least, there was 'ample
evidence' that the Liberal Democrat party at federal, national and regional
levels had been 'aware of problems in Tower Hamlets'; 300 Bangladeshi
members of the Tower Hamlets party wrote to the Lester committee alleging
racism against three Liberal Democrat councillors.
Labour has been unable to witness these events with detached purity. Some of
its own leaflets are alleged to have also played on white voters' concerns
over the allocation of housing to Asians, while the local party has never
dealt satisfactorily with claims that false canvas returns exaggerating BNP
support were leaked during the by-election and became self-fulfilling.
Whatever the causes of the growth in BNP support, the potential consequences
are particularly serious in Tower Hamlets. The council is the most
decentralised in Britain, with services and decision-making devolved to
seven neighbourhoods. Election of only two more councillors alongside Derek
Beackon would give the BNP control of Isle of Dogs neighbourhood. A further
three would bring control of Globe Town. Winning both would put Pounds 40m
of discretionary spending in the BNP's hands.
Liberal Democrats - promoters of decentralisation - point to surveys
indicating the policy has popular support; critics say it has deprived
councillors of a collective, unifying sense of responsibility for the
borough as a whole, turning them instead into parish managers - and their
electorates into inward looking parishioners - and that the BNP has
capitalised on this.
Next week, the Liberal Democrat and Labour parties that dominate Tower
Hamlets politics must persuade one of Britain's most racially volatile areas
to step back from a further vote for extremism. Labour's Arthur Downes,
longest serving member of Tower Hamlets council, points to the dilemma they
face: 'There is a feeling among the people of the Isle of Dogs that the
Conservative government has let them down, the Liberal Democrat controlled
Tower Hamlets council has let them down and the Labour controlled Isle of
Dogs neighbourhood has let them down.
'In the past, they believed no one listened when they complained that they
felt let down. Now that they have elected a BNP councillor the political
parties, press, television and opinion pollsters are all listening. That is
a very difficult perception to deal with in an election campaign.'
Neither do the main parties go united into the fight - the aftermath of
Derek Beackon's win has worsened divisions in both Labour and the Liberal
Democrats and break-away factions are standing against the official parties.
The last council meeting before the election draws to a close. Councillors
leave the chamber for the most important campaign they have ever fought
carrying their agenda papers, covered with the borough coat of arms and
motto.
It is the old Stepney council motto, so familiar to those heroes of the East
End's political past, translated from Latin and retained when Tower Hamlets
was formed in 1965. A Magnis ad Maiora. From Great Things to Greater. Next
week will determine whether, in 1994, it should end with a question mark.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940430

