FT942-12843

FT  27 APR 94 / EMI chief drops call for narrow currency bands


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy, president of the European Monetary Institute,
yesterday told the European Parliament he had changed his mind about the
need to revive the exchange rate mechanism's narrow fluctuation bands.
Currency stability was the fundamental objective, he said.
Mr Lamfalussy's remarks on the future of the ERM reflect a new consensus
among central bankers, the European Commission and the Bundesbank that the
15 per cent fluctuation bands - introduced as a crisis measure last August -
have helped not only to deter speculators but to reinforce currency
stability.
The EMI president said he favoured keeping the wide bands for as long as
possible. 'A forced return (to the old ERM) which fails would be the worst
possible outcome.'
The unexpected success of the crisis measures still leaves ministers with a
dilemma: how to reconcile the 15 per cent bands with the Maastricht treaty's
provision that a currency must be a member of the 'normal' ERM bands for at
least two years in order to qualify to join a future single European
currency.
Mr Lamfalussy suggested that ministers would probably decide by the end of
the year whether to describe 15 per cent as normal. This would keep alive
hopes of moving to a single currency by the first target date of January 1
1997. 'With wide bands, 1997 becomes more feasible,' he said.
But in his testimony to the parliament's monetary affairs committee, Mr
Lamfalussy spelt out formidable technical obstacles to European Monetary
Union. These included planning for a single monetary policy; harmonising
accounting rules and practices among national central banks; creating a
proper statistical base; the printing and issuing of a European banknote;
and a payments systems in the final stage of Emu.
Mr Lamfalussy expressed cautious optimism about exchange rate stability,
tempered by a warning to member states to reduce their budget deficits which
reached a record high last year.
Failure to do so risked an increase in long-term rates which could choke off
the incipient recovery in Europe.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940427

