FT944-2656

FT  16 DEC 94 / Gas chief faces grilling over salary


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mr Cedric Brown, the British Gas chief executive, is to be forced to deliver
a detailed public justification of the company's decision to give him a 75
per cent pay rise while cutting staff numbers and wages.
Mr Brown and two other executives of privatised utilities were yesterday
called to give evidence to an inquiry into executive salaries launched by
the Commons employment committee.
Mr Brown will appear at a public hearing in January, together with Mr James
Smith, chairman of Eastern Electric, and Sir Desmond Pitcher, chairman of
North West Water.
Mr Greville Janner, the committee's Labour chairman, said there was
'absolutely no doubt that the committee will want to ask Mr Brown about what
I regard as a very insensitive decision'.
The inquiry reflects growing concern among MPs of all parties about big
increases in executive salaries, especially those awarded to managers of the
privatised utility companies.
In a sign of the government's embarrassment on the issue, Mr John Major
condemned 'unjustified' executive pay rises in the Commons last month,
shortly after it was announced that Mr Brown's salary had been increased to
Pounds 475,000.
The cabinet's industry sub-committee yesterday discussed proposals drafted
with the support of Mr Major and Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, that
would make executive salary packages subject to affirmative resolutions by
shareholders. Yet there were indications that Mr Major's support for a
change in the law was cooling in the face of difficulties identified by Mr
Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary.
Mr Heseltine told the committee that tougher shareholder powers would hinder
companies' ability to hire the best staff, and warned that changes to
company law might be difficult to draft and might trigger opposition from
Tory MPs.
In the Commons Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, demanded regulation of
'excesses that are offensive to the British sense of justice'.
Mr Major accused him of seeking either rigid government controls on pay or
renationalisation. 'In one sense you oppose monopoly, in another sense you
oppose competition. The reality is that you just oppose the private sector,'
he said.
Later Mr Blair said the salaries of most privatised utility chairmen had
risen three times faster than average earnings since privatisation. In a
letter to the prime minister, Mr Blair said that top salaries had risen by
311 per cent in the gas industry, 497 per cent in telecommunications, 116
per cent in the water industry, and 25 per cent in the electricity industry.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941216

