FT941-17063

FT  06 JAN 94 / Greece snubs EU over Macedonia: Brussels fears refusal to
recognise republic may provoke border crisis


   By DAVID GARDNER


   ATHENS


Greece, which this week took over the presidency of the European Union,
refused yesterday to join its partners in recognising the former Yugoslav
republic of Macedonia.
Its resistance clouded hopes of a renewed effort to end the fighting in
Bosnia, and of the EU developing a common foreign and security policy.
Mr Andreas Papandreou, the Greek prime minister, refused to rule out closing
his country's frontier with Macedonia, raising the threat of a border crisis
while Athens is at the EU helm. Greece holds the rotating EU presidency
until July.
After a meeting in Athens with the European Commission to set EU policy
priorities for the six months, Mr Papandreou said 'it is not our intention
today to close the frontier' with Macedonia. But he warned that Athens
reserved its options and that Macedonia was dependent on Greece and the
Greek port of Thessaloniki for most of its trade.
Greece believes that the former Yugoslav Macedonia - which it refers to as
Skopje, the republic's capital - is making a territorial claim on the Greek
province of Macedonia, by virtue of its choice of name, its constitution and
its flag, which bears an ancient Macedonian dynastic emblem discovered in
1975 in northern Greece.
'For us this is a kind of irredentism, and what is more, a territorial
claim,' Mr Papandreou said. 'You cannot have neighbours threatening to
liberate your territory.'
Greece's partners have grown increasingly irritated with Athens' attempts to
block EU recognition of Macedonia, which several governments have likened to
Greek obstruction of closer links with Turkey because of the Turkish
occupation of part of Cyprus.
Five member states - the UK, Germany, France, the Netherlands and Denmark -
announced full diplomatic relations with Macedonia just before Greece took
over the EU presidency.
The depth of Greek feeling, shared by the government, opposition and public
opinion, was reflected by Mr Theodoros Pangalos, the Greek European affairs
minister who now chairs the Council of Ministers of the EU.
'You want us to love the people who hate us,' Mr Pangalos told journalists.
'Of course they hate us; does the IRA hate Britain? These people are
claiming half my country.'
Mr Pangalos said the Skopje government had to guarantee to respect Greece's
border, while Mr Papandreou hoped that those of his partners who had
recognised Macedonia 'will exert influence on them and not only on us'.
Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, steered well clear of the
Macedonian controversy, in spite of fears in Brussels and member state
capitals that it might provoke a fresh EU crisis.
But he appealed in Athens for a 'realistic . . . strategic view of Turkey's
importance' to a frustrated EU policy, which sees Ankara as a political and
commercial hub both in the eastern Mediterranean and for the central Asian
republics of the former Soviet Union.
Mr Papandreou defended Greece's blocking of Ecu400m (Pounds 315m) in aid to
Turkey, as well as its resistance to Ankara's EU membership application. 'We
cannot forget that there is a Turkish occupation of Cyprus after an
invasion,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940106

