FT943-13104

FT  21 JUL 94 / Reformist Belarus cabinet named


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


The new president of Belarus has named a cabinet chosen from among the most
reformist figures in the country's political class - in contradiction to his
campaign promises and his comments immediately after the election.
Mr Alexander Lukashenko was inaugurated as president of the former Soviet
state yesterday after a campaign promising closer union with Russia and an
end to the privatisation programme as well as to corruption.
Mr Lukashenko appointed a banker Mr Michael Chigir as his prime minister. In
his first news conference, Mr Chigir said: 'I stand for market reforms.
Belarus cannot be an island among states moving towards market reforms. For
the moment I am for state regulated prices, but that is only temporary. I
will pursue reforms.'
Further, Mr Lukashenko has asked Mr Stanislav Bogdankevich, head of the
central bank and the strongest opponent in the previous government of a
merger of the Russian and Belarus currencies, to continue in his post.
Mr Bogdankevich, previously regarded by Mr Lukashenko as one of a number of
corrupt officials he would sack, is also identified with the small and so
far weak group of market reformers in the Belarus government.
'Lukashenko's programme will be pro-market,' he said. 'There is simply no
other way to go.'
These moves appear to show that Mr Lukashenko, even more than Mr Leonid
Kuchma, the new president of Ukraine elected at the same time, is
positioning himself to bring in a quite different policy in government than
that laid out to his electors. Mr Kuchma, generally seen as pro-Russian and
elected with the support of the Communist and Socialist groups, has since
also revealed himself as pro-reform and for the retention of full
independence.
However, the plight of both Belarus and Ukraine remains perilous. The two
states were heavily dependent on the Soviet military for the purchase of
their industrial output and on the supply of cheap energy from Russia for
the continued profitability of their plants. The collapse of defence orders
and the rise of energy prices to near world market levels have decimated
their industries and living standards.
It now seems likely that they will seek to negotiate an economic agreement
with Russia aimed at ending tariff and customs barriers between them and
re-establishing links between their enterprises.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940721

