FT943-12743

FT  23 JUL 94 / Fears of summer violence in Paris: Hot weather brings threat
of revived racial attacks


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


The insalubrious suburbs of France's cities have long been prey to racial
violence but last week's tragedy at Dreux, one of the poorest outer suburbs
of Paris, sent shock waves around the country. Five armed youths drove into
a ghetto area and fired indiscriminately at a group of North Africans,
injuring 10 of them.
Dreux is already notorious for its high crime rate and social problems. Yet
last week's violence, which ended with one of the armed youths being shot
dead by the police, has fuelled fears that France is set for another summer
of discontent in les zups, its deprived suburban ghettoes.
'The Dreux incident may just be the beginning,' says Ms Sophie Body-Gendrot,
professor of political science at the Sorbonne in Paris and an expert on
urban problems. 'The situation in some urban areas is now at breaking
point.'
Fresh violence would be a setback for the authorities, who have in recent
years made progress in reducing unrest in les zups.
Summers have traditionally been difficult periods for France's deprived
urban areas. 'It's the time of year when tension tends to be at its
highest,' says Mr Henri Rey, a research fellow specialising in urban issues
at L'Institut d'Etudes Politiques in Paris. 'It's so hot, particularly in
southern cities like Marseilles, that people open their windows at night so
they're left fully exposed to the noise and promiscuity of living in cramped
conditions.'
The worst summer in recent times was in 1981, when Les Minguettes, one of
the most depressed suburbs of Lyons, erupted in a vicious race riot that
triggered riots in other cities, notably Paris and Marseilles.
Successive governments and local authorities across France have since made
heavy investments in trying to improve conditions.
Some of the old buildings, many flung up in the early 1960s to house North
African immigrants entering France from its old colonies in large numbers,
have since been renovated or replaced. There have also been efforts to
create youth projects such as training centres and special summer
initiatives such as extra sports facilities and seaside trips to keep
potential troublemakers off the streets.
'These initiatives have had a positive effect,' says Mr Rey. 'There's still
appalling poverty and violence in les zups. But the situation has improved
since the early 1980s. People then thought that the French ghettoes would
eventually become as bad as those of the United States. That hasn't happened
and there seems to have been less violence in recent years.'
However there is now concern that racial tension is rising again. The French
recession has made life even more difficult in les zups, particularly for
young people. The overall level of unemployment in Dreux is estimated at 15
per cent (against a national average of 12.7 per cent), but youth workers
estimate that it is as high as 70 per cent for school-leavers.
Further, the pressure on government budgets has forced the Balladur
administration to cut public expenditure in many areas, including urban
programmes. Local finances are also under strain as many authorities
struggle to repay the debts amassed in the 1980s.
As a result there is less money available for urban renewal initiatives and
youth summer schemes. 'It's impossible to assess the precise impact of the
cuts, but conditions in some areas have deteriorated and one gets the
impression that there's less for the kids to do this summer,' says Ms
Body-Gendrot. 'Is that likely to undo some of the progress of recent years
and to lead to more violence? Yes. I'm very much afraid that it will.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940723

