FT942-16185

FT  12 APR 94 / UK Elections - Major's Campaign: Party seeks to play a
holding game - Local authority polls, May 5 / The next eight weeks will see
voters deliver a comprehensive mid-term judgement on John Major's embattled
Conservative government. As campaigns get under way in local and European
polls and in five parliamentary by-elections. FT writers survey the
electoral battlegrounds


   By JOHN AUTHERS, ROLAND ADBURGHAM, JAMES BUXTON, PAUL CHEESERIGHT, IAN
HAMILTON FAZEY and CHRIS TIGHE


London is likely to pose Mr John Major's greatest local government electoral
test next month. The national media's traditional interest in the capital
will influence this, but there are also sound political reasons why London
should hog headlines.
Councillors facing re-election this year were elected in 1990, when the poll
tax, or community charge, was introduced. That helped condemn the
Conservatives to appalling results everywhere in England, apart from London.
There the 'flagship' rightwing boroughs of Wandsworth and Westminster, which
set the two lowest poll tax figures in England, saw strong swings towards
the Conservatives, while the party also took control of less publicised
boroughs, including Ealing and Brent. The poll tax, plus the alleged 'London
effect' which held that Londoners were uniquely annoyed by the antics of
'loony left' Labour councils, were held to blame.
The Conservatives must defend a sizeable presence in London, having taken 13
of the 32 boroughs at the last election.
Labour has regained Hillingdon in west London through by-elections, while
Brent and Ealing, along with Enfield, would all be vulnerable to a Labour
recovery.
Harrow (where the Liberal Democrats are the main rivals), Croydon (where the
Conservatives have 41 to Labour's 29) and Redbridge could all see the Tories
lose control if the night goes badly for them, while double-figure swings
would wrest control of Barnet, Bexley, and Bromley.
London also presents challenges for the Liberal Democrats, who hope to gain
the one seat they need for overall control of Kingston. They also have hopes
in several traditional Labour boroughs, including Waltham Forest in east
London, and two inner-London Labour strongholds - Lambeth and Southwark.
Tower Hamlets, where the ruling Liberal Democrats have been accused of
racism, is another test of strength.
Outside London the opposition parties are busy playing down expectations, as
their strong 1990 performance limits chances of further gains.
While all London councillors face re-election, only a third of metropolitan
council seats are up for election, along with a third of seats on 114
district councils in England and Wales and the Scottish regions. About
two-thirds of district councils in the shires are not going to the polls
this year.
Calculating potential winners and losers where only a third of seats are
contested is complicated.
Even in the south-west, where the Liberal Democrats made strong advances in
last year's county council elections, the Lib Dems speak only of 'cautious
optimism'. Unless they capitalise on Tory turmoil, they may be disappointed.
The Conservatives privately accept that their best hope is to hold seats
rather than gain them. With the elections turning into a vote of confidence,
or lack of it, in the government and Mr John Major's leadership, one Tory
official ruefully described the introduction this month of higher taxes as
'interesting timing'. The party's campaigners fear that even if disaffected
supporters do not vote against them, they may abstain.
Of the largest cities, the Conservatives no longer control any council with
the exception of Derby, where they have a casting vote, while Trafford, in
Greater Manchester, is the only Conservative-controlled metropolitan
district.
Their hopes of regaining Birmingham, lost in 1984 to Labour which now has a
seven-seat majority, subsided on March 24 when Labour won a by-election in a
ward which once had a Tory majority of more than 1,000 and had never had a
Labour councillor.
Focusing on Birmingham may have been at the expense of neighbouring Dudley,
where Labour has control by virtue of a by-election win. The Conservatives
also seem exposed in Walsall and Wolverhampton, which they run without
overall control.
Liverpool is an unusual contest. The controlling Labour group is fighting on
two fronts - against the Liberal Democrats and 'Liverpool Labour
councillors', a 17-strong, leftwing faction expelled from the party in 1990.
Liberal Democrats believe Labour is on the defensive, having imposed a 20
per cent rise in council tax this year to make the city's rate the highest
in England. The Liberal Democrats have 39 seats compared with the 49 held by
Labour.
Another council where special factors come into play is South Tyneside. Few
councils in Britain could be more rock-solidly Labour. The party has 55
councillors, the Liberal Democrats four and the Progressives - a local brand
of independent - one. Yet Labour is divided into two factions, known as the
A Team and the B Team.
Labour's national executive has conducted an inquiry and the result is
expected soon. The Liberal Democrats, for the first time contesting all 20
seats up for election, will highlight the battle within the Labour camp and
could make one or two gains.
Labour hopes, however, to wrest Barrow-in-Furness in Cumbria from the
Conservatives' tenuous hold, which is secured at present only by the
allegiance of two independents.
In the south-west, Labour's best bet is Gloucester, where it is the largest
party on the hung city council and only needs two seats for outright
control. Exeter is another city where Labour is the largest party, although
the Conservatives have only two fewer seats and have not given up hope of
making gains in spite of their difficulties.
But Labour is not without problems of its own. In Bristol, which Labour
holds with a majority of 12, a party formed by disgruntled Bristol Rovers
football supporters, upset at the city's failure to find the club a stadium,
has gained broader backing. The so-called Bristol Party seeks to mount a
challenge in at least 10 Labour-held wards. Labour describes it as 'one of
those irritants'.
Bath, where the Conservatives are the largest party, is a target for the
Liberal Democrats, who in the general election defeated local Tory MP Mr
Chris Patten, now governor of Hong Kong. The Conservatives have 24 seats,
the Liberal Democrats 17, and Labour seven. The Liberal Democrats are also
confident of winning Weymouth and Portland in Dorset, and Colchester in
Essex.
In Wales, only four out of 37 district councils are holding elections, all
in the south: Newport, Swansea, Port Talbot and Rhondda. Labour is firmly in
the saddle, although in Swansea its overall majority is down to eight with
the Conservatives in second place, and the Liberal Democrats hope to gain
some ground from the Tories. But the Welsh elections are being held in the
knowledge that the councils are about to be reorganised, with elections to
unitary authorities in 1996.
In Scotland as well, the May elections are overshadowed by local government
reorganisation. The elections in the nine regions and three island councils
will be Scotland's last regional elections before the regions are abolished
in 1996.
In spite of the reduced significance of this year's poll, the elections are
likely to be an opportunity for Scottish voters to display their discontent
with the Tory party. After months of somnolence, Scottish politics has come
to life with a recent opinion poll showing support for the Tories at 13 per
cent.
Labour holds five regions, Strathclyde being the largest, with no party in
overall control in the others and independents dominating Borders, Dumfries
& Galloway and the islands. Since the Tories hold no councils and have no
expectations of doing so, there is not much further they can fall.
Report by John Authers, Roland Adburgham, James Buxton, Paul Cheeseright,
Ian Hamilton Fazey and Chris Tighe
 -----------------------------------------------
Borough battlelines are drawn
 -----------------------------------------------
LABOUR'S TORY TARGETS
Hillingdon
Brent
Enfield
Ealing
Harrow
Croydon
Redbridge
Walsall
Wolverhampton
Barrow-in-Furness
 -----------------------------------------------
LIB DEMS' TORY TARGETS
Bath
Colchester
Weymouth & Portland
Kingston upon Thames
 -----------------------------------------------
TORIES' LABOUR TARGETS
Birmingham
 -----------------------------------------------
LIB DEMS' LABOUR TARGETS
Lambeth
Southwark
Liverpool
 -----------------------------------------------
LIB DEMS COUNCILS AT RISK
Tower Hamlets
 -----------------------------------------------
ELECTIONS TO BE HELD IN:
 32 London boroughs
 36 Metropolitan districts
114 English shire districts
  4 Welsh districts
  9 Scottish regions
  3 Scottish islands
 -----------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940412

