FT944-2481

FT  16 DEC 94 / Mexico raises privatisation revenue targets


   By TED BARDACKE


   MEXICO CITY


Mexico is to embark on an ambitious new privatisation and foreign borrowing
programme designed to raise Dollars 5.5bn (3.5bn) in 1995, according to Mr
Jaime Serra Puche, the new finance minister.
The funds will be used to stimulate infrastructure investment and help
finance the country's large current account deficit.
Mr Serra said in an interview this week immediate candidates for
privatisation are the high-volume Mexico City-Queretaro and Mexico
City-Puebla toll roads and the country's ports. Significant revenues will
also come from the fees charged to new entrants in the long-distance
telephone service market when the former state-owned telephone company
Telmex is stripped of its monopoly status in January of 1997.
Although Mr Serra stopped short of designating the country's rail system and
secondary petrochemical plants among other state-owned industries to be sold
off, these sectors are expected to be included in the new privatisation
list. This would allow the Mexican government to reach its stated revenue
target without being forced to achieve the Dollars 5bn foreign borrowing
limit it has set for itself in 1995.
Privatisation of the railways would almost certainly require a
constitutional amendment, while the regulatory framework for petrochemical
privatisation already exists.
Funds raised from privatisation and other one-time revenues, together with
foreign borrowing by government entities, will be used to provide financing
guarantees and/or risk capital for private infrastructure projects. Export
promotion programs would also be targeted with these new revenues in an
attempt to reduce Mexico's trade deficit, which in the first nine months of
1994 grew by 31.9 per cent over the same period last year.
Mr Serra also acknowledged that privatisation and other structural reforms
had additional motives. He said the moves willsignal that Mexico was going
forward with the sort of reforms that would strengthen the confidence of
foreign investors in the country and lead to more capital inflows.
Most analysts consider securing sufficient foreign capital to be Mexico's
biggest macroeconomic challenge in the coming year. The government is
forecasting a current account deficit of 7.8 per cent of GDP, or
approximately Dollars 30.5bn, a slight increase over 1994's estimate of 7.6
per cent and Dollars 29bn respectively. This year capital inflows fell short
by some Dollars 7bn, causing a corresponding drop in international reserves,
which now stand in the neighbourhood of Dollars 17bn.
Mr Serra rejected a similar fall in reserves during 1995, arguing that if
capital inflows were to slow down so would the economy and imports. At the
same time, however, he did acknowledge that this was a long-run relationship
and there could be a short-term gap between the supply of foreign capital
and demand for foreign goods, as happened in 1994.
'The reserves exist to cover this gap,' said Mr Serra, rejecting time and
time again in the interview that the way to soften a possible shortfall in
the capital account was via a devaluation in the peso.
Were such a gap to repeat itself in 1995, Mr Serra said that although 'we're
not going to mess with the markets,' he would rather see interest rates
raised before he would agree to a one-off devaluation of the peso or an
increase in the daily depreciation of the exchange rate band.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941216

