FT941-16799

FT  07 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Washington holds key to Cuba's
farming future - Agricultural exports could blossom if the US lifted its
embargo


   By CANUTE JAMES


Cuban agriculture could become a significant force on markets, including the
US, if Washington's trade embargo on the Caribbean island was lifted,
according to a group of experts that discussed the island's agriculture at a
recent conference in Miami on Central American and Caribbean trade.
It also concluded, however, that it would take the country many years after
the ending of an embargo to adjust to a global market very different from
that which prevailed at the time of the 1959 revolution.
It was also thought unlikely that the island republic would be able to
regain any of the significant markets it lost, as these had been taken over
by other producers who would not easily be dislodged.
'Cuba has not been sitting still in agriculture despite the many setbacks,'
said Mr John Lamb, associate director for international trade of Chemonics
International of the US. 'The sector employs 19 per cent of the country's
workers and accounts for 75 per cent of its foreign earnings.' The changes
to Cuba's agriculture that were implemented by the government last September
were intended to deal with current problems of production shortfalls, and
did not seek to lift production to find new markets, the experts concluded.
The Cuban government has allowed increased private participation in
agriculture with the establishment of new co-operative farms and
individually-run farms - but these still operate within the framework of the
state's continuing control of the economy.
The sugar industry, the main pillar of Cuban agriculture, would face some
difficulty in regaining markets even if the embargo was lifted, Mr Lamb
said. He noted that before the 1959 revolution, Cuba had a half of the US
sugar market at a time when US cane sugar imports were about 6m tonnes a
year. But US cane sugar consumption was now only about 3m tonnes a year.
The experts reasoned that, if the trade embargo ended, Cuba could be
attractive to US investors in agriculture wanting an offshore location. Mr
Lamb said the island had good soil and flat land, adequate water, a large,
trained labour force, minimal pest problems, good ports and a sound internal
transportation infrastructure.
The Cuban citrus industry was supported by an extensive research system,
said Mr Gene Albrigo, a horticulturalist with the Citrus Research and
Education Centre of the University of Florida. 'Over 60 per cent of the
trees are under 15 years old. There are adequate facilities in the packing
houses, of which there are 25, with two more being built.
The industry has several forms of joint agreements with Chilean, British,
Spanish, Israeli and Greek companies.' Cuba's impact on the US or other
markets would not be immediate if the embargo was lifted, the experts
concluded. They expected that first efforts would be for an expansion of
domestic food crops for local consumption, and a rehabilitation of the sugar
industry because of its importance to the national economy. It would also
take some time for the expected disputes over land tenure and land ownership
to be resolved.
The US government has warned prospective foreign investors in Cuba not to
become involved with property that was seized by the government and could be
the subject of legal disputes if and when there is a change of government in
the island.
'Salinity is also a very big and growing problem,' reported Mr Albrigo.
'This has reached a crisis in some parts of the coast and across the centre
of the island. If this continues it will be a disaster, particularly for
fruit and vegetables.'
In addition to expanded production of the traditional commodities (sugar,
citrus, coffee, tobacco) to satisfy a new market, Cuba has the potential to
become an important source of horticultural products for North America. Some
participants in the conference concluded that this was an area of the
island's agriculture that could bloom in a post-embargo Cuba.
'Cuba was once a major exporter of vegetables, but the market has been taken
over by Mexico since the embargo,' said Mr Lamb. 'Cuban access to the US
market in the future will have an adverse impact on producers in the
Caribbean, Central America, Mexico and Florida, especially in the production
of vegetables and horticulture.'
Mr Carlos Balerdi, a tropical fruit crops agent in the agricultural
extension service of Dade County, Florida, thought that one major hurdle for
Cuban agriculture if and when the embargo was lifted could be psychological.
'One problem is that agricultural work has been used as a penalty for
dissidents and those trying to leave the island,' he said. 'This may cause a
very negative psychological reaction to agriculture in a future Cuba.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940107

