FT941-12868

FT  28 JAN 94 / Kazakhstan offered IMF, Japanese loans


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The International Monetary Fund has agreed to lend Kazakhstan a total of
185m special drawing rights (Pounds 170m) to support the government's
economic reform programme.
The first SDR62m will be available immediately as Kazakhstan's second
drawing on the Systemic Transformation Facility, a fund set up with looser
conditions by the IMF to help former communist countries overhaul their
economies, but the remaining SDR124m have been authorised under a normal IMF
standby arrangement, which is conditional on a tough economic stabilisation
programme.
In a further boost to the Kazakh government, Japan has agreed to provide
Dollars 145m (Pounds 97m) of financing in parallel to the IMF loans, the
first for a standby arrangement.
The agreements follow a meeting of donor countries in Paris two weeks ago at
which Kazakhstan received pledges of aid totalling Dollars 1bn this year. US
officials have praised the country for its commitment to free market
economics and for its willingness to give up Soviet nuclear weapons based on
its territory.
Although Kazakhstan has been viewed by some western lenders as a model among
the republics of the former Soviet Union for economic reform, its economy
still faces severe problems. Mr Daulet Sembayev, central bank chairman, said
this week the country's gross national product fell 13 per cent last year
while inflation rose by 2,270 per cent.
Following the introduction in November of an independent currency, the
tenge, Kazakhstan is now aiming to cut monthly inflation to 3 per cent by
the end of this year, and to reduce the fall in output to 3 per cent over
the course of 1994.
The IMF said yesterday the standby programme included particular attention
to the provision of a social safety net for the most vulnerable segments of
the population.
The government aims to limit its fiscal deficit in 1994 to 4 per cent of GDP
through measures that include new import tariffs and export duties, a
simpler structure for value added and income taxes, and significant
reductions in tax exemptions.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940128

