FT942-15525

FT  14 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chile expects regrowth in fruit
exports


   By DAVID PILLING


   SANTIAGO


Chilean fruit exports, severely hit last season by counterveiling duties
imposed on apples by the European Union, should rebound by 15 per cent this
year to Dollars 1bn, according to Mr Ricardo Ariztia, president of
producers' association Fedefruta.
'Generally, exports should be better to the extent that we have not been
affected by compensatory duties from the European Union,' said Mr Ariztia.
Producers say the fruit industry, which accounts for 10 per cent of Chile's
export revenue, suffered losses of Dollars 100m-Dollars 120m last year
because of EU import surcharges.
Mr Ariztia said that exporters had partly countered European restrictions by
co-ordinating their shipments to ensure that prices did not fall below EU
reference prices. 'I believe that this has been the most noteworthy and
important development of this season,' he said.
However, prospects as a whole were far from rosy. Profits were being
squeezed by low international prices, an appreciating peso and rising labour
costs. There was also stiff competition from South Africa and New Zealand,
as well as from emerging producers such as India, which also grows grapes -
Chile's most important fruit export.
'The industry's profitability in Chile has truly deteriorated. I would even
go so far as to say that, talking globally, the fruit industry this year
will be in the red,' Mr Ariztia said.
Last year, the sector, which had seen spectacular growth over the previous
decade, suffered its first big bankruptcies.
This season, European resistance to imports had been replaced by problems
with Argentina and Mexico, two of Chile's biggest Latin American customers.
Argentina had been refusing entry to about 60 lorries a month, while Mexico
recently held up two ships in the port of Manzanillo because of a fruit-fly
scare.
Such actions were evidence 'of continued protectionist barriers' that had no
basis in international law or in bilateral agreements, Mr Ariztia said.
In the long-term, the sector could only prosper by concentrating on quality
rather than volume, he said. For this reason it was vital that the industry
reached agreement on regulations to guarantee the quality and
standardisation of exports.
Although producers and exporters had been arguing over details for three
years, Mr Ariztia thought agreement might soon be reached and appropriate
legislation sent to congress in June.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940414

