FT944-2826

FT  15 DEC 94 / Arts: Brecht updated - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


When a theatrical work we know is updated and relocated to the place we live
in, we expect a certain gain in immediacy, a certain thrill of recognition,
a certain now-ness. The Donmar Warehouse's new staging of Bertolt Brecht's
and Kurt Weill's 1928 bitter satire The Threepenny Opera (Der
Dreigroschenoper) has been set by its director, Phyllida Lloyd, in London,
and (more or less) in the present day. During the overture, video-screens
show us Mack the Knife (Tom Hollander) fraternising with Trevor Nunn; later
on, they show us Anneka Rice.
Mr Peachum trains beggars in the latest techniques of begging. Jeremy Sams's
ultra-now new lyrics speak of ICI executives who take coke, Tory ministers
who like crumpet, Torvill and Dean, and so on. 'Now remember that fire in
Hounslow? - 20 Asians and the cat?' - sings Jenny in 'The Flick-Knife Song'
about Mack the K. - 'While they're raking through the embers,/ There's a
flick-knife. Fancy that.' The main element of fiction is that Prince William
is about to be crowned William V. Clever stuff.
Too bad, then, that this Threepenny Opera feels remote, artificial,
implausible. One problem is that Lloyd has not managed to give her team of
singing actors any one performing style. Tara Hugo (as Jenny, the whore who
betrays Mack) is mordantly involved; Simon Dormandy (as Tiger Brown, chief
of police) is ironically hammy; Beverley Klein (Mrs Peachum) is vividly
cynical; and so on. Oh yes, and Polly here is Irish, her parents Scottish
and London-Jewish, her two female rivals white American and black English.
Another problem is that The Threepenny Opera is an anti-opera whose balance
of words and music needs to be very finely judged. I guess that this
production has been planned as a sequel to the Donmar Warehouse's very
successful production of Cabaret this time last year. (Cabaret carefully
evoked the German mid-war world that had produced The Threepenny Opera.) The
Warehouse is a marvellous place for music theatre, where songs can be
projected without amplification. Here, Weill's accompaniments have been well
directed by Gary Yershon. (Some songs are miked, but okay - this is to make
a dramatic point.)
But in general this is an evening that forces Brecht noisily down poor
Weill's throat. As Mack, Hollander shouts his songs like a punk rock star.
He is a tight, light frog-like baritone who runs out of voice at either
extreme. His biggest melodic line, the seemingly romantic arch of 'For love
will flourish or fade away', he sings twice. The first time it is a shout,
the second an unimpressive falsetto.
By contrast, Klein delivers Mrs Peachum's music with a buzz-saw vibrato  -
the kind of old-style vocal artifice that surely this kind of music theatre
was never about - even though her voice has a real training that certainly
delivers all her vocal lines firmly in place. It is Hugo whose style of
singing best combines urgent diction and musical phrasing; and hers is by
far the evening's finest performance.
It is hard to believe in little Hollander as 'the last real man in London'.
He plays the role as a coolly vicious spiv, with a blaring Londoner accent
(sounds like Griff Rhys-Jones), and he plays it with unhesitating force. But
he lacks sexual allure and, more important, dimension of spirit. Why should
we spend two hours and three-quarters attending to a tale about this minor
crook? Sharon Small, as Polly, is sometimes too stagey and vocally uneven,
but hers is a talented, if unfocused, performance. As a Scottish Mr Peachum,
Tom Mannion is loud and dull.
Sams's lyrics are so forceful that they contribute to the Brecht-heavy
feeling of the evening. But they are almost all so accomplished and so
right-on that they are one of the few components of this uninvolving
production that I would like to save for another staging of this tricky
work.
At the Donmar Warehouse, WC2

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941215

