FT942-12284

FT  30 APR 94 / Foundations laid for Palestinian state: Julian Ozanne
considers the impact of the Israeli-PLO economic agreement


   By JULIAN OZANNE


Yesterday's economic agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organisation gives the Palestinians the ability to influence their economy
for the first time in modern history.
More important for the PLO, the agreement allows for limited independent
economic decision making. This could lay the foundation for a future
Palestinian state the PLO hopes to achieve in negotiations with Israel which
are due to start in 1995.
'People will start seeing Palestinian ports, airports, television stations,
economic institutions,' said Mr Nabil Shaath, senior PLO negotiator. 'They
will see a real opportunity to develop their future.'
Yet the accord, essentially a free trade and customs union, keeps the
Palestinian economy largely within Israel's broad macro-economic trade and
taxation policy, recognising the dependence of the territories on their
neighbouring economic giant for the foreseeable future.
The Palestinian economy, backed by Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.7bn) of
international aid over five years, can thus expect to enhance the benefits
from association with Israel's Dollars 67bn economy, including continued
migrant labour.
The challenge will be to solve massive unemployment, overhaul neglected
infrastructure and reverse years of stagnation which have left the 1.9m
Palestinians in the occupied territories with per capita income one seventh
that of Israelis.
While critics from both sides will attack the agreement, the great
achievement of the accord has been to balance the economic reality of
Palestinian dependence on the protected and regulated Israeli economy, with
the PLO's political need to show its people that it is on the way to
statehood and economic independence.
In all of the areas of the agreement - trade, taxation, monetary policy,
agriculture and labour - Israel and the PLO have shown their ability to
strike this difficult balance. In trade the two economies will have a
similar import and customs policy, reflecting Israel's staggered trade
liberalisation which envisages reducing all import duties to a uniform 15
per cent rate by 1998.
The Palestinians will be able to import a long list of goods at lower
customs rates to be determined by the incoming Palestinian National
Authority. Most of the goods on this list will be priority materials for the
construction sector. Palestinians will also be able to import cars duty
free, import and price oil products freely except for petrol (for which the
pump price may not be more that 15 per cent below the Israeli price) and
import goods in limited quantities from Arab countries that do not currently
trade with Israel.
A Palestinian tax authority will set its own direct tax policy, including
income, corporate, property and municipal taxes. However it will largely
adopt Israel valued added tax regime, although at a rate of 15-16 per cent
rather than Israel's 17 per cent.
Israel has agreed to end the ban on the importation of Palestinian
agricultural produce which has been in force since the Jewish state captured
the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 1967. From the day the self-rule agreement
is implemented, Palestinians can export all products freely except five
items - tomatoes, cucumbers, potatoes, eggs and broiler chickens. These
products will be subject to increasing quotas over four years to be phased
out in year five. (Agriculture contributes at least 25 per cent of the
Palestinian economy and employs a quarter of the workforce.)
The Palestinians will establish a monetary authority to regulate and
supervise banks, set liquidity ratios on deposits, manage foreign currency
reserves and oversee foreign exchange transactions. However, the two sides
have yet to agree whether the Palestinians will be able to issue their own
currency. In the meantime, the Israeli shekel and Jordanian dinar will
remain legal tender.
Both sides agreed that Palestinians will need to find expanded work
opportunities in Israel although, due to Israel's security concerns, no
final figure has been agreed on the number of Palestinian workers Israel
will allow into its economy.
Increasing the number of Palestinians who work in Israel from the present
figure of about 16,000 to at least 100,0000 is critical to the short to
medium term viability of the Palestinian economy. Israel will transfer 75
per cent of the income tax it collects on Palestinian migrant workers to the
Palestinian authority.
The agreement will apply to the Gaza Strip and West Bank enclave of Jericho,
due to come under Palestinian self-rule after next Wednesday's signing of an
agreement in Cairo. The economic accord will later apply to the rest of the
West Bank, after Palestinian elections due in July but almost certain to be
delayed.
To strike the agreement, both sides have had to risk the fury of domestic
opposition. Israel will face criticism from protected interests in its
agriculture and manufacturing sector who will be seriously undermined. The
PLO has already been accused by many Palestinians of selling out the
aspiration for an independent economy after more than a quarter century of
Israeli occupation.
But western economists believe both sides have been wise to choose economic
pragmatism over political nationalism.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940430

