FT942-15934

FT  13 APR 94 / Banks' long haul in mortgages: How the high street clearers
are creeping up in the home-loans market


   By ALISON SMITH and SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


High street banks are so dominant in British personal banking that it comes
as something of a shock that in mortgage lending the market share of even
the largest of them is relatively small.
'Probably more of our current account customers have mortgages with Halifax
building society (the UK's largest) than have mortgages with us,' is a
common view among the big four clearing banks.
Only Abbey National, now a bank but formerly a building society, can
challenge or overtake the Halifax market share.
Banks have been offering mortgages for about 10 years, but judging by their
market share their approach has changed sharply in the past two years -
after the worst of the recession and the steep falls in house prices.
Excluding Abbey National, banks' market share of net mortgage advances in
1990 was 6 per cent, and in 1991 fell to 4 per cent. Yet in 1992 it was up
sharply at just over 20 per cent, and last year climbed to almost 40 per
cent.
The main cause of this increase is the popularity of banks' fixed-rate
mortgages, which represented at least 60 per cent of the big four clearing
banks' net mortgage lending last year.
Some banks, notably National Westminster, TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland,
have recently offered particularly competitive fixed rates, according to Ms
Olive Thompson, residential mortgage editor at Moneyfacts, a monthly
publication which monitors mortgage and savings rates.
However, banks in general have tended to be slower to develop the range of
discounts currently being offered by many building societies.
Ms Anne Gunther, controller of NatWest home loans, characterises their
approach as offering 'competitive but not absolutely cut-throat products'.
Even if the heyday of fixed-rate mortgages has passed, with rates beginning
to increase, banks insist that from now on they intend to stay in the market
more consistently.
They see the taking out of a mortgage loan as an important chance to cement
loyalty in a transaction that attracts less customer resistance than some
other financial services, such as life assurance.
'If you score well on something as meaningful as buying a home, then you can
talk to the customer on a wider range of issues,' according to Mr Garry
Skelton, Barclays head of mortgages.
It is also a time of general financial review and hence an opportunity to
cross-sell products such as personal loans, house and contents insurance,
and life cover.
'On average, you would find a Lloyds Bank mortgage customer would have five
products with the bank, while a current-account customer normally has less
than three,' says Mr Dennis Holt, general manager of personal banking at
Lloyds.
The new aggression in mortgage lending makes sense for the banks' balance
sheets. According to rules drawn up by a committee of international banking
supervisors, known as the Basle rules, residential mortgages are weighted at
only half the risk of commercial lending. Every Pounds 1bn of mortgage
loans, for example, need be backed by only half the capital that the same
amount of commercial lending would require.
Nor, at present, does the emphasis on mortgage lending mean any diversion
from developing commercial lending, since demand there is so weak.
Maintaining or increasing banks' mortgage market share will be a long haul,
however. As Mr Geoff Ellerton, Midland general manager of business
development, points out, building societies have been offering mortgages for
more than 100 years, and probably most bank current-account customers with
mortgages took them out before banks were in the market.
As all the banks recognise, they still need to do more to promote themselves
as the 'natural choice' for customers seeking mortgages. With building
societies already having regained some market share in the past few months,
the mortgage customer may never be more in demand.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

