FT941-16957

FT  07 JAN 94 / Last of one of America's biggest spenders: Jurek Martin
offers a farewell salute to 'Tip' O'Neill, son of a bricklayer who rose from
Boston ward politics to become a powerful and respected Democratic Speaker
of the US House of Representatives


   By JUREK MARTIN


Most elected officials go through life without uttering a memorable
spontaneous sentence. 'Tip' O'Neill's most celebrated aphorism - 'all
politics is local' - must now be part of the universal political lexicon.
It is also the perfect epitaph of the man himself, christened Thomas Patrick
but always known by his nickname, who died of cardiac arrest in his home
town of Boston on Wednesday night. This son of a bricklayer spent a life in
politics, 34 years in the House of Representatives, rising to become its
powerful Speaker from 1977-86.
But he never lost a sense of his working-class roots, both his native Irish
ones and those from the Italians who made up a good part of his district.
He was, nonetheless, an intimate of the patrician Kennedy clan, inheriting
John Kennedy's House seat in 1952 and bequeathing it to the late president's
nephew, Joe Kennedy, in 1986.
He could be critical of them, once labelling Robert Kennedy a
'self-important upstart', but the Kennedy family was warm in its praise
yesterday, with Senator Edward Kennedy calling him 'a giant of a man, a
giant of a Speaker and a giant of a friend.'
O'Neill was raised in the ward politics of Boston. He was first elected as a
ward committeeman in 1936 while still a student at Boston College and became
a symbol of the city-based, ethnically sensitive Democratic Party, an
unrepentant partisan liberal proud to call himself 'one of the biggest
spenders of all time.'
His finest hours may well have been as the leading Democratic counterpoint
to President Ronald Reagan's determination to eviscerate the great social
welfare legislation in th US that O'Neill had spent his career helping to
create. At the time, his party was demoralised, having lost not only the
presidency in 1980 but also control of the Senate - though not the House.
By the time the Speaker stepped down, the Democrats were on the way to
recovery and Mr Reagan's second term was proving nothing like as productive
as his first.
O'Neill, though a conspicuous patriot, was always suspicious of foreign
adventures and, in 1967, he was one of the first Congressional Democrats to
break publicly with President Johnson over the Vietnam war, which, he said,
was 'too high a price to pay for an obscure and limited objective.' He was
an equally sharp critic of the Reagan administration's interventions in
Central America and, after initial support, in Lebanon.
He derided Mr Reagan in public, once memorably calling him 'the least
knowledgeable of any president I've ever met on any subject.' Yet,
typically, he got on well with Mr Reagan in private, as he did with
politicians of all stripes, over a drink or on the golf course. Even
President Nixon, for whom he had little time, paid him the true, albeit
backhanded, comment in 1984: 'He plays hardball; he doesn't know what a soft
ball is.'
At 6ft 3 ins tall, 250-plus pounds, with flowing white locks and a permanent
air of the rumpled, he was a dominant figure in more ways than one, the
dream of critical cartoonists who loved to portray him as the quintessential
Congressional manaager of the pork barrel.
For much of his career before he became Speaker, this was mostly what he
was, a self-confessed backroom politician, mostly interested in the welfare
state and the needs of his constituents, who returned the compliment by
always returning him to the House easily, sometimes unopposed, 16 times. He
used to arrive in Washington on Tuesday morning, go back to Boston on
Thursday night, and did most of his deals on the golf course, in poker games
and over dinner.
In 1976, though, he became Speaker at a time when the House was in great
flux, its long-standing seniority system in tatters and his predecessor,
Carl Albert, virtually unknown to the wider public. The Bostonian determined
to give his office, and the House, a higher profile, using the media to the
maximum advantage.
This paid particular dividends in his battles with Mr Reagan, whom Mr
O'Neill ackowledged as a master of communications. But it was a strategy
that also encouraged more Congress members to become more independent as
they sought the media limelight. Today, party discipline in the US Congress
is worse than it ever was, a by-product of which he profoundly disapproved.
A partisan to the end, 'Tip' O'Neill would have appreciated the comments
yesterday by another partisan from the other side of the fence. Senator Bob
Dole, the Republican minority leader said: 'I considered him one of my best
friends in all my time in Congress. No doubt about it, he was a
Congressman's Congressman who will go down in American history as one of the
great political leaders of our time.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940107

