FT941-4191

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arafat wants peace talks, says Kozyrev


   By JULIAN OZANNE and REUTER


   JERUSALEM, TUNIS


Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, said in Tunis last night after
a meeting with Mr Yassir Arafat that the PLO leader had expressed his
commitment to resuming peace talks with Israel.
Earlier in the day he had arrived in Israel for talks with the prime
minister and foreign minister
at the beginning of what Russian officials described as an independent and
'dramatic' shuttle mission between Israel and PLO headquarters Tunis.
At the same time, President Boris Yeltsin named Mr Viktor Posuvalyuk, head
of the foreign ministry's Middle East department, as his special envoy on
the Middle East crisis. Presidential envoys enjoy wide authority and close
ties with the president.
Mr Kozyrev said in Tel Aviv, Russia wanted to save the peace process and was
supporting PLO demands for an international presence in the occupied
territories and further measures by Israel to protect Palestinian lives in
the wake of the Hebron massacre two weeks ago. Mr Kozyrev made no comment on
Moscow's announced support for the reconvening of a multilateral Middle East
peace conference in Madrid.
The Russian initiative marks Moscow's decision to pursue an independent
Middle East policy for the first time since the Madrid peace conference in
1991 and has been less than welcomed by Israel.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, has let it be known that Russian
intervention is not welcome because it exposes the division in policy
between Russia and the US, the two co-sponsors, which in turn strengthens
the PLO's push for more Israeli concessions. Mr Rabin also rejected any
attempt to reconvene a Middle East peace conference in Madrid.
Meanwhile, Mr Warren Christopher, US Secretary of State, appeared to be
increasing pressure on both sides to return to talks. Israeli officials said
Washington was now supporting the PLO demand for the evacuation from Hebron
of 415 Jewish settlers living in the heart of the Israeli occupied West Bank
town of 110,000 Arabs. Mr Rabin has so far ruled out evacuating the settlers
on political grounds. The settlers have vowed a nation-wide campaign of
civil disobedience to resist any effort to force them to leave.
Mr Christopher also sent a secret message to Mr Arafat yesterday. The US has
threatened to veto a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning
the Hebron murders unless Mr Arafat sets a date for returning to talks with
Israel. A vote on the UN resolution, a key PLO demand before returning to
negotiations, has been delayed until tomorrow at the request of the US. PLO
officials said the US is using its delaying powers and the threat of a veto
to put pressure on Palestinians. The US is also apparently backing Israel
which is unhappy about the inclusion of the word Jerusalem as part of the
Israeli-occupied territories in the language of the resolution.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940312

