FT942-12347

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (1): There is no
magic carpet - Keynote / On the bumpy ride ahead, investors must make sure
they get value for money


   By BARRY RILEY


Look on the bright side for a moment: yields have gone up. Of course, by and
large capital values have dropped this year, but as I said in this space
three months ago, not everybody should be miserable about a modest retreat.
The old lesson taught once again during the first quarter of 1994 was: never
to get caught up in a mood of euphoria.
Investment returns in 1993 had been wonderful, and at the start of 1994 it
seemed as though share prices could only continue to go up. So, for a month
more, they did. Smaller company shares did especially well, helping to push
the All-Share Index up another 5 per cent to a peak on February 2, although
the Footsie index composed exclusively of blue chips was not quite so
buoyant.
There were some tell-tale warning signs. Unit trust sales were setting new
records - especially in December and January - and extraordinary amounts of
money, some Pounds 1.1bn in all, were put up for two new European
privatisation investment trusts launched in January by Mercury Asset
Management and Kleinwort Benson.
Investors, it seemed, were desperate to get their cash into the market. It
was unhealthily reminiscent of the spectacular Royal Event of September
1987, when investors subscribed Pounds 240m to unit trusts launched by Royal
Life.
Those Royal investors blundered straight into Black Monday in October 1987,
and although the European privatisation fans did not face quite such a
disaster this time, they were badly damaged by stray bullets and shrapnel
from something slightly different - a bond market crash.
Dollar bonds had been modestly weak since last October, but European bonds -
including UK gilt-edged - had powered ahead until January. Then, on February
4, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, announced a
quarter-point rise in US short-term interest rates, which had been at a rock
bottom 3 per cent for 18 months. Mayhem then ensued in the fixed interest
markets around the world.
It turned out that vast amounts of that money borrowed at 3 per cent had
been financing huge speculation in international bonds by hedge funds,
securities firms and commercial banks. So a modest, prudent and not totally
unexpected move by the Fed, which in theory should have encouraged bond
investors because of the implied crackdown on future inflation, caused a
meltdown in fixed income securities.
Yields on long-dated gilts, for instance, jumped from 6.4 per cent at the
beginning of January to 8 per cent at one stage in March. The equity market
was sent spinning by this, because the 3.2 per cent average dividend yield
on shares was no longer adequate. However, share prices really only suffered
something of a glancing blow. The All-Share Index was down no more than
about 7 per cent during the January-March quarter as a whole.
At times the markets became quite scary, but a reversal was in fact long
overdue and a better structure has now been established for yields. At last
there is a decently steep yield curve between short-term deposit rates and
long gilt rates, so real investors - rather than speculators - have an
incentive to buy gilts. Meanwhile, UK company profits and dividends appear
to be moving up quite nicely, thanks to a favourable combination of rising
output and stable costs of labour and raw materials.
Yet there has been an important shift in the mood of the equity market.
Until recently the conditions for a bull market were clearly evident: a
recovering economy (and thus rising company profits) but still-declining
short-term interest rates, increasing the incentive for investors to shift
their cash into shares. Now it is no longer at all clear that the next move
in bank base rates will be down.
The quarter-point fall in base rates to 5 1/4 per cent on February 8, just a
few days after Alan Greenspan had moved in the opposite direction, turned
out to be a minor disaster. It was far from justified by some mediocre
inflation figures for January and the clash of opinion between chancellor
Kenneth Clarke and Bank governor Eddie George was confirmed by minutes of
their February meeting published on April 13.
Such a small cut was not enough to be passed on in lower mortgage rates to
house-buyers by the hard-pressed building societies, which have been losing
deposits heavily to the unit trusts and to the new National Savings granny
bond. In fact, fixed medium-term rates on mortgages have jumped sharply,
reflecting the recent rises in gilt-edged yields; and although the housing
market appears to be moderately strong, it does not appear as though it is
going to get any more help from cheaper money - perhaps the reverse.
In the short term, the stock market faces two domestic uncertainties: the
impact of the higher taxes that are hitting this month's pay packets, and
the political problems that might result from poor results for the
Conservatives in the forthcoming local and European elections, leading
perhaps to a full-scale leadership crisis.
If the growth of consumer spending slows down, it may be no bad thing. The
consumer-led recovery is taking us towards a balance of payments crisis, and
the emphasis must now switch towards capital investment and exports. But
that transition could be tricky.
Last year's global bond market bubble created something of an illusion, an
impression that securities prices could float on upwards effortlessly,
regardless of the lower and lower yields they were offering.
But after the bubble burst in February and March we came back to reality.
There is no magic-carpet ride for investors. The trip could be bumpy from
now on, and you should make sure that you get good value. Investors in the
European privatisation funds forgot that principle, and within two months or
so were showing losses of anything up to 20 per cent on their investment.
This was not quite the dead cert that Sid spotted with British Gas or the
water companies.
Insist on decent yields - of say 4 per cent on equities and 7 1/2 per cent
on gilts. If you cannot get them, remember that although the return on a
savings account may be low by past standards it is still a lot better better
than making a capital loss.
In the first quarter of the year, the average investor with a substantial
portfolio of securities will have shown a negative return of 4.6 per cent,
according to a model devised by Cantrade Investment Management. This made it
the worst quarter since the third quarter of 1990.
It is scarcely the end of the world, coming after all the handsome profits
of the past few years, but it is a warning that the climate has changed.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940429

