FT941-4125

FT  12 MAR 94 / International Company News: Japanese broker warns of
write-off


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


Kankaku Securities, the Japanese broker, is to write off Y50bn (Dollars
472.4m) in losses stemming from illicit client transactions. It will slide
further into the red as a result.
Mr Yoichiro Kato, Kankaku's president, said the broker would suffer a
pre-tax loss of Y77bn for the year ending this month, against Y51bn a year
ago. It had earlier forecast a pre-tax profit of Y300m.
Kankaku, one of Japan's 10 so-called second-tier brokers, expects to incur a
net loss of Y76bn. It will again omit the dividend.
Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, the big commercial bank which holds a 4.9 per cent
stake in Kankaku, will provide the broker with Y70bn in subordinated loans.
The announcement follows last year's bail-out by Daiwa Bank of Cosmo
Securities, which was hit by heavy losses due to illegal share deals. Cosmo
became the first Japanese broker to be rescued by a bank.
The two rescue moves come as the country's medium-sized and small brokers
continue to suffer from the effects of a shake-out in the Tokyo stock
market. During the stock market boom of the late 1980s, some brokers had
aspired to rise to the ranks of the Big Four - Nomura, Daiwa, Nikko and
Yamaichi - and expanded rapidly, making large capital investments.
Where possible, Japan's ministry of finance is determined to prop up weak
brokers and banks to preserve confidence in the Japanese financial markets.
Financial bureaucrats are pushing larger and healthier banks and brokers to
help weaker counterparts to restructure.
Support plans for other second-tier brokers are expected shortly. Sanyo
Securities, the most aggressive of the medium-sized brokers, is currently at
the last stages of negotiations with its creditor banks - Bank of Tokyo,
Daiwa Bank, and Nippon Credit Bank - and Nomura Securities, its leading
shareholder. It may announce a restructuring next week.
Kankaku said several employees arranged trades to shift loss-carrying
securities held by some of the company's leading clients to other customer
accounts between 1986 and 1990.
The Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission, Japan's securities
watchdog, yesterday advised the ministry of finance to take punitive action
against Kankaku over the illegal deals.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940312

