FT941-12961

FT  27 JAN 94 / International Bonds: Building society launches FRN


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


The Eurobond market absorbed two sterling floating-rate note issues and
several US dollar convertible bonds while dealers prepared for further large
bond issues in coming days.
The UK's National & Provincial Building Society issued Pounds 150m of
five-year floating-rate notes paying a coupon of three-month Libor plus 10
basis points.
Most syndicate officials complained that the deal was too tightly priced,
and even lead manager Goldman Sachs conceded that it was aggressive and
would take a while to place.
'Considering the borrower's rating, the pricing was completely unjustified,'
said a trader.
He pointed out that a recent five-year FRN for the Cheltenham & Gloucester
Building Society yielded 19 basis points over Libor at its re-offer price,
in spite of its higher credit rating.
Cheltenham & Gloucester is rated Aa3 by Moody's compared to National &
Provincial's A1 rating. A five-year floater from A1-rated Bradford &
Bingley, issued some three weeks ago, currently trades at 21 basis points
above Libor, another dealer pointed out.
The day's other sterling floater, a Pounds 100m issue for the Household
Mortgage Corporation via Lehman Brothers, met a slightly warmer reception.
'It was tight, but fair,' said one syndicate official. The notes, which
mature in March 2021 but are callable from 1997, ended around 99.95 bid,
slightly above their 99.925 re-offer price.
With nearly Pounds 2bn of FRNs maturing this year and another Pounds 2bn -
Pounds 3bn of floaters with 5 per cent coupon floors likely to be called if
short-term interest rates fall below that level, traders are expecting heavy
FRN issuance in comings months. Until more supply emerges, the redemptions
are expected to generate strong demand for FRNs, especially from building
societies, which are keen buyers of this paper.
Elsewhere, the Brazilian power company Electrobras launched Dollars 150m of
eight-year bonds via Nomura International. The bonds will be priced on
Friday at a yield spread of 350 basis points over US Treasuries.
The Mass Transit Railway Corporation issued the first Hong Kong dollar
range-floaters: HKDollars 200m of two-year notes via Morgan Stanley. The
notes pay the three-month Hong Kong interbank offered rate (Hibor) plus 1.25
per cent, on the days that the Hibor fixing falls within a specified range.
The market also saw three new convertible bonds: Dollars 200m of 10-year
bonds for Malaysia's United Engineers, Dollars 175m of six-year bonds for
the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India and Dollars 125m
of 10-year bonds for the Thai borrower Tanayong.
'This is classic convertible climate: with yields so low worldwide, they
offer a decent coupon and the chance to gain on the equity side while stock
markets are still so buoyant,' said one dealer.
The Province of Ontario is set to launch its long-awaited USDollars 1.5bn
global floating-rate notes today. They are expected to have a maturity of
around 5 1/2 years and traders are calling for a yield spread of between six
and 10 basis points above Libor. The deal will be arranged by Lehman
Brothers and Merrill Lynch.
Meanwhile, China is expected to issue its Dollars 1bn 10-year global bond in
the middle of next week, with Merrill Lynch as lead manager. The bonds are
expected to yield between 80 and 85 basis points above the relevant US
Treasury bond.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940127

