FT942-16272

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (21): Hospitable laboratory
 -Pension Funds


   By NORMA COHEN


European states, anxious to reform their overburdened state pension schemes,
would do well to take a look at Latin America.
There, governments are beginning to put in place attractive alternatives to
their creaking pay-as-you-go state pension schemes which rely on
contributions from existing workers and their employers to pay benefits to
those already retired. The reforms involve the diversion of employee
contributions to long-term individual savings accounts and away from the
state pension scheme.
In the process of this reform, Chile, the pioneer in Latin America, has
built up a domestic capital market valued at over Dollars 15bn. These
newly-created Chilean pension schemes, begun in 1981, provided 72 per cent
of all domestic investment by the end of 1991. And, unlike the recent surge
of foreign investment into Latin America, which can flow out as easily as it
flowed in, domestic pension funds provide capital which is here to stay.
'When private pension schemes first started in Chile, there really wasn't a
domestic capital market,' said Mr Tim Sharples, a director at Callund and
Co, an actuarial consulting firm specialising in Latin America.
The growth of assets under management has been so swift that Chilean
regulators have had to gradually relax the investment restrictions placed on
the private pension schemes. According to data from Chile's Superintendent
of Retirement Fund Administration Companies (AFJP), the average pension
fund's investment in equities has risen from nil in 1981 to about 10 per
cent in 1986 to roughly 40 per cent by the end of 1991.
Moreover, currency-matching requirements have been relaxed, allowing for
some investment abroad.
Chile's neighbours have watched its emerging pension fund business with
growing interest. Last May, Peru put in place its own version of Chile's
dramatic reform of its state pension system, while Argentina will launch its
pension reforms on June 1 this year. Colombia has recently passed
legislation allowing for similar reforms while Bolivia is also examining the
same structure.
Pension reform in Latin America is proving attractive especially to US-based
insurance companies and fund managers. American International Group (AIG)
has a significant presence in the pension fund management business there,
and UK-based fund management companies are anxious to export their
expertise. For instance, Mr Win Bischoff, chief executive of UK merchant
bank Schroders, recently pinpointed Argentina as a potential growth region
for the group's investment management business.
But aside from the potential that pension reform offers service providers,
Chile's shift to a funded pension system is being closely watched,
particularly by European governments anxious to do the same.
For most countries, making the shift is complicated by the fact that the
bill for those already receiving state pensions, is paid by current workers.
If the contributions of those workers were to be diverted to long-term
savings accounts, governments would have to meet the pensions bill out of
tax receipts - something most governments are unable to even contemplate.
Mr Sharples notes that Chile was to some extent bailed out by its
demographics; it has far fewer pensioners per worker than most European
states. Moreover, it guessed - correctly - that the 1980s would be a decade
of strong economic growth which would enhance its tax receipts.
To finance its existing pension obligations, Chile issued long-term bonds
and set investment rules requiring AFJPs, the managers of the funded pension
schemes, to buy them. Thus, Chile was able to recycle much of the individual
savings in a way which allowed it to meet its own pensions bill.
Moreover, it changed the way national insurance contributions were treated.
Instead of the previous system which made NI contributions a liability of
the employer, they became a liability of the employee. 'Tax avoidance
decreased because people could see a reason to declare their earnings and
make a payment,' Mr Sharples said.
Meanwhile, western governments may find other lessons to be learned from the
Latin American pensions experiment. For instance, both the Chilean and
Argentine systems are compulsory for younger workers, with older workers
having the option of either remaining in the state scheme or choosing a
private pension.
Also, both countries have chosen to cap costs. In Chile, three percentage
points of the 13 per cent of each workers' pay which goes in contributions
is set aside to cover life insurance and disability insurance premiums and
costs.
Overall, the Latin American experiment with pension reform offers a few
crucial lessons for other western governments grappling with a state
pensions bill threatening to run out of control. However, the peculiar
demographic and economic conditions at work there may make it a much more
hospitable laboratory for such experiments than other more industrialised
nations.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940411

