FT942-14920

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (1): The mother of all
battles - Changes in the taxation of company cars have failed to shake their
popularity as status symbols. In Europe, the entry of Japan's three UK-based
producers has raised competition for business fleet orders to fever pitch


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


The business car market is crucially important to all car makers. In the UK
and Germany, for example, it accounts for more than one-half of all sales.
In the past 15 months competition for business sales has reached fever
pitch, stoked up by one of the steepest downturns on record in Continental
European markets.
Although a frail recovery is now beginning, the competitive temperature is
also being raised by other factors, notably the coming on stream of two more
Japanese 'transplant' car factories - Toyota's and Honda's - in the UK.
Nissan, the first, is now well established, having first begun production at
Sunderland in the mid -1980s. But it has expanded well beyond original
projections, last year making nearly 2850,000 units and becoming the biggest
car exporter from the UK.
Toyota's and Honda's UK plants have been on stream only since the beginning
of last year and are still climbing towards their combined declared capacity
of 300,000 units a year. Yet few expect that these plants will also not be
expanded further, and in any case the EU is scheduled to become completely
open to all Japanese cars, including direct imports from Japan, by the end
of the decade.
All three know they must have a firm presence in the business car market for
their long-term viability to be ensured - and are meeting fierce resistance
from the indigenous European industry.
One of the predictable consequences is that the customers - the businesses,
partnerships and individual entrepreneurs operating an estimated 10m-plus
business cars on Europe's roads - are enjoying a buyers' market stretching
as far into the future as the industry cares to look.
Also helping to hold down prices, and driving manufacturers and their
dealers to offer business car operators an ever more extensive and
sophisticated network of support services, is the continuing sharp debate on
variations in new car prices within Europe and whether the existing system
of exclusive new car dealerships - which requires an exemption from EU
competition rules - should be allowed to continue after the exemption
expires in mid-1995.
Not surprisingly, the industry fears a retailing 'free-for-all', and has
been trying to harmonise prices and limit increases, in an attempt both to
mute the criticisms of consumer groups and to avoid upsetting Brussels while
it ponders the 'block exemption' options.
As a result, most fleet managers would appear to have little incentive to
take advantage of the creation of the EU to indulge in cross-border shopping
for cars.
The lion's share of fleet business traditionally has gone to a country's
leading indigenous, or at least very long-established, producers - in the
UK, that means Ford, Vauxhall, Rover and Peugeot. Few other manufacturers or
importers have previously managed to secure more than a one or two per cent
share each in the face of deep discounting - of 35 per cent or more in a few
extreme cases - and other inducements by the majors to retain fleet
business.
In addition, until the 'transplants' began generating significant component
and other jobs in the UK and Continental European sector, Nissan and other
Japanese companies had to contend with widespread corporate hostility to
'buying Japanese', and even Sunderland-built Nissans were proscribed from
many fleets.
But as several annual surveys of company car policies now show consistently,
this prejudice is fading fast in Continental Europe as well as the UK.
Toyota claims to be already on the 'approved' list of more than 500 sizeable
companies in the UK alone.
To raise the competitive stakes further, North American manufacturers are
also eyeing Europe's business car market as potentially fertile ground for
US-built niche vehicles such as MPVs (multi-purpose vehicles) and
recreational four-wheel-drives.
So far, however, Europe is showing no signs of imitating the US, where
company car provision is low and where leasing of cars by individuals,
rather than purchase, is gaining ground rapidly.
This is despite some gloomy prognostications in the UK, where steep rises in
company car taxation imposed from the late 1980s until last year has
prompted some industry observers and accountancy groups to suggest that many
company car drivers, if offered a cash alternative, would take it.
In reality, the company car had long been seriously undervalued for tax
purposes. And company car policy surveys undertaken since the 1993 Budget -
which claimed to have at last achieved tax 'neutrality' for the company car
 -indicate clearly that no significant decline in the company car population
is in prospect.
That will have come as no surprise to people like Mr Tony Vernon-Harcourt,
joint editor of the annual Monk's Guides to company car policies in both the
UK and Continental Europe. The perception that company cars are a peculiarly
British phenomenon is just plain wrong, he points out. They have become a
deeply-entrenched part of remuneration packages throughout Europe, with any
tax advantages they may possess forming only part of the picture.
Perceived status, the freedom from servicing and repair 'hassles', and from
the stress of buying and selling cars privately all figure high on the list
of company car 'pluses', while Monk's researches show that companies regard
their ability to offer the 'right' sort of company car as a useful weapon in
wooing talented staff away from rivals.
Just one statistic makes the point - in 10 out of the 12 countries surveyed
regularly by Monks, at least nine out of 10 general managers have an
automatic entitlement to a car.
Surveys among wide cross-sections of the business community consistently
indicate that many companies still have only a poor grasp of their true
fleet costs and how to minimise them. However, as the number of factors to
be considered multiplies, the management of company fleets becomes an ever
more demanding business.
To traditional concerns such as model choice, efficient purchasing,
replacement cycles and maintenance organisation there have recently been
added factors such as soaring insurance premiums and the requirement to take
measures against the likelihood of theft. As a result, many companies have
thrown their hands in the air and have simply surrendered their fleets to
outside management.
Thus a new catch phrase has entered the world of fleet management:
out-sourcing. Implemented to the full, it means a company simply receives a
monthly bill for everything connected with its fleet from contract hire
rentals to fuel statements.
'But outsourcing begs the question of just how far you go,' according to Mr
Geoffrey Bray, sales and marketing director of Fleet Support Group, who
maintains that it can be an unjustifiably expensive 'cop-out' by company
management.
A sobering thought for many an in-house fleet manager ..

The Financial Times


London Page I

940418

