FT941-5617

FT  05 MAR 94 / Mayhew strikes against veto threat to peace talks


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


Political parties in Northern Ireland will neither be allowed vetoes nor be
able to place 'impassable procedural barriers' in the way of political
progress, according to Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary.
In a speech clearly aimed at Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, and
Northern Ireland's unionists, he told an audience at Trinity College in
Dublin yesterday evening, that there will be no 'short cuts' to an agreement
for new constitutional arrangements in Northern Ireland and that there will
be no backtracking on the Downing Street declaration.
In what appeared to be an indirect response to Sinn Fein's concerns,
expressed at its annual conference last weekend, that the declaration gives
unionists a means to block the pathway to any political progress, Sir
Patrick said: 'No one will be allowed to erect impassable procedural
barriers to progress. The path of peaceful persuasion is open to all, on the
basis of their democratic mandates.
'But those who choose to stay in their cul-de-sacs can have no veto over
progress.'
The Sinn Fein leader, Mr Martin McGuinness, told the FT last weekend, that
if the British government were to clarify that unionists do not have such a
veto, then this could break the current stalemate and lead to an IRA
ceasefire.
Sir Patrick emphasised that any change to Northern Ireland's constitutional
status, can only come about with the consent of the majority living there,
and not as a result of the majority wish in the island of Ireland as a
whole. He said that an 'overwhelming majority' of people on the island
supported this view, as evidenced by recent opinion polls.
But there remained no predetermined outcome to any future talks and nothing
would be ruled in or out.
'If Northern Ireland is to cease to be part of the UK (or) if there is to be
a united Ireland, then that is a question which can only be determined by
all the people living in Ireland, North and South,' he said.
Agreement and consent of a majority in Northern Ireland would be necessary
for any change, as stated in the joint declaration, Sir Patrick added.
'It is self-determination, in other words democracy, that shall prevail . .
. no one should claim a veto to override that,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940305

