FT944-11055

FT  08 NOV 94 / Bosnia Serbs may ease peace plan stance, UN official says


   By LAURA SILBER and BRUCE CLARK


   BELGRADE, LONDON


Bosnian Serbs may soften their opposition to international peace proposals
as a result of their military reverses over the past two weeks, the top UN
official in former Yugoslavia said yesterday.
Mr Yasushi Akashi, the Japanese diplomat who heads the UN's 40,000-strong
mission there, said the Serbs would probably respond to the present
offensive with a counterattack, but then a military balance would be
reached.
British officials said they were doubtful as to whether the present upsurge
in fighting might lead to a positive result. They urged all parties to
abandon the idea of a military solution to the Bosnian conflict.
In a further sign of international disunity, British officials disclosed
that they and their French counterparts had launched a discreet diplomatic
campaign to dissuade other members of the UN Security Council from voting
with the US to authorise arms supplies to Bosnia.
Mr Akashi said Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, might step back
from his outright rejection of the international peace plan drawn up by a
contact group consisting of the US, Russia, Britain, France and Germany.
'With the change of situation, they may become more amenable to talking with
the contact group,' Mr Akashi said of the Bosnian Serbs.
In Bosnia, a Serb commander threatened to seize back all the heavy weapons
that his army has placed under UN supervision and deploy them against the
Moslem-led government army if attacks around Sarajevo continue.
UN ground forces are too lightly armed to prevent the Serbs from retaking
the equipment. However, such violations of the total exclusion zone around
Sarajevo might prompt air strikes by Nato forces.
Bosnian Moslem and Croat forces continued their offensive, pouring artillery
fire on to Serb positions near Donji Vakuf, a strategic town in central
Bosnia, yesterday.
Bosnian government forces are also trying to take Trnovo, a ruined but
strategically important town, which, if it falls, could provide a link
between Sarajevo and the Moslem enclaves in eastern Bonsia.
Mr Akashi was speaking in Geneva, where he conferred with Mr Boutros Boutros
Ghali, the UN secretary-general, and UN commanders in former Yugoslavia
about the future of the organisation's hard-pressed peacekeeping effort.
UN officials have complained that the contact group, which is supposed to be
working for a settlement in Bosnia, is failing in its role as a mediator and
leaving the peacekeeping forces in Bosnia increasingly exposed.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

941108

