FT942-14967

FT  18 APR 94 / Dollars 150m held in UBS account by wife of suspected drug
dealer


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


The pride of leading Swiss bankers in the care they take to avoid handling
dirty money has been bruised by revelations that Union Bank of Switzerland
has been holding Dollars 150m (Pounds 102.7m) in Zurich for an alleged
Colombian drug dealer for several years.
Although it is by far the largest amount of drug money uncovered in a Swiss
bank, the account is not the first of its kind. In 1989 a parliamentary
commission accused the public prosecutor of laxity in pursuing narcotics
investigations, and a book with the cheeky title, La Suisse Lave Plus Blanc
(Switzerland Washes Whiter), became a best-seller.
But this latest case is a surprise in the light of the efforts made by Swiss
authorities in the last few years to outlaw money-laundering and force banks
to stop dealing with criminals.
The controversy began when Mrs Sheila Miriam Arana de Nasser, who held the
account, applied in January for permission to buy her house near Geneva.
As with every foreigner, Swiss authorities insisted on checking her
background and bank references. With the help of US drug enforcement
officials, they identified her as the wife of Mr Julio Nasser David, sought
as a leading drug trafficker in Colombia.
On February 23, Mrs Arana was arrested by Swiss police and the account
frozen. On Friday, charges were filed in Miami against the couple for
smuggling more than 55,000lbs of cocaine and 3m lbs of marijuana into the US
from 1976. Mr Nasser David is still at large, and the US is seeking Mrs
Arana's extradition from Switzerland.
The UBS vice-president who opened and handled Mrs Arana's account has been
suspended and is being questioned by Zurich police. The Swiss Bankers'
Association due diligence committee has launched an inquiry.
The big question among Zurich's banking community is how UBS, renowned as
the most cautious and meticulous of banks, could have failed for so long to
have spotted trouble in the Arana account.
According to the authorities, she opened it in 1979 with a Dollars 50m cash
deposit. UBS claims it carried out its normal identity checks which showed
the family had extensive shipping and hotel interests in Colombia, so there
was no reason to suspect anything untoward.
'Not every Colombian is a potential money-launderer,' says Mr Stephan
Haeringer, a UBS director. However, UBS admits that the account manager must
have been very naive.
Swiss laws and regulations on money-laundering were tightened in the late
1980s. Analysts were asking why UBS, which has a 100-strong internal audit
team, did not pay special attention to accounts from places such as Colombia
and Sicily with known links to drug smuggling.
Apparently, not much effort was required. A Zurich prosecutor says that even
the children in the Nasser Davids' home town of Barranquilla were aware of
the alleged drug links. The bank says the account has been virtually
inactive for many years, so there was no reason for suspicion.
'The manager's superiors asked questions and got appropriate answers,' UBS
said. 'We are now checking to see if we have to change our procedures.'

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940418

