FT943-13006

FT  21 JUL 94 / Arts: Sensual promises, wishful thinking - Cinema


   By STEPHEN AMIDON


SIRENS (15) John Duigan
LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS (18) Denys Arcand
THE FLINTSTONES (U) Brian Levant
SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS (U) David Hand
MY GIRL 2 (PG) Howard ZieffSirens is a smug, frothy ode to bohemianism that
leaves you wondering if stuffy conservatism might not be such a bad way of
life after all.
Set in 1930s Australia, it concerns a young English vicar (Hugh Grant) who
is asked to try to persuade the rebellious artist Norman Lindsay (Sam Neill)
to remove an allegedly blasphemous painting from an exhibition. The vicar
travels to the painter's remote studio accompanied by his new bride (Tara
Fitzgerald), the sort of repressed Englishwoman abroad who has become a
stock-in-trade in art house cinemas of late.
The buttoned-up couple discover that Neill leads a seemingly amoral
existence with a free-thinking wife and three dishy models, all of whom pose
naked for his racy, idiosyncratic paintings.
The vicar proves no match for all that naturalism, while his wife soon lets
her hair down, aided by a steamy encounter with a brain-damaged ranch-hand
who looks like a blind Chippendale.
The promise of Elle Macpherson (as the lead model) turning Hugh Grant on to
the more earthly pleasures in a film which espouses creativity over
convention should have proved a winning formula.
Unfortunately, the film's celebration of artistic freedom is so
self-satisfied that it defeats itself at just about every turn.
Neill and his models are so piously cocksure about their lives that it is
they who come across as the fundamentalists, utterly contemptuous of anybody
or anything that does not fit their narrow sensual agenda.
Grant and Fitzgerald, meanwhile, prove to be the only real human beings,
flawed yet likable characters who are willing to listen, grow and love.
You soon pity them for having to endure this squad of cultural onanists for
more than a few minutes. Now, if this ironic reversal had been intended it
would have made for a fine comedy, but director John Duigan takes his bohos
seriously, littering the film with Edenic imagery of snakes and apples and
references to lost paradises.
Indeed, there is something brazenly two-faced about a film which lectures
you on the value of artistic integrity while shoving a nude supermodel in
your face at every opportunity.
Grant's and Fitzgerald's eventual conversion to a more sensual life is
utterly unbelievable, more a product of wishful thinking on the director's
part than anything intrinsic in the story.
* Where Sirens is never more than a pale imitation of art, Love and Human
Remains looks like the real thing.
French Canadian director Denys Arcand's first English language feature has
the messy, enthralling feel of modern life. It centres on David (Thomas
Gibson), a gay actor who rooms with Candy (Ruth Marshall), a depressive book
reviewer.
She secretly loves him, while herself serving as the object of the
frustrated affections of a lesbian schoolteacher and a married bartender.
David, meanwhile, divides his time between his womanising best friend, a
confused rich boy and a clairvoyant dominatrix.
While Arcand might not reach the dizzying mythic heights of his Jesus of
Montreal here, he does manage to create a film whose honesty is disturbing.
For the most part, he avoids emotional cliches and facile resolutions as he
charts the interactions of this diverse group. David believes he can live
without love yet finds that this refusal causes pain to everyone around him,
while Candy wrongly thinks she can love several people equally.
It is only in a gratuitous subplot involving a serial killer that Arcand
falters - his vision is much too strong to need such artificial bolstering.
* The Flintstones is a curious cultural phenomenon. Not a film in any
meaningful way, it is rather a Dollars 30 million exercise in problem
solving on the part of supremo Steven Spielberg and his crew.
Can the filmmakers accurately reproduce the classic Hanna-Barbera cartoon
using live actors and real sets? Can they create a world in which everything
is made of leather and rock, where dinosaurs and people coexist, where every
name is a paleolithic pun? Can John Goodman as Fred bring to mind the
shambolic presence beloved by a generation of couch potatoes? Can the
special effects boffins fabricate a credible Dino?
It is a measure of how dismal the film is that, even though the answer to
all these questions is yes, you are still left with a tediously pointless 90
minutes. The few good moments - a living garbage disposal, a soap opera
called 'The Young and the Thumbless' - are not nearly enough to sustain a
project which completely abandons the adult irony and Middle America satire
that makes the cartoon so enjoyable.
The filmmakers must hope that we are so dopey with nostalgia and impressed
by the film's dubious cartoon-into-life alchemy that we will forgive them
for not bothering to entertain us.
Or maybe Spielberg just had some dinosaurs left over from Jurassic Park.
* At the end of The Flintstones there is a moment when a prehistoric bird,
facing imminent extinction, rues not having signed a contract with Disney.
'They would never have done this to me,' he quips.
How true, as this week's reissue of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs reminds
us. It is nice to see that there are examples of animation created by people
who believe in the art form still on show.
* Interestingly, the Disney classic is not the most schmaltzy film on offer
this week. This distinction must go to My Girl 2. For those who missed the
original episode - congratulations. That said, at least the first instalment
provided the unalloyed pleasure of watching Macaulay Culkin die horribly in
a bee-sting accident.
No such luck here as Anna Chlumsky, now 13, reprises her role as the
motherless girl with a heart of gold. As part of a school project, she
travels to LA to research her dead mother's life, discovering that she was
in fact a serial killer and an S&M hooker who . . . just kidding.
The film's only distinction is its uncanny ability to present a world in
which everyone, including a sergeant in the Los Angeles Police Department,
is unfailingly nice. Good soundtrack, though.
Nigel Andrews is on holiday.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940721

