FT944-5995

FT  01 DEC 94 / BSkyB in partnership talks with Reuters


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


British Sky Broadcasting is in detailed talks with Reuters, the news and
information group, over the possibility of a partnership between Sky News
and Reuters Television.
Reuters, which has been expanding its broadcasting interests, appears to
have taken over the running from Independent Television News in the long
search for a partner for the loss-making Sky News.
For some time Mr Sam Chisholm, the BSkyB chief executive, has been looking
for a way of reducing the Pounds 30m a year cost of the 24-hour television
news service while improving quality.
Talks with the BBC several years ago foundered on the issue of editorial
control.
In the past few months BSkyB, a consortium in which Pearson, owner of the
Financial Times, owns 17.5 per cent, has had extensive negotiations with ITN
involving Mr Chisholm, Mr Michael Green, chairman of ITN, and Mr Rupert
Murdoch, chairman of News Corporation.
The possible deal involves ITN providing Sky News under contract.
When the negotiations first became public last month Mr Chisholm said: 'We
have plenty of suitors who want to get involved with us in a whole range of
areas. ITN is but one.'
The emergence of Reuters as the preferred partner is ironic because Mr
Green, chairman and chief executive of Carlton Communications, is also a
non-executive director of Reuters.
It is not clear precisely what kind of relationship is likely to emerge
between BSkyB and Reuters but it will probably go beyond a news supply
agreement. A full contracting-out of Sky News has been ruled out.
The discussions centre on a partnership or possible merger between Sky News
and Reuters Television, the leading world television news agency.
BSkyB's emerging preference for Reuters is based on the depth of its
international resources and the number of bureaux around the world.
Apart from its specialist television correspondents Reuters is increasingly
installing cameras in bureaux so that non-television reporters can provide
television coverage.
A deal with Reuters would almost certainly lead to a rekindling of BSkyB's
ambition to make Sky News more international, possibly even taking a variant
of the channel to the US on DirecTV, the recently launched American
satellite television service.
BSkyB value queried, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941201

