FT943-803

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (7): Innovation
UK-style - Telecommunications


   By ANDREW ADONIS


For companies with heavy telecommunications requirements, the UK is the most
attractive of the larger EU states, in terms of the price of links and the
competition between operators.
For all organisations, large and small, the UK's telecoms networks are
generally considered a match for anywhere except the US. Even then, all
depends on requirements: leased lines are notably cheaper in the US, but
price differentials in other services are not wide, and in some services are
cheaper in the UK. The range of services on offer is larger in parts of the
US, but the UK is becoming a centre of innovation in its own right.
Companies have three main concerns about their phone systems. They want a
rapid installation service. They want cheap calls. And they want a high
level of network reliability.
British Telecommunications, the former state-owned monopoly, scores highly
on all three. According to surveys by the Telecommunications Users
Association, its network reliability is found to be high, and its service
record is almost as good.
Some companies report problems with rapidly changing BT account managers,
caused by the massive redundancy programme carried out by BT over the past
four years. Redundancies are continuing, and this may continue to be a
problem. But BT is more customer-responsive that the traditional national
monopoly phone company, and on measures such as reliability and speed of
response to complaints it has improved dramatically.
Part of the reason for the rapid improvement is the fact that BT now faces
fierce competition in the UK telecoms market. Mercury, a subsidiary of the
Cable & Wireless group, was licensed as a national competitor to BT shortly
before BT's privatisation in 1984. In 1991 the BT/Mercury duopoly was
abolished, and upwards of 100 operators are now offering services, most of
them to the business sector.
Large companies in the City of London get the best deal, with a remarkable
concentration of operators competing hard for their traffic. About
two-thirds of the City's outgoing traffic now goes via Mercury. Two new US
operators, MFS and Colt, are constructing their own fibre-optic networks in
the City: most of the City can now choose between four operators all
providing direct telecoms links.
In addition, a number of other operators lease lines from the larger
operators and re-sell them to customers at a discount. They mostly
concentrate on international calls, but some offer long-distance UK
services. The largest is Worldcom, a US operator which offers City customers
about 10 per cent off Mercury's best business price and now claims to have
about 3 per cent of the UK's outgoing international traffic.
'Mercury is our main target, not BT,' says Mr David Hardwick, Worldcom's
managing director. That is true of most City telecoms operators, who are
thriving on the readiness of companies who have moved once from BT to move
again to other carriers. Many City institutions now have three, four, even
five telecoms providers.
Beyond the City, choice is more limited, but is growing fast. Mercury offers
a business service in all main UK centres. Local cable companies are
installing combined television and telephone networks across Britain's urban
areas, and offer competitive packages for businesses. And other operators,
such as local electricity companies, are building regional networks targeted
at business users.
It therefore pays to shop around. But many companies are wary of severing
their BT connections entirely, because of fears for the resilience of their
telecoms links without a direct BT link. The inability to transfer phone
numbers between operators is also a problem, although it is set to become
less serious under new rules, which will make it easier for users to take
their numbers with them when they move. Several niche operators are also
starting to offer 'personal numbers' for a fee, which will be particularly
attractive to small companies that expect to be on the move and want a
guaranteed number.
Mobile communications is an important requirement for much of the business
sector, and the UK scores highly in that sphere too. Although Scandinavia
has far more cellular users as a proportion of the population, the UK
cellular phone market is more competitive than any other in Europe, with two
national networks and a further two launched in the past year offering
regional coverage.
The two largest operators, Vodafone and Cellnet, have recently launched
digital GSM networks, which allow users to use their phone to make and
receive calls across most of western Europe.
Serious price competition is entering the mobile market for the first time,
which will be of particular benefit to businesses wishing to equip large
numbers of their employees with mobile phones. Orange and Mercury One-2-One,
the two new operators, have tariff packages priced well below those of their
larger rivals, although they lack national coverage. In particular, they are
far cheaper for incoming calls to mobile phones - an issue of concern to
companies issuing mobiles to employees so that they can keep in touch with
the office.
Mobile communications are still not cheap, however. Vodafone, the largest
operator, netted upwards of Pounds 700 in the year to June from the typical
subscriber on its business tariff, and more than Pounds 900 per customer on
its GSM Europe-wide tariff.
Lower fixed charges are available to users on low-usage or limited coverage
schemes - but they also face far higher call tariffs, rising in some cases
to 50p a minute. Companies need to make a realistic estimate of their mobile
requirements, and go through them with a dealer willing to sell services
from across the four cellular networks.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940927

