FT942-15701

FT  14 APR 94 / Government acts to restrict quarry growth


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


The government moved yesterday to sharpen its green credentials by giving
local authorities planning guidance to restrict the growth of quarries
supplying rock, sand and gravel for construction.
In a separate development, Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary, said no more
than four coastal 'super quarries' should be developed over the next 15
years. This included the existing Glensanda quarry operated by the privately
owned Foster Yeoman. It had been expected that crushed rock from a new
generation of large Scottish and Scandinavian quarries planned by British
building material companies would compensate for a more restrictive planning
regime in England and Wales.
Instead, ministers expect the industry in England to double the use of
recycled and secondary material such as slate, colliery spoil and china clay
waste from 30m tonnes a year to 60m tonnes by 2006.
Mr David Curry, environment minister responsible for planning, said: 'We
need to seek better patterns of supply and use of resources and more
environmentally acceptable ways of working mineral sites and restoring these
once work has ceased.'
He added that local authorities should plan to have no more than seven
years' supply of planning consents for aggregates instead of the 10 years'
they have now.
RMC, one of Britain's largest aggregate company, said yesterday: 'This is
potentially very damaging and could cause a shortage of sand and gravel,
particularly in south-east England where the time taken to win consents can
be anything up to 10 years.'
Rules restricting the development of quarries in national parks and areas of
outstanding natural beauty have been strengthened.
The guidance note for English local authorities envisages that the
proportion of land-won sand and gravel will fall from 39 per cent to 24 per
cent by 2001 to 2006. Land-won crushed rock would fall from 54 per cent to
44 per cent. To compensate, the use of secondary materials is expected to
rise from 10 per cent to 15 per cent. Imports from Scottish quarries and
elsewhere in Europe would increase from 1 per cent to 5 per cent. Use of
marine-dredged aggregates would remain constant at about 7 per cent. Similar
restrictions are being introduced in Wales.
Annual demand is expected to rise from 230m tonnes in England and Wales to
330m-365m tonnes by 2006. Under the new guidelines this would mean a small
increase in crushed rock production but no rise in land-won sand and gravel
supply.
British Aggregates Construction Materials Industries, the trade body, said
the position might have been worse and questioned whether there would be
sufficient supply of quality secondary and recycled material to compensate
for cutbacks elsewhere.
The council for the Protection of Rural England said: 'The guidance note is
far weaker than originally proposed and the government clearly has given in
to the construction industry.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940414

