FT941-13129

FT  27 JAN 94 / Patten urged to intervene in Hackney school row


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Conservative MPs yesterday urged Mr John Patten, the education secretary, to
intervene at a primary school in the London borough of Hackney after the
school's governors defied a request by the council to suspend the head
teacher.
The case has gained widespread attention after the decision by the head, Ms
Jane Brown, not to take pupils to see the ballet Romeo and Juliet because it
was 'blatantly heterosexual'.
The MPs' move, however, has exposed a loophole in measures introduced in the
education reforms of 1988 to ensure schools' accountability to parents.
Mr Gus John, Hackney director of education, recommended that Ms Brown should
be suspended as head of Kingsmead school. This was rejected on Tuesday night
by all but one of the governors. Several parents enthusiastically supported
the governors.
Mr Harry Greenway, Conservative MP for Ealing North and a former head
teacher, said: 'The time has come for Mr Patten to intervene, and it would
be right for him to do so . . . to order her suspension.'
The Department for Education said Mr Patten would not intervene unless
directly requested to do so. It refused to comment on the case.
Hackney yesterday said the matter raised 'serious constitutional issues',
and that Mr Patten could intervene at any time he wanted to.
Last night the council warned the governors that unless they co-operated
with an investigation into allegations against Ms Brown they could face
legal action.
Mr John McCafferty, council leader, said the governors would be invited to
set up a disciplinary panel with the local education authority to hear the
case which Ms Brown 'needs to answer'.
Educational experts said that the governors were acting within powers given
to them under the 'local management of schools' system introduced in 1988.
This shifted the responsibility for hiring, firing and discipline of heads
from education authorities to governing bodies.
Mr Walter Ulrich, of the National Association of Governors and Managers,
said that the authority still had the power to require governors to report
on any issue affecting the school.
Mr Ivor Widdison of the Confederation of Local Education Authorities said he
believed that the governors had acted within their powers, and that Mr
Patten could only step in using a clause in the Education Act of 1944, which
would allow him to intervene if the head had 'used her powers unreasonably'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940127

