FT942-14297

FT  21 APR 94 / IMF World Economic Outlook: UK urged to await 'firm
evidence' on inflation fall


   By PETER NORMAN


   WASHINGTON


Britain should be cautious in cutting interest rates and should not take
yesterday's news that the budget deficit undershot its 1993-94 target as a
signal for an easier fiscal policy, the IMF says.
The Fund's latest World Economic Outlook suggests that a further easing of
UK financial conditions might be possible in the light of considerable slack
in the economy and the tax increases this year.
But it says that Britain should wait for 'firm evidence' that inflation is
well on course towards its medium-term target of 1-2.5 per cent before any
further cuts in interest rates.
Further moves to consolidate the deficit will be needed in the UK and the
other big industrialised countries. 'Prospective budgetary imbalances will
continue to absorb significant shares of domestic saving,' the IMF warns.
Its projections showing that Britain will have the second highest budget
deficit as a share of gross domestic product among the Group of Seven
countries both this year and next should do nothing to encourage talk of tax
cuts in this year's Budget. Instead, the IMF believes that tax increases
taking effect this month have helped to improve the British policy mix and
should not halt the recovery.
Although it has revised downwards its expectation of UK growth this year to
2.5 per cent from last October's 2.8 per cent, the momentum of recovery
should be sufficiently strong to allow output to rise by 2.8 per cent next
year. By that time, the Fund hopes that Britain will be able to benefit from
recovery in its important European export markets.
The IMF notes that recovery so far has been mainly supported by private
consumption and that exports have made only a small contribution.
Although the Fund expects inflation, as measured by the retail prices index
excluding mortgage interest rates, will ease slightly next year to 3 per
cent from 3.2 per cent this year, this will be somewhat higher than the
average consumer price rise in the industrialised countries.
The IMF expects employment in Britain will grow by 0.6 per cent this year
and by 0.8 per cent in 1995, helping to bring the annual unemployment rate
down to 9.8 per cent next year from 10 per cent this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940421

