FT942-15723

FT  14 APR 94 / South African Elections (April 26-28): Buthelezi rejects
mediation terms


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


Foreign mediation of South Africa's constitutional conflict was stalled even
before it began yesterday when Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Inkatha Freedom
party leader, demanded that a new date for all-race elections be put on the
mediators' agenda. Foreign mediators, led by Dr Henry Kissinger, former US
secretary of state, sat helpless in their Johannesburg hotel rooms yesterday
as the African National Congress, Inkatha and the government bickered over
the terms of reference for mediation.
The situation degenerated into farce when Chief Buthelezi called a hastily
convened press conference in the lobby of the Carlton Hotel to denounce the
ANC and government, claiming they were sabotaging mediation. He said they
were colluding to exclude the IFP from the April 26-28 elections.
'This is creating an insurmountable problem. It means that there is no
possibility that an acceptable mediation can be concluded on its own merit,'
Chief Buthelezi said. 'It is putting the cart before the horse. Our initial
agreement with the ANC was that the issue of an election date could be
discussed,' he said. The ANC denied this.
Lord Carrington, former British foreign secretary who is also part of the
seven-man mediation team, expressed frustration at the lack of a clear
mandate from the parties. 'It's clear that the mediators can't mediate if
there isn't agreement between the three parties on what they are mediating
about,' he said.
But it remained unclear why mediators had agreed to travel to South Africa
before the terms of reference for their task had been agreed. The dispute
over terms will have brought home to them the complexity of the task
required, given the wide differences in principle between the ANC and IFP.
As the parties bickered in Johannesburg, killings continued in Natal. In one
of the worst politically-linked attacks since a state of emergency was
declared on March 31 in the KwaZulu homeland and surrounding Natal province
a fortnight ago, seven people distributing election literature were burned
and hacked to death late on Monday. Police said a further nine people died
in violence in KwaZulu/Natal overnight, bringing to 193 the death toll in
political violence there since the state of emergency was imposed.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940414

