FT942-15438

FT  15 APR 94 / Life groups seek tax moves to enhance competitiveness


   By ALISON SMITH


Changes in taxation on life insurance to enable UK life insurers to compete
more effectively in the rest of Europe are to be urged on the Inland Revenue
by the Association of British Insurers.
However the recommendations are likely to fall far short of the immediate
wholesale shift in life insurance taxation that a significant minority in
the life industry would like to see.
The ABI, the trade association for the insurance industry, held a meeting
yesterday to take views from members before responding to the Revenue. It
must reply by the end of the month but is expected to call for more time to
consider whether widespread changes should be made over the longer term.
One of the main elements in the association's proposal would affect taxation
of services business where the insurer does not have to have an office in
the country in which the policyholder lives. This is not permitted now but
will be after changes in European law on life insurance, due to take effect
at the start of July.
Mr Michael Cole, group taxation manager at Prudential, said that if UK
insurers were to be able to compete effectively in Europe, the tax systems
must be brought more into line.
The UK system taxes income to policyholders as it builds up in the funds.
Most of the rest of Europe taxes income when it is withdrawn from the fund
and reaches the individual.
Mr Cole said: 'If we are to be able to compete we need a system similar to
theirs, and it is possible to achieve that without affecting the whole UK
business. There is already a different regime if you write business abroad.'
The Revenue is expected to put proposals to Treasury ministers next month.
It is also likely to seek to close a loophole in the existing system by
making sure that the investment element of offshore reinsurance does not
slip through the tax net.
Mr Nigel Collard, head of tax at Legal & General, said that many in the
industry believed that it would take time for the pattern of business in the
European single market to emerge.
In the meantime, he said the best course was to keep the present system,
with some adjustments, without rushing for a radical overhaul.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940415

