FT942-15310

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: IBM to produce Intel chip clones


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


International Business Machines has agreed to manufacture clones of Intel's
microprocessor chips designed by Cyrix, a Texas semiconductor company. The
agreement poses a significant challenge to Intel, the dominant supplier of
microprocessors to the personal computer industry.
IBM will manufacture Cyrix's equivalent of Intel's 486 and Pentium
microprocessors in 'non-trivial quantities', the companies said. As well as
supplying these chips to Cyrix, under the five-year deal IBM will also sell
about half of the chips, either to its own personal computer operations or
to outside customers.
'IBM is committed to becoming a major supplier of semiconductor products,'
said Mr Michael Attardo, IBM senior vice-president and general manager of
IBM's micro-electronics division. IBM's semiconductor sales were about
Dollars 700m last year, up from just Dollars 5m a few years ago.
However, Intel, which has vigorously defended its intellectual property
rights in the courts, said its legal department was examining the IBM-Cyrix
announcement.
IBM and Intel have been technology partners since the introduction 13 years
ago of IBM's first PC. This relationship, the foundation of Intel's growth
into the world's largest semiconductor manufacturer, is expected to be
strained by the Cyrix accord.
Intel seems, however, to be reluctant to engage in a legal battle with IBM,
its largest customer. All IBM PCs contain microprocessors designed by Intel,
and either purchased from Intel or manufactured by IBM under a long-standing
arrangement.
Intel holds at least an 80 per cent share of the market for PC
microprocessors, according to market analysts, while Cyrix has a share of
less than 3 per cent. The agreement with IBM will significantly expand
Cyrix's opportunity to participate in the market, said Mr Jerry Rogers,
president and chief executive of Cyrix.
IBM and Cyrix declined to comment on the possibility of legal disputes with
Intel. However, Intel and Cyrix are already involved in litigation over
patent rights. A decision in that case, which could affect Cyrix's and IBM's
plans, is expected in a few months.
Intel yesterday disputed whether the patent licences it had granted to IBM
could be applied to the Cyrix-designed chips. 'We do not believe that IBM
can provide patent protection to Cyrix, and we are still examining the
question of whether IBM has rights to market the chips,' Intel said.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940415

