FT943-13310

FT  20 JUL 94 / Contractors threaten to quit market testing programme


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


Private sector contractors may withdraw from bidding for civil service work
under the government's market testing programme unless changes are made in
the rules, a spokesman for some of the largest contractors warned yesterday.
Under the programme, civil servants must compete for their jobs against bids
from private sector companies. If they put in the best value bid, the work
stays in-house.
But Mr Charles Cox, who chairs a newly-formed Confederation of British
Industry market-testing advisory group, told a CBI conference on market
testing that many contractors were refusing to bid against in-house teams.
He said it was difficult to win such contests because of the advantages
enjoyed by an in-house team in preparing a bid, especially if properly
advised by consultants.
Mr Cox, of Hoskyns, the information technology company, also warned that
making civil servants bid for their jobs created an adversarial climate in
which service could suffer. If the staff lost a bid and were transferred to
the winning contractor, they would be like 'demoralised prisoners of war put
to work for the enemy'.
The 14 large companies represented at the first meeting of the group on July
5 had agreed that 'the inclination to participate in the market testing
programme was declining', Mr Cox said.
Five working parties are examining detailed proposals to improve the market
testing process to be presented to the Cabinet Office which is in charge of
the programme.
The biggest obstacle was the role of the in-house bid, Mr Cox said. The cost
of bidding for contracts ran into hundreds of thousands of pounds, and with
the probability of winning against an in-house team low, contractors were
reluctant to bid.
Mr William Waldegrave, public services minister, said that he would look
sympathetically on the group's findings. But he rejected criticism of market
testing, saying that competition may be 'useful and necessary'.
He added that the savings were greatest where staff were allowed to compete,
reaching 28 per cent when work was contracted out after an in-house bid,
compared with 20 per cent when there was no competition from staff.
Earlier, Mr Waldegrave told the conference that there would be no let-up in
market testing, even though departments would be given greater freedom over
their programmes after last week's white paper on the civil service.
The Cabinet Office would monitor progress in departments and publish the
results of market testing annually.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940720

