FT944-2803

FT  16 DEC 94 / Clinton aims Dollars 60bn tax cuts at middle classes


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton last night jumped on the fast rolling tax-cutting
bandwagon by proposing a five-year, Dollars 60bn (Pounds 38.4bn) programme
of relief principally aimed at middle-income Americans with children, to
take effect from January 1 1996.
The plan, which he called 'a middle-class bill of rights', was his first
considered public response to the Republican landslide in the November 8
mid-term elections and to the welter of opposition policy initiatives that
have been announced since then.
The cost of the tax cuts, he said in a nationally televised address, would
be more than covered by cutting Dollars 24bn from the budgets of the
housing, energy and transportation departments, including the privatisation
of operations such as the naval petroleum reserve and air traffic control,
and by Dollars 52bn in savings by extending for two more years until 1998
the existing freeze on discretionary federal spending.
In a detailed address, the conclusion of which was strikingly personal in
tone, Mr Clinton warned the new Republican majority in Congress: 'I won't
support ideas that sound good but aren't paid for.'
He also took issue with some of the more ideological proposals of the
opposition designed at eviscerating the welfare state. 'I want a leaner, not
a meaner, government,' he said. He called for 'less malice and more charity'
in public discourse.
Only hours before he spoke, Senator Phil Gramm, from Texas, said his party
would accept nothing less than the Dollars 107bn tax cut promised in the
Republican election manifesto, and again demanded the abolition of federal
departments such as housing. Whatever the president proposed, Mr Gramm said,
was a 'non-starter'.
Beyond the plan's details, the president was also under pressure to prove
that he had not been marginalised by Republican control of both houses of
Congress. Mr Clinton and his administration have appeared defensive to the
point of disorientation for much of the past five weeks.
A central ingredient of the Clinton plan, recalling some of his 1992
election campaign promises to cut taxes on the middle class, is to allow
families with annual incomes of up to Dollars 120,000 a year to write off up
to Dollars 10,000 in college tuition costs. He also proposed a tax credit of
up to Dollars 500 a child under the age of 13 for families earning less than
Dollars 75,000 a year.
He announced a new proposal to encourage personal savings by allowing those
on income under Dollars 100,000 a year to deduct up to Dollars 2,000 for
investments in personal pension plans.
Republicans damn Clinton tax cut plans, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941216

