FT941-16886

FT  07 JAN 94 / Technology: General Magic's genie


   By TOM FOREMSKI


After more than three years of development, California-based General Magic
yesterday introduced its new communications software technology based on the
concept of 'software agents' that will automatically perform set tasks.
The first products are Magic Cap, a graphical user interface (to simplify
screen instructions) for palm-sized personal communicator devices, and the
Telescript programming language. AT&T, a General Magic shareholder, says it
is the first company to use Telescript as the basis for its PersonaLink
online service. General Magic's other shareholders include Apple Computer,
Motorola, Philips, Sony and Matsushita.
Users of Telescript can create 'software agents', self-contained programs
that roam communications networks delivering and receiving messages or
looking for information or services. 'With Telescript, you could create an
agent to check airline departure times and notify you if your aeroplane is
late. Or you could use agents to bid on products or services,' says Marc
Porat, president of General Magic.
Magic Cap enables users to access information and other services by pressing
tiny pictures of buildings. It is designed for the small touch-screens in
personal communicator devices, essentially high-tech versions of the
portable telephone combining fax, electronic mail and voice features.
Magic Cap includes Telescript and provides additional functions such as a
diary, address book and communications software. Motorola and Sony plan to
introduce Magic Cap-based personal communicator devices soon; the other
shareholders are expected to announce products based on General Magic's
technology later.
The technology may have arrived too late for Apple, which has several
development efforts that mirror General Magic's technology. Apple's new
online service, eWorld, does not use Telescript.
'We're interested in Telescript but it's not for us right now,' says Peter
Friedman, director of Apple Online Services. 'We'll take another look at
Telescript later in the year.' Porat says there will be Apple products based
on Magic Cap and Telescript in 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940107

