FT941-5528

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Many happy returns . . .  - Know
your enemy, a user's guide to what makes the tax man's nose twitch / Your
inspector is really a caring, sensitive human being


   By DAVID CHATER


Q. Is he an ogre?
Quite the reverse. Like a dentist, the tax man is very aware of an image
problem and is keen to inflict as little pain as possible.
Q. What's he like, then?
Well, he's actually a very decent man. Honesty, common sense and fairness -
these are his watchwords. No one enters the Revenue burning with ambition or
craving wealth. He strives to apply the law consistently and even-handedly.
Things irresponsible or unprofessional appal him.
Q. So, is he desperately dull?
Who wants a flamboyant tax inspector? Bear in mind he has to have a working
knowledge of the Taxes Act (some 5,000 pages of it) and case law dating back
to 1875. These are not tomes which provoke excitement or laughter.
Q. Why on earth would anyone join the Inland Revenue in the first place?
Because it's there. Besides, the advertisement for graduate recruits used to
say 'No particular discipline preferred,' so every history graduate for
miles around applied.
Q. Is he a social pariah?
He doesn't yell about his job from the rooftops. On the other hand, people
chatting to a tax man over the Twiglets often find themselves wondering if
something-or-other is allowable against tax, the way a doctor is asked for
advice out of surgery hours. As such, it's almost a social asset.
Bear in mind, too, that the tax inspector is a left-leaning, fair-minded
Guardian or Independent reader who buys his clothes from Marks and Spencer
and has far more in common with Alan Bennett than Alan Sugar. This is not
the stuff of social leprosy.
Q. How helpful is he?
Very. If you're a Paye employee, your tax district is determined by your
employer and is likely to be processed by a large office in the provinces.
If you're self-employed, your tax man is usually local. Either way, there's
an individual - a living, breathing human being who spills coffee and burns
toast - directly responsible for dealing with your affairs.
You can find out who he is without getting embroiled in some Kafka-esque
nightmare, and you can actually talk to him. You'll be amazed how pleasant
he is. But, as in all big organisations, things can go dreadfully wrong -
there have been a number of recorded instances where people have visited
their local tax office and been offered a leaflet.
Q. What are the advantages of a career in the Inland Revenue?
Job security. As one tax inspector put it: 'One cannot readily foresee the
end of Inland Revenue.' It is big enough to ensure that merit is rewarded,
so dog isn't obliged to eat dog. Colleagues are helpful, confrontation is a
known quantity, and few inspectors suffer from stress.
Q. And disadvantages?
After years of service, you run the risk of going round the bend in a quiet
and subtle kind of way. Nothing is what it seems. Nothing can be taken for
granted. Nothing has a straightforward explanation.
The tax man doesn't glance at things, he peers at them inquisitively.
Cynicism comes by the lorry load. He becomes the ultimate lateral thinker,
which is useful for dealing with obdurate teenagers but not much else.
Q. How effective is he?
Frighteningly so. In 1992/3, the Revenue raised Pounds 4.6bn pounds from
'action taken against non-compliance.' That is the equivalent to the yield
from 3p on the basic rate of income tax. In the same year, it collected
Pounds 982m of capital gains tax at a cost of just Pounds 38.4m in
administrative fees.
Q. What does he aspire to?
Tax men aren't driven by desperate longings; otherwise, they wouldn't have
entered the Revenue in the first place. When the tax man dreams, he dreams
of early retirement. Of converting his garage into a wood-working shop and
producing reproduction antique furniture.
Q. Is he ever tempted to join the opposition?
During the 1980s, there was a massive exodus of inspectors throwing down
their felt-tip pens and joining accountancy firms or corporate tax
departments. The recession stemmed the flood and the Revenue itself has now
said: 'That's it, chum. If you leave, you can't come back.'
But a large number of tax men ease themselves into retirement with some sort
of part-time consultancy work.
Q. How does he catch people?
The tax man's nose. This refined and valuable proboscis - an almost mystical
organ - starts to twitch frantically when it gets within half a mile of
something dodgy on the tax return.
Q. Do the rich deal with a nicer class of tax man?
Yes, but only because wealth is relatively complex and you need more senior
(better trained, more intelligent etc) people to deal with it. But it's
nothing to do with class war: figures on a tax return are as meaningless as
Monopoly money.
Q. What makes the tax man angry?
Nothing. Almost nothing. Like the priest in the confessional, they've heard
it all before. But the tax man has a highly cultivated spirit of fair play.
If a large company or a wealthy individual is clearly getting up to
artificial shenanagins purely to avoid paying The Right Amount of Tax, well,
you're likely to put the taxman's proboscis out of joint.
Q. What turns him on?
Winning a disputed claim, especially if you're at inspector level where the
claim tends to be over a million quid. It's the intellectual challenge, the
piecing together of the jigsaw.
Q. What makes him miserable?
Routine paperwork and form-filling. A vast number of bureaucrats abhor
bureaucracy, yet still manage to lead happy and fulfilled lives in the
Revenue.
Q. And how do you make the inspector happy?
By speaking to him. He loves to be spoken to. And should you ever get the
urge to jot down a quick note of thanks, his cup would overflow. (See above:
'Tax men as toast-burning fellow humans').
Q. What does a tax man do when he's not being a tax man?
He spends much of his time commuting: the Inland Revenue is the backbone of
British Rail. But, for a bit of innocent enjoyment on the side, the tax man
will often settle down to a detective novel or study military history in the
Dark Ages.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940305

