FT943-12668

FT  23 JUL 94 / International Company News: Mercedes-Benz plans shake-up of
bus operations


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


Mercedes-Benz is planning a shake-up of its loss-making European bus
operations, involving job cuts and the merger of its interests into an
independent business unit.
The new operation brings together separate divisions in Mannheim and Turkey.
Kassbohrer will also be included if, as expected, Mercedes wins a takeover
bid for the struggling group. The new company is due to start operating on
January 1 next year.
According to Mr Helmut Werner, chairman of the Daimler-Benz vehicles
subsidiary, Mercedes will decide whether to make a bid for the Ulm-based
Kassbohrer business next week. Although Sweden's Volvo is believed to have
shown some belated interest in the group, best-known for the Setra marque,
Mercedes has been studying the feasibility of a takeover since April.
There have been rumblings of resistance from Mercedes' commercial vehicles
works in Mannheim. However, Mr Werner says the workers' council would not,
ultimately, obstruct the move, which would improve the long-term health of a
sector which had been losing money for years.
However, the cartel authorities could throw up obstacles to the deal, which
would give Mercedes a further 22 per cent of the German bus market, where it
already has a 35 per cent share.
According to Mr Werner, a structural clear-out was needed in an industry
plagued by over-capacity. The market was so tight that not all suppliers
could maintain production at economic levels.
At a closed meeting of the Mannheim workforce earlier this month, union
officials were reported to have said provisional plans to switch bus
manufacturing and fitting-out operations between the Mercedes and Kassbohrer
works could cost 2,000 of the 11,300 jobs in Mannheim.
Mercedes says a takeover would imply the loss of 400 bus-making jobs. Talks
are already under way on reducing the Mannheim workforce by 1,400,
regardless of the Kassbohrer project.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940723

