FT943-13153

FT  21 JUL 94 / International Capital Markets: CBoT and Liffe consider
linking after-hours trade - Derivatives


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


The pattern of alliances between the world's futures exchanges shifted once
again yesterday. The Chicago Board of Trade and the London International
Financial Futures & Options Exchange, largest and third-largest exchanges,
said they would explore the feasibility of linking their after-hours
electronic trading systems.
The two exchanges were known to be looking at ways to join forces, after
both turned their backs on Globex, the electronic trading system developed
by Reuters.
Although Globex has achieved disappointing volume, relying mainly on
after-hours trading the Matif French futures exchange, it does command an
impressive grouping of bond contracts.
Since Liffe decided not to join the system, mainly because of concerns about
restrictions on other commercial links, and the CBoT, one of the original
backers of the project, pulled out earlier this year, Globex has attracted
Germany's Deutsche Terminborse to join the Matif and the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange. The Matif and the DTB have agreed to link their day-time trading.
The CBoT has an agreement in principle with Bloomberg which would give users
with Bloomberg terminals access to its products.
The growing number of strategic alliances between futures exchanges has
raised the stakes for Liffe and the CBoT - both have a number of failed
efforts behind them. But the technical feasibility still has to be explored.
It involves linking two after-hours systems, Liffe's APT and the CBoT's
Project A, which have certain similarities - both are open workstation-based
systems - but some important differences.
Users would have to be trained on both systems, which could be accessed on
the same workstation, but through different windows. The APT system
replicates trading in the futures pits, while Project A is a trade-matching
system.
'We are optimistic that it can be done,' said Mr Phil Bruce, director of
strategic business development at Liffe. He hopes the technical study will
be concluded by the end of this year, and a live system would be implemented
in 1995.
Unlike Globex, the agreement would allow each exchange to retain 'complete
control of its own contracts', according to the CBoT. Clearing would be
provided by the Board of Trade Clearing Corporation for CBoT contracts and
the London Clearing House for Liffe products.
While the Liffe/CBoT link and Globex are part of the same trend, the
potential rivalry between the two systems should not be exaggerated. For the
most part, they will trade different products. The only direct competition
would be for business in bund futures, and perhaps short-term German
interest rate futures, listed on both the DTB and Liffe.
Nevertheless, the move is not good news for Globex, which is left with a
smaller array of products than it might have hoped for, in a market which is
cynical about the scope for global trading.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940721

