FT942-16384

FT  11 APR 94 / Business Travel: A passenger's kinda town - Chicago's
airports act as a gateway to the rest of the US


   By LAURIE MORSE


The steady globalisation of trade and the stirrings of economic recovery in
the US and Europe are bringing more business travellers to America's
heartland. For most of them, Chicago is the gateway to other, less populous
destinations.
Although there are cheap flights to other US destinations from Chicago's
O'Hare Airport, travellers should consider using the city's second airport,
Midway. Served by 16 domestic airlines, many of which are short-haul
carriers with cut-rate prices, Midway gives budget-conscious business
travellers easy access to places such as Detroit, Kansas City, St Louis, New
Orleans and Dallas.
And for weary travellers concluding business in Chicago and looking for a
warm-weather holiday destination, Midway offers a handful of carriers, with
names such as Kiwi and Private Jet, which specialise in flights to Florida.
These airlines can be more flexible than the big carriers, making it
possible to reserve a seat to Florida on notice of a day or two for a
round-trip fare as low as Dollars 200.
Midway is a no-frills airport. The one-storey terminal is a second world war
relic with only two restaurants and, because it is offers only domestic
flights, no duty-free shops. Conference rooms and business services are not
available.
However, flights from Midway have a better record for departing on time than
those from O'Hare, and the terminal, which served 6.3m passengers last year
compared with O'Hare's 66m, is less congested and quicker to pass through.
Midway is an island, 30 miles south of O'Hare and a 20-minute drive south of
downtown Chicago. It was connected by rail to the city centre late last
year. You can board a Chicago Transit Authority train (the orange line) in
downtown Chicago and, for Dollars 1.50, ride to Midway in about 30 minutes.
The trains are the newest in Chicago, and have special racks for luggage. At
Midway, there is a five-minute walk through a covered walkway from the train
stop to the airport.
Any travellers with stamina and light luggage can - for the same Dollars
1.50 - board a CTA train in O'Hare airport (the blue line), travel into
Chicago, change to the orange-line train at the new, Helmut Jahn-designed
State of Illinois building (the Clark/Lake stop) and continue south to
Midway in about 90 minutes.
Midway can also be reached from Chicago by scheduled minibus service from
most downtown hotels for about Dollars 10, while a taxi ride takes about 40
minutes and costs about Dollars 25.
Construction on the main highway leading to Midway this summer will extend
driving times to more than an hour, making the train an attractive
alternative. Long-term parking is available at the airport for Dollars 6 a
day.
Once at Midway, travellers have their pick of some of the most
entrepreneurial airlines in the US. Southwest Airlines is the leader: for
the past three years, the Dallas-based carrier has won the US Department of
Transportation's designation as best US airline for on-time performance, for
baggage handling and for fewest customer complaints. Its success has forced
the big carriers to rethink their policy and pricing on competitive routes,
generating cuts in fares to many US destinations.
International business travellers who have to use O'Hare can still benefit
from these cut-rate domestic flights. American, United Airlines and other
large US carriers now offer flights from O'Hare to other US cities at prices
designed to compete with their Midway-based rivals.
Connections to these domestic flights can be made by taking the 'people
mover' from O'Hare's new international terminal to domestic terminals two
and three. The light-rail transit ride between terminals takes about five
minutes and is free.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940411

