FT941-3345

FT  16 MAR 94 / World Stock Markets: Venezuelan equities are upset by tax
proposal - Transaction costs could rise


   By JOSEPH MANN


A new tax proposed last week by the Venezuelan government covering most
debit transactions at domestic banks has sent tremors through the Caracas
stock exchange.
On March 9, Mr Julio Sosa Rodriguez, Venezuela's minister of finance,
presented a series of tax bills to congress, including a proposed tax of
0.75 per cent on debit transactions at banks that will primarily affect the
country's private sector.
On the same day, the Caracas index reacted with a 4.3 per cent decline, and
over the week retreated more than 10 per cent in local currency terms.
The index recovered more than 3 per cent on Monday, but at midday yesterday,
prices were beginning to weaken once more. The market underperformed the
region last year, showing a 14 per cent gain in dollar terms, while turnover
slipped by 28 per cent compared with 1992.
Although equity investors in Venezuela were - and are - worried about a
number of problems, the proposed debit tax, as it is now being called, has
given them a new headache.
The tax, still to be approved by congress, has also raised fears that
trading will move offshore and that foreign investors will find the
country's equity market less attractive.
With some exceptions, banks will deduct the tax from the accounts of
individuals or companies whenever they order a debit to their accounts,
including issuing cheques or making an electronic payment.
A stock transaction requires at least four cheques or debit orders, each of
which would be taxed under the proposal. The new levy would increase
transaction costs significantly for domestic investors, and would have an
even greater effect on foreigners.
Ms Norys Aguirre, president of the stock exchange - the Bolsa de Valores de
Caracas - has asked the government to exclude exchange transactions from the
proposed levy. She warned that investors, especially from overseas, would be
driven away, noting that the tax would have theoretically added more than
Dollars 54m to last year's transaction costs.
Brokers and investors are also worried that stock deals will simply move
offshore in an effort to avoid the tax. Ms Aguirre pointed out that a
similar tax in Argentina was eliminated soon after it was applied when the
authorities realised that much of that stock exchange's activities had moved
to Uruguay; many Argentinians also decided to carry out their daily business
activities in cash rather than cheques.
The government has tried to soften the impact of the debit tax by noting
that it will only be in effect until December 31 and that, originally, a tax
of 2 per cent had been discussed.
The new tax is a sign of the desperate fiscal situation of President Rafael
Caldera's administration, which took office on February 2. It is trying to
cope with an economy in recession, a large fiscal deficit, high inflation,
declining income from oil exports (one of its main sources of Treasury
revenue), a banking crisis and other problems. It also hopes to raise
additional revenues through a proposed luxury tax and aims to reduce income
tax evasion.
Another tax initiative involves lifting the ceiling on corporate and
individual income tax from 30 per cent to 34 per cent. While this is not a
crippling increase, businessmen generally are unhappy as they work their way
through the second year of a recessionary economy.
The failure last January of Banco Latino, the country's second largest bank,
created an unexpected problem for the new government and provoked crises at
several other banks. The cash-strapped government has so far been forced to
supply Latino and other troubled banks with some Dollars 3bn in financial
assistance.
No-one can say for sure how the debt tax will fare in the new congress,
where the two political parties supporting Mr Caldera together hold under 25
per cent of seats in both the chamber of deputies and the senate.
The proposal got off to a bad start when Mr Henry Ramos, a spokesman for the
Democratic Action Party (AD), said the tax had never worked anywhere else.
Mr Caldera's parties need the support of one of the other three, larger
political blocs in congress in order to gain approval of the debit tax and
other tax proposals. So far, none of the three groups - AD, the Christian
Democrats or the left wing Radical Cause party - has indicated that it will
back the president.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

940316

