FT942-14492

FT  20 APR 94 / Leading Article: Fudging the Post


The so-called 'BP option' for privatising the British Post Office seems to
be gaining ground. This, it may be recalled, would involve the government
floating a minority stake in the Post Office while retaining majority
control, as it did with BP until the 1980s.
According to the Post Office, this would satisfy two conflicting objectives.
On the one hand, the public is mostly hostile to full privatisation, on the
grounds that it might jeopardise the service. On the other, the Post Office
seems to be winning converts to its argument that public ownership prevents
it from investing in new forms of electronic and computer mail, without
which it risks becoming a dinosaur.
The BP option, it is argued, would free it financially while leaving
responsibility for its operations with the government. Thus, the more timid
Tory backbenchers might be induced to vote for it on the grounds that it is
neither quite one thing nor the other.
Financial freedom certainly seems justified. Last year, the Treasury allowed
the Post Office to invest only three-quarters of what it wanted to. This may
seem bizarre for a consistently profitable operation which has no debt and
over Pounds 500m in cash. But in the curious world of the Treasury any
investment is undesirable, since it contributes to the nation's budget
deficit. Meanwhile, the annual dividend which the Treasury extracts from the
Post Office - currently Pounds 181m, or virtually the whole of its net
profit - is by private sector reckoning imprudently high.
The other side of the argument is less satisfactory. It is by no means clear
that majority government ownership would in fact offer safeguards to the
opponents of privatisation.
Doubtless, the government would nominate a couple of directors to the board.
Certainly, the Treasury would have to settle for a more realistic dividend.
But privatisation is an all-or-nothing process. Once the government had
brought in outside investors on a commercial footing, it would find it very
hard to interfere with the Post Office's operations on anything other than a
commercial basis. This would be as true if it sold 10 per cent as if it sold
the lot.
On a slightly cynical view, this is an argument in the BP option's favour.
One need only look at the mechanics of even a partial privatisation to see
the benefits. The prospectus would have to set out the Post Office's
ambitious plans to invest in new technology and expand overseas, thus
submitting to objective scrutiny a strategy whose outlines have so far been
left studiously vague. It would have to set out the terms on which the Post
Office would be regulated. Above all, it would have to specify how far the
Post Office's monopoly would be left in place.
As an attempt to fudge the issues, the BP option is questionable. As a means
to an end, it might just work.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940420

