FT944-11000

FT  08 NOV 94 / International Company News: AlliedSignal back on a growth
tack - Chairman Larry Bossidy has set precise targets


   By TONY JACKSON


One might have guessed that Mr Larry Bossidy, chairman and chief executive
of the diversified US manufacturer AlliedSignal, is an ex-General Electric
man. The gospel of GE is ever-increasing productivity: Mr Bossidy has a
productivity target of 6 per cent a year stretching into infinity. So far at
least, he looks on target.
When Mr Bossidy arrived at AlliedSignal in 1991, his first task was to
confront a business which, in some parts, was shrinking alarmingly. A large
part of the company is in aerospace, and a large part of that business is in
defence. In this year's third quarter, however, the aerospace division
increased its sales for the first time in more than three years. For Mr
Bossidy, this is an important symbol of a return to growth for the company
overall.
Granted, the growth was tiny - under 1 per cent - and was wholly due to
acquisitions. Granted, too, Mr Bossidy expects the military side - about 28
per cent of the division's sales - to continue shrinking. Civil aerospace,
too, is a tough business these days: but here at least, he is confident that
things can only get better.
'Worldwide deliveries of aircraft look like being down 26 per cent this
year. Next year we expect them to be down around 5 per cent. They should
start to recover in 1996, though not dramatically. Flying hours and
take-offs and landings are still growing at around 3 per cent a year, so you
know the business is going to come back. The question is when.'
The projections sound curiously precise, but Mr Bossidy is a precise man.
When he took over in 1991, he set himself financial targets for 1994: an
improvement in operating margins from 5 per cent to 9 per cent, and a return
of equity of 18 per cent against 10.5 per cent. Nine months into the year,
margins are running at 9.2 per cent, while return on capital is 20 per cent.
In response to this, he is raising the targets. Margins next year will be 10
per cent, he says, and 12 per cent by 1997. Similarly, productivity - which
he defines as sales without price increases divided by costs without
inflation - will carry on rising by 6 per cent (this year so far it has gone
up 5.9 per cent). 'It's an infinite target,' he says. 'You just have to keep
re-inventing ways of getting it.'
He expects sales this year to be up 8 per cent in real terms, having been
flat from his arrival until last year. Here, too, he has raised the bar. 'I
said last year we would try to sustain revenue growth of 8 per cent, with 4
per cent generated internally and the rest from acquisitions. We now think
we can do 5-6 per cent internally, so we'll do 8 per cent plus for the next
three years.'
This year's third quarter, he says, was particularly reassuring, with sales
up a nominal 11 per cent - the first double-digit increase in 6 1/2 years.
'So with costs in good shape, and with volume continuing to grow, we ought
to see a period of nice income growth.'
The obvious question arises of how far this recovery is cyclical and thus
unsustainable. Everything is cyclical, he says; but in the company's largest
single division, which makes car and truck components, he argues for greater
stability. The US auto industry is greatly helped by the weakness of the
dollar, but US auto manufacturers are also running their businesses better
than they used to. As for the cycle, he says, 'as US autos weaken, Europe
should strengthen, and we're roughly equal in both'.
One reason for the company's strength in Europe is an active acquisition
programme. This is an important part of Mr Bossidy's strategy; since his
arrival AlliedSignal has made 11 acquisitions, which next year will
contribute sales of Dollars 1bn - perhaps 7 per cent of the total.
In addition to acquisitions, he points to two more sources of future growth:
new products, such as innovative forms of radar, and globalisation, above
all in China, India and Mexico. Provided that strategy works, he is happy to
stick to the existing businesses of aerospace, automotive and materials. 'If
we can get the growth I think we can in those three sectors, we'll stay
there. Failing that, we'd consider a fourth area. That's a low priority
right now.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941108

