FT942-12828

FT  28 APR 94 / S African polling system strained as millions vote:
Buthelezi accepts compromise - Organisers accused of poor planning


   By MARK SUZMAN and MICHAEL HOLMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


Widespread organisational problems yesterday threatened the credibility of
South Africa's elections as millions turned out to vote for the first time.
Some designated polling stations never opened, and many of those that did
soon ran out of equipment, including ballot papers and the invisible ink
supposed to be stamped on to voters' hands to prevent fraud.
However, early today fears that the Inkatha Freedom party might pull out of
the election receded when its leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, said he
was satisfied with a compromise over the unavailability at a number of
stations of stickers with the IFP's name. Electoral officers were to have
affixed these to ballot papers, printed before the party decided barely a
week ago to take part.
Chief Buthelezi said he had accepted an undertaking by the Independent
Electoral Commission to provide additional specially-printed ballot papers
which would include Inkatha's name and additional voter help for the Zulu
heartland in kwaZulu. 'I believe the issue of the ballots has solved the
crisis I saw looming before us,' said Chief Buthelezi.
Earlier President F. W. de Klerk appealed for patience and understanding and
said that he did not believe the problems would interfere with the free and
fair nature of the election.
After consultations with Mr Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress
leader who voted for the first time in his life yesterday, Mr de Klerk
announced that today would be a public holiday, as yesterday had been, to
allow extra time to vote.
Mr Justice Johann Kriegler, chairman of the IEC, acknowledged
'difficulties', but described the process so far as '80 per cent'
successful.
Amid widespread confusion over how to deal with the absence of Inkatha from
some ballot papers, the IEC at one stage gave permission for Inkatha
supporters, many of whom are illiterate, to write the party's name on to the
ballot after having initially said this would constitute a spoiled paper. It
then later announced that such ballots would be counted only at an
unspecified 'lesser value'. The number of affected votes is not yet known.
The turnout far exceeded expectations and in many voting stations queues
stretched for over 2km as people had to wait for up to eight hours to vote.
The IEC was criticised for poor planning, inefficiency and even impropriety.
Mr Clarence Makwetu, president of the Pan Africanist Congress, charged that
the IEC was rigging the election.
The voter response belied fears that recent bomb blasts, which have killed
at least 21 people since Sunday, would deter voters. Another car bomb
exploded at Johannesburg's Jan Smuts airport yesterday morning, injuring 18
people. Police later announced they had arrested 31 suspects, including one
police officer and one reservist, many of whom were allegedly associated
with the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB).
At stations round the country, which were remarkably free of violence, many
voters were without water or access to toilet facilities, and there were
reports of heatstroke, faintings and one death. Overall, though, the mood
was cheerful, with most voters content to wait it out.
SOUTH AFRICA VOTES
Page 11
Civil servants cling to last barricades
Hard road for Natal voters
Election judge prepares for not proven verdict

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940428

