FT944-14404

FT  22 OCT 94 / Private View: Modest monk with a diplomatic mission - Dr
Rewata Dhamma is a Buddhist who has made an impact on international affairs


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


A Buddhist monk living in Birmingham, England, is the improbable channel
through which Burma's military junta has been seeking to end the country's
diplomatic isolation.
The Venerable Dr Rewata Dhamma acted as intermediary for a historic meeting
a month ago between the two senior military men in Myanmar (as Burma has
been renamed) and the pro-democracy leader and Nobel peace prize winner Ms
Aung San Suu Kyi, put under house arrest by the military more than five
years ago.
Western diplomats were initially sceptical that an innocent-looking teacher
of Buddhist meditation, philosophy and scripture, a scholar of Hindi and
Sanskrit, could play such a delicate role. There were suspicions that the
generals might try to use him as part of a propaganda effort to improve the
standing of a regime repeatedly denounced for its abuses of human rights.
Yet the fact is that the promised parley with Ms Suu Kyi did occur within
weeks of Rewata Dhamma's second visit to Rangoon this year.
The ground was prepared in May this year, when, armed with a visa from the
Burmese ambassador, he entered the country and met Lt Gen Khin Nyunt, head
of military intelligence and first secretary of the State Law and Order
Restoration Council (Slorc).
'I think I was the first Burmese to say to him directly to free her. He
explained that the army was divided and her detention was a matter of
security. But I feel he was honest, genuine.'
On the second visit he met Gen Khin Nyunt again, and this time was given
permission to see Ms Suu Kyi.
'She was very strong, cheerful, very happy. Also her husband was there. We
talked for three hours.'
She was less concerned about herself than about the other political
prisoners, he said. She also seemed to accept that poor education and
economic instability might delay the restoration of democracy. But she asked
to see General Than Shwe, the head of Slorc, to discuss things directly.
The abbot then met the head of Slorc and a few weeks later, her wish was
granted.
The modest-seeming monk is not new to unofficial diplomacy, nor to
international platforms. He has spoken at peace conferences in Moscow and
Tokyo and at UN assemblies in New York and Geneva. Furthermore, he appears
to enjoy the highest standing and connections in Burma, the country of his
birth. Today, he is being pursued by the television networks who want to
make him a media star.
Our meeting place was as improbable as his mission, a detached house
converted into a Buddhist temple near the Brent reservoir off London's North
Circular Road. The abbot (as I shall call him for convenience) produced two
photographs: the first showed a slender, attractive and cheerful-looking Suu
Kyi, sitting on the floor at his feet in her house in Rangoon, the second a
group of military men in similarly respectful attitudes on the floor of the
guesthouse where he met them.
He also showed me a translation of a letter from her after his August visit.
Signed 'Suu Suu', it thanked him for his attention, advice and compassion
and urged him to see a throat specialist for the weakness of his voice
which, she wrote, might be caused by chewing betel nut.
The abbot first met Suu Kyi in Benares, India, when she was a little girl
and her mother was the Burmese envoy. Her father, Gen Aung San, Burma's
resistance hero, had been assassinated in 1947 by rivals on the eve of
independence from Britain.
They met again regularly when Suu Kyi studied at Oxford University (she
later married Michael Aris, an Oxford don) and the abbot had left India to
become a missionary to the west from his base in Birmingham.
The abbot was born Shwe Maung in 1929 - he looks too young for 65 - in the
Irawaddy delta. Although the only son among five children he joined the
Theravada order of Buddhist monks at the age of 12. A prize-winning student,
he was awarded a state scholarship - the first and only Buddhist monk to get
one - to study Hindi and Sanskrit in India, where he completed a PhD,
lectured, wrote commentaries and edited, among other works, an encyclopaedia
of Buddhist technical terms.
When in 1962 the Burmese government of U Nu was toppled in a military coup
led by General Ne Win, the abbot found himself an exile. When later U Nu, a
devout Buddhist, himself arrived in India for medical treatment he struck up
a friendship with Dr Dhamma. This was enough, said the doctor, to get his
name blacklisted in Burma. It was to be 30 years before he saw his homeland
again.
While in India, the abbot said, he was asked by Indira Gandhi, the late
prime minister, to dissuade U Nu from going back to fight the Burmese junta.
Then in 1974 he was asked by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, exiled ruler of
Cambodia, to go to Peking and conduct a religious service for the prince's
ailing mother. He carried a diplomatic message from Mrs Gandhi to the
Chinese leaders.
I asked the abbot why he landed up in Birmingham.
He replied in his indistinct English: 'I did not know it. I never heard of
Birmingham before.' He chuckled. 'Also, I wanted to learn English so I could
use my knowledge - so more people could understand Buddhism.'
You saw the English-speaking world as a promising place for Buddhism?
'I felt so, yes, because many Americans were becoming Buddhist - Europeans
also. Many people came east to learn Buddhism in the sixties.'
Was it difficult to go to a strange, cold island in the north Atlantic?
'I don't feel like it was difficult. I don't know why but I just found it
very homely. I don't have any problems here, even physically.' He chuckled
again. 'I had no colds: many English have fevers.'
There was one difficulty: opening a bank account. In Burma, there are no
surnames, and the abbot had in any case adopted the single religious name
'Rewatadhamma'.
'The manager asked for my Christian name,' he said, 'I told him I don't have
a Christian name. And no surname either.' He laughed. 'So to make things
easier I made two words of 'Rewatadhamma'.'
He arrived with a letter of introduction from U Nu to Lord Mountbatten, who
was later murdered by the IRA, and went to see him.
Were you tired of India?
'No, no. I wanted to teach meditation to the westerners. India doesn't need
teachers of Buddhism so much. It has a whole tradition.'
So it was missionary work?
'Missionary work, yes.'
Birmingham now had 10 Buddhist centres, he said, and there were about
125,000 English-born Buddhists (not including the 50-60,000 Asian Buddhist
immigrants), more in Germany and France. He has been doing missionary work
in eastern Europe. 'Now they are free from communism they are looking for
something different,' he explained.
'The Buddha says if you are ill, what you need is medicine. It's not
important who gives it to you, whether the doctor is American, English,
Jewish, Christian or Buddhist. It releases the mind from strains and helps
you make good decisions; it teaches us how to see things objectively.'
I asked if he was surprised to find himself in the news.
'Not very much. Even if I try and hide myself now I cannot really escape,
because this is very important news now.'
Do you enjoy the attention?
'Not really . . . But it is good for the country.'
Before his missions to Rangoon, the abbot had approached the UN secretariat
in New York and the US State Department where officials encouraged his
attempt to find out what was preventing the generals from releasing Aung San
Suu Kyi and handing over power following the 1990 elections in which her
National League for Democracy won 60 per cent of the vote.
He explained the Buddhist method of mediation as follows: 'I always say like
this. We have to learn how to listen to others' problems. When you know
their problem, then you will get a good solution.
'Also you try to do it with loving kindness, compassion. If someone is very
angry, he can't do anything. He is suffering, so he can't do this good
thing. And the same thing if I am feeling anger: I cannot listen to others.
My ego, my personality - I am right, the other is wrong - is a block in the
way of understanding.
'So when you are talking to both sides, you dispel your ego, your
personality and just listen. Then you present your own feelings and try to
reconcile them to each other. And that way you get a solution.'
Dr Rewata Dhamma has been invited back to Rangoon next month. The military,
he said, wanted to talk to him about the place of Buddhism, the creed of an
estimated 85 per cent of the multi-ethnic population, in the socialist Union
of Myanmar.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

941022

