FT941-5604

FT  05 MAR 94 / Codswallop, but a big deal for Norway: Spanish demands for
fish are a hurdle to EU membership


  By HUGH CARNEGY and KAREN FOSSLI


It is hard to imagine many Spanish fishermen wanting to venture to the bleak
waters of the Arctic, where the shoals of Norwegian cod run beneath the icy
surface.
But the fear of raiders from the south plundering its jealously guarded fish
stocks this weekend stands between Oslo and an agreement with Brussels on
terms for Norway's entry to the European Union.
While its Nordic neighbours, Sweden and Finland - together with Austria -
concluded accession accords last Monday, Norway held out against demands,
led by Spain, that it relax its stubborn insistence that is has 'no fish to
give' to the EU's fishermen.
To outsiders, Norway's dogged attitude on fish may seem hard to fathom. The
Spanish demand for 14,000 tonnes a year from Norwegian waters compares with
Norway's total annual catch of more than 2m tonnes. Fish is an important
export industry for Norway, but it accounts for less than 3 per cent of
gross national product.
Many Norwegians - especially in the business community - privately
acknowledge that to sacrifice the wider economic and political benefits of
EU membership on the fishmonger's slimy slab would be a big mistake, the
more so now that Sweden and Finland are well on the road to joining.
But few question the political judgment of Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, the
prime minister, in attaching so much importance to winning a deal that
satisfies Norway's demands on fish.
Though it was long ago dwarfed in economic importance by the North Sea oil
and gas industry, fishing has remained important to Norway. This is partly
for sentimental reasons. The image of the rugged fisherman making his living
on the far-flung fringes of northern Europe is as much a part of the
national culture as the tough mountain skier.
However, there is also a practical issue at stake. A broad political
consensus in Norway favours keeping alive the hard-pressed communities of
the distant northern coastal regions - and these communities still depend to
a large extent on the sea fishing industry.
The industry has been in long-term decline. This has been considerably
offset by the rapid growth of fish farming - but farming still employs only
about one-quarter of the 26,000 people who work in the fishing fleet.
Meanwhile, fish stocks - and catches - in Norwegian waters have been rising
in the past five years thanks to Norway's own quota system and stock
management. Hence it is reluctant to make any concession to Brussels that
might threaten the achievements to date.
Mrs Brundtland's minority Labour government recognises the political
significance of the fisheries issue. In 1972, Norwegians rejected joining
the European Economic Community, as the EU then was, in a referendum, after
Brussels adopted a common fisheries policy without consulting Norway.
The prime minister of the day, Mr Trygve Bratteli, had staked his Labour
government on winning a Yes vote and was forced to quit. Labour was deeply
split internally on the issue, and lost a subsequent election.
It is an experience that Mrs Brundtland and her colleagues in the Labour
party do not want to repeat. With the party rank and file, like the
electorate as a whole, still deeply divided on the merits of EU membership,
a 'defeat' on its fish demands could make it almost impossible for the
government to win another promised referendum on membership.
Mrs Brundtland has therefore been extremely careful throughout the
application process. She has said all along that, if she does not win good
accession terms, she will abandon the process and settle for Norway's
existing membership of the European Economic Area, which gives many of the
trade advantages of full EU membership.
But in spite of this tactical stance, Mrs Brundtland is determined to get
Norway into the Union. Those close to her say she is convinced of the
long-term economic benefits of being inside the Union, as well as the
political and security advantages for Norway, which is a Nato member
bordering Russia.
'She also thinks it would be a catastrophe - a real catastrophe - for Norway
if Sweden and Finland join and we find ourselves outside and isolated,' says
a senior Labour member. Apart from the lack of influence Norway would then
have in Europe, it would risk losing investment in the Nordic area to its
neighbours.
The three-time prime minister - she first held office in 1981 - has
therefore been plotting to overturn the result of the 1972 referendum since
the late 1980s. She secured approval for the 1992 application to the EU at a
party convention - thereby gaining an important mandate that averted
internal Labour splits. She successfully steered Labour through last
September's general election when the anti-EU Centre party became the second
largest in the Storting (parliament). Labour not only held on to office, but
increased its number of seats.
That left Mrs Brundtland clear to prepare for the present negotiations. The
next few days will determine whether she has succeeded in winning a
favourable accession accord - as now looks likely - or whether she herself
will fall into the tangled netting of Norwegian-EU relations.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940305

