FT943-779

FT  28 SEP 94 / Blair shuns high taxes and backs market economy: Ideological
baggage discarded as Labour stakes out ground for next election


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


The Labour leadership yesterday cast itself in the role of ally to a vibrant
market economy as it staked out the ground on which it will fight the next
general election.
In a speech designed to mark a break with postwar interventionism and
1970s-style corporatism, Mr Tony Blair said Labour's prescription for
sustained economic growth was neither anti-market nor anti-business.
The last remnants of the party's ideological baggage were discarded as the
opposition leader rejected the 'laisser-faire dogma' of the Conservatives
and Labour's past reliance on demand management in favour of a new
left-of-centre economic agenda.
Mr Blair, speaking at a London conference with Mr Gordon Brown, shadow
chancellor, dismissed the idea that a future Labour government could solve
the country's economic problems through higher spending and higher taxes.
Instead, its central objective would be to build a new partnership between
the public and private sectors which would reinforce rather than restrict
the role of the market in promoting faster growth with low inflation.
In a co-ordinated operation ahead of next week's Labour party conference -
the first since Mr Blair's election as leader in July - the two men warned
that the party's social ambitions could be met only if it delivered a
successful economy. Economic growth rather than increased public spending
would provide the route to a more cohesive, fairer society.
Their speeches were dismissed by senior Conservatives as a publicity
exercise. Mr Michael Portillo, employment secretary, accused them of
offering 'slogans and buzzwords'.
Mr Blair told the conference of academics and businessmen that a radical
shift in Labour thinking to meet the realities of the 1990s would redefine
the dividing lines between its strategy and that of the Tories.
The central dividing line was not between a rightwing government that
believed in the market and a leftwing opposition that did not. It was
between the right's dogmatic reliance on market forces alone and a left
approach that equipped business to prosper by promoting investment in
education and industry.
On spending, the line was between increased Tory spending on 'unemployment,
welfare and social decay' and Labour's desire to devote resources to
economically and socially productive projects. On taxes, the difference was
not between high and low taxation but between fair and unfair taxes.
Mr Brown, who sketched out a series of initiatives to encourage long-term
investment, underlined the break with the past by setting as the party's
central goal a dynamic market economy with long-term horizons.
He said crude 'free-market dogma' had failed to deliver this because it
provided no incentive for long-term investment.
But Mr Brown added: 'It is equally clear that the old Labour language - tax,
spend and borrow, nationalisation, state planning, isolationism, full-time
jobs for life for men while women stay at home - is equally inappropriate to
the demands of the future as it was to the needs of the past.'
Brown discards 'quick-fix' route, Page 13
CBI calls for Pounds 1bn support in Budget, Page 13
Editorial Comment, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940928

