FT944-11063

FT  08 NOV 94 / Harmony under the bonnet: Volkswagen is about to reach
agreement with the Czech government over the future of Skoda


   By KEVIN DONE


Peace is about to be declared between Volkswagen and the Czech government
ending 14 months of wrangling over the future of Skoda, the Czech carmaker.
Volkswagen, Europe's largest car-maker, has scaled back the ambitious plans
to modernise Skoda that initially helped it beat Renault of France to win
the Czech government's approval for the takeover in 1991.
The revised plans should guarantee the future of the Czech carmaker, while
allowing the German company to introduce production arrangements more
radical than anything it has so far attempted at its plants in Germany.
The new harmony between Skoda's shareholders was on show two weeks ago when
Czech ministers and government officials gathered with the company's top
management on Prague's Charles bridge to christen the Felicia, the first new
Skoda to be launched since VW took over management control in early 1991.
President Vaclav Havel took a private test drive.
Last year, Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW's management board chairman, had stunned
his partners in Prague, by pulling out of a prestige DM1.4bn (Pounds 570m)
project finance facility for Skoda. Negotiated over many months with the
International Finance Corporation and the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, the loan was abandoned only hours before it was due to be
signed in London.
VW's withdrawal, made without prior warning to the Czech government, sent
shockwaves through Prague and soured a relationship that had begun with high
hopes.
It has taken a long time to rebuild trust, but lawyers for the two sides are
putting the final touches this month to crucial amendments to the original
Skoda acquisition contract.
A new appendix to the agreement is aimed at stilling Czech government fears
about the level of Volkswagen's commitment to Skoda, the showpiece of the
Czech privatisation programme, fears that had led to rumours that Prague
might drop VW and seek a new partner.
Due to be signed in the next couple of weeks, the new agreement will finally
clear the way for VW to boost its shareholding in Skoda by the end of
December from the 31 per cent acquired in 1991 to a majority 50.5 per cent.
VW will inject an additional DM350m of new equity into Skoda and make a
further DM40m payment to the Czech government. Its stake will rise to 70 per
cent by the end of 1995 in return for a total investment of DM1.4bn -
DM1.2bn in new equity capital for Skoda and DM200m paid to the Czech
government.
Prague has had much to come to terms with in the revised deal:
The capital investment planned for Skoda until the end of the decade has
been cut to about DM3.7bn from the original estimate of DM9.5bn.
The target of a doubling of production capacity to 390,000 cars a year has
been reduced to less than 350,000.
A costly new engine plant has been dropped from the programme.
VW argues, however, that the revision of its plans for Skoda will enable the
Czech carmaker to avoid the costly disasters that have beset Seat, the
group's Spanish subsidiary, pushed to the edge of financial collapse last
year by the combination of recession and the over-ambitious investments
agreed in the late 1980s.
In 1990, VW had just begun a 10-year, Pta607bn (Pounds 3.4bn) investment
programme at Seat, and presented its spending on the Spanish operation to
the Czech government as a model for Skoda.
Today it is clear that the Spanish model was flawed. Huge losses at Seat
last year helped to pull the whole of the VW group deep into the red.
Instead of a model, Seat is now cited by VW as a warning of the perils of
profligate over-investment.
'We always mentioned how successful Seat was. We organised many trips to
Spain to show the Czechs the brand-new plant, how well-equipped it was with
a lot of automation. Today we know that labour rates are very low in the
Czech Republic.
It is much more effective not to automate all the processes,' says Mr
Volkhard Kohler, the Skoda vice-chairman brought in by VW in 1991.
Volkswagen is hardly the same company today as the one that planned the
development of Seat and then announced a string of visionary projects for
eastern Europe in 1990 and 1991 as the borders of the eastern bloc suddenly
opened to the west.
It plunged into record losses of DM1.94bn in 1993. Virtually its entire top
management has been replaced. It is undergoing a corporate revolution, as it
seeks to escape from the unenviable position as Europe's high-cost car
producer.
The robust regime initiated by Mr Piech at the beginning of 1993 set out to
cut costs to the bone. The gospel now is lean production, lean engineering
and lean investment. The Skoda project has been subjected by Mr Piech to the
same ruthless review as the rest of the group's operations, with little
regard to the sensitivities of his partners.
'Too high investment can kill our company,' warns Mr Kohler.
'In 1990 all views were too optimistic,' he adds. 'There were buoyant
markets in the east, today we know there is no purchasing power. When the
Iron Curtain came down there were ideas that you could speed up development,
but today it is clear that that cannot happen.'
Volkswagen is pushing ahead, however, with the development of a second Skoda
car range to be launched in late 1996, which is aimed at increasing Skoda
sales worldwide above 300,000 a year by the late 1990s from less than
200,000 this year.
It will maintain and further develop the existing 1.3 litre Skoda engine
family - now regarded as one of the company's biggest cost advantages - and
is looking to develop a version for use elsewhere in other group cars,
possibly at Seat.
It is building a new paint plant at the main Skoda facility at Mlada
Boleslav with a capacity for processing 1,300 cars a day or 307,000 cars a
year based on three-shift, round the clock working. It is also building an
assembly plant for the second range, a large family car to be based on the
chassis platform of the next generation VW Golf.
The initial capacity for the new car will be for 70,000 a year, but this
could be increased later to 140,000 a year, if there is sufficient demand,
says Mr Gerald Weber, Skoda's engineering director. 'We have to be careful.
We have the lesson of Seat, where the investment was too much. We have to
avoid that.'
The guiding principle for VW as it has revised its plans for the Czech
Republic has been to ensure that Skoda does not forfeit its cost advantages.
According to Mr Piech 'the 'low-cost' argument is of particular significance
due to the fact that the vehicles of the Skoda marque compete in the
extremely competitive segment of the low-cost family car. In this segment
the battle for the customer is fought decisively on prices.'
Mr Piech argues that the 'image disadvantage' of Skoda - in the UK it is the
butt of endless jokes - coupled with a low level of familiarity elsewhere in
west Europe, as well as an aggressive price battle in world car markets,
'will put the brakes on a swifter and profitable growth of the marque'.
The labour cost advantage for Skoda in the Czech Republic is enormous with
total labour costs at around one tenth of the level in Germany, but Mr
Kohler accepts that this advantage will gradually be eroded.
'We have to streamline our production processes to be able to offer cars at
a very low price. Wages will go up in the Czech Republic. We must find
production processes that work to our advantage in the future, and that
means the integration of our suppliers.'
The development of a more efficient Czech automotive component industry was
a key element in the original VW acquisition of Skoda, and its renewed
commitment to this programme will be included in the new agreement with the
Czech government.
Since VW moved into Skoda nearly four years ago, around 40 joint venture
components operations have been established, which already supply 44 per
cent of Skoda's purchases of materials. A further 6.5 per cent of purchases
come from greenfield site operations.
Around 80 per cent of Skoda's total purchases are made in the Czech Republic
and Slovakia and more than half of total purchases are already coming from
suppliers with access to western technology.
VW is now seeking to break new ground at Skoda by establishing supplier
operations directly inside the car plant, moving a step ahead even of the
Japanese model of having suppliers grouped in close proximity to the plant.
Three suppliers - Lucas, Johnson Controls and Pelzer - are already working
inside the Skoda plant producing rear axles, seats and carpets. Mr Kohler
says the number will soon rise to 10 to include items such as bumpers,
dashboards, instruments and exhaust systems.
'Labour costs will rise over time, so we must have a lean structure from the
outset.' The company claims that productivity has improved by 37 per cent in
the last three years.
Despite the labour cost advantage, the Skoda workforce is already falling,
from more than 17,000 last year to under 16,000 in 1995. The Cuban,
Vietnamese and prisoner workers of the Communist era are long gone, and
Skoda has also cut the number of Polish workers to 140 from 700 earlier this
year.
It also plans to transfer some workers from its own payroll to its
suppliers'. Unlike in Germany, where car workers' wages are significantly
higher than rates paid at components suppliers, there is little difference
in the Czech Republic. It is therefore easier to transfer workers and create
a flexibility that Mr Kohler hopes will be a crucial source of future
competitiveness.
While VW has been tightening its manufacturing and product development plans
for Skoda, it has been buffeted by dramatic fluctuations in the fortunes of
Skoda's main markets, which have forced the Czech carmaker to scour the
world for new outlets.
In 1991 Skoda sold 29,600 cars in Yugoslavia; this year sales to that area
have fallen to around 6,000. Sales in Poland have plunged from 38,000 in
1991 to 3,800 in the face of heavy import duties. In Turkey, they have
fallen from 22,000 last year to close to 4,000 in 1994.
According to Mr Detlev Schmidt, Skoda sales director, the sales potential of
90,000 a year in these three markets from 1991 to 1993 has fallen to around
14,000 this year.
'Skoda must succeed in opening new markets and finding new opportunities,
because there is such vulnerability in central and eastern Europe. It is
nothing to do with product weakness or price but with local market
conditions.'
Sales are rising in west Europe, with registrations up by 10.6 per cent in
the first nine months of this year. Skoda is also breaking into new markets
from Syria to Egypt, Jordan, Venezuela, China and North Korea. The number of
markets in which Skoda cars are sold will have been raised from 20 in 1991
to 57 by the end of the year, and around 36 additional markets are under
study.
However, it has had to start virtually from scratch in creating a
western-style sales and marketing network, having inherited state-selling
organisations of limited commercial skills in 1991.
'It was a delivery and allocation mentality. The factory just produced and
was surprised when someone came and said it must meet customer expectations.
It said the car is there, that's the colour, the customer can take it or
leave it,' says Mr Schmidt.
Skoda has ambitious plans for the expansion of its worldwide sales and
distribution network. The number of dealerships worldwide had already been
raised from 1,522 at the end of 1991 to 2,100 by the end of 1993, and this
is set to reach 2,500 by the end of this year and 4,000 by the end of the
decade.
Helped by the launch of the Felicia range, which has just been unveiled as
the successor to the Favorit and which will go on sale in the Czech Republic
next month, Skoda sales are forecast to rise to 205,000 in 1995 including
sales of 76,000 in west Europe and 67,000 in the domestic Czech market.
In line with the hairshirt mentality now ruling Volkswagen these forecasts
along with the latest strategic plan for Skoda are much more modest than the
euphoric earlier versions. But VW is still working hard to explain to its
Czech partners that even this agreement must be open to change as market
conditions evolve.
'Our people saw the (original) contract as a state plan,' says Mr Ludvik
Kalma, Skoda chairman. 'When we speak of five-year plans, people think that
that is a dogma for five years, but now when one plan is made, we start
working on the next.'

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941108

