FT944-5920

FT  01 DEC 94 / Leading Article: A fresh chance for Russia


The autumn collapse of the rouble has brought the Russian government to the
brink of a credible attempt to stabilise the economy. There are serious
flaws in its new budget package, now awaiting the approval of both the
Russian parliament and the International Monetary Fund. But it is a
ground-breaking document nonetheless. Few would forgive either institution
if their doubts extinguished Russia's latest and best chance of laying the
foundations for stable growth.
Worked out partly in collaboration with the IMF, the draft 1995 budget marks
a decisive shift, on paper at least, from the gradualist anti-inflation
efforts of recent years. This is because further efforts to lower the budget
deficit would this time be accompanied by three safeguards which past
attempts have lacked: namely, the nominal anchor of a pegged exchange rate,
strict rules against monetising the budget deficit, and Dollars 13bn in
western support.
The plan still falls short in important respects. Tax revenues, for example
 -which have fallen to a mere 11 per cent of GDP this year - are unlikely to
meet the plan's rosy expectations. Neither are economic growth, inflation or
interest rates. This means that next year's budget deficit will not fall to
the targeted 8 per cent of GDP in 1995, down from this year's 10 per cent.
Indeed, without extra spending cuts, the chances are that it will grow
larger.
These weaknesses will have to be tackled sooner or later. But more
important, in the short run, than lowering the deficit is changing the rules
for financing it. The government hopes to fund half of next year's shortfall
through domestic bond issues, with the rest funded by a mixture of IMF
support and other foreign financing. The idea of the budget plan is that the
central bank would be barred from resorting to the printing press if the
deficit exceeded its target. If it held, the new regime would impose a
powerful new constraint on over-spending - showing that in principle at
least, the Russian authorities know what is needed to win credibility.
Here, too, the detail of the budget is over-optimistic. Only around 10 per
cent of this year's deficit had been covered by treasury bill sales by the
end of September. Real interest rates might have to rise substantially to
find enough buyers, thus further endangering the government's targets.
Opposing deputies used these arguments in criticising the budget in last
Friday's debate in parliament: they want a much less ambitious programme.
Rather than craft one of their own, however, they set up a conciliation
council, which must reach a compromise with the government by December 10.
Parliament has the power to stop the reform effort in its tracks. But it
would then have responsibility for finding a more palatable, or incremental,
alternative. The deputies have no hope of finding one. Weak demand for
government bonds is a symptom of failed gradualism. So, too, is the fact
that Russians now put half of their earnings into foreign currency.
Successfully pegging the rouble with a Dollars 5bn stabilisation fund from
the IMF would restore faith in its value. The reward would be rising demand
for roubles and government bonds, which would lower the cost of
stabilisation.
Unlike parliament, the IMF can improve Russia's chances of success. It
should work with the government to bring the package and its planned
implementation closer to its requirements. But then it should sign.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941201

