FT941-5619

FT  05 MAR 94 / Potential bidder for pit urges early sale


   By CHRIS TIGHE


A potential bidder for the last pit to close in north-east England is
pressing for British Coal to start the sale process.
Mr Crispian Hotson, chief executive of the Ryan Group, the Welsh-based
private mining company, said yesterday his company had written to British
Coal asking when and how it planned to advertise Ellington, in
Northumberland, for sale and urging it to give potential bidders access to
the pit quickly.
Ellington closed last month with the loss of 1,100 jobs. It is being
maintained in anticipation of a possible sale.
'It would be better for all if Ellington is found to have a future to embark
on it as soon as possible,' said Mr Hotson yesterday.
British Coal's remaining working deep mines and its opencast operations are
to be sold in five regional packages. Twenty-eight closed pits have already
been offered separately for lease and licence, but three which shut very
recently, including Ellington, are to be offered 'in parallel' with the
regional packages.
The Department of Trade and Industry said yesterday it had not yet been
decided whether they would be part of the packages.
The coal industry privatisation bill is likely to receive royal assent in
the summer; the DTI expects to invite potential bidders for the regional
packages to register their interest in a few weeks. They will then be given
more information.
Ryan and British Alcan Aluminium - the UK subsidiary of Alcan of Canada -
which uses coal from Ellington in its adjacent smelter, announced in January
they were considering a joint bid for the north-east package.
Mr Hotson, who expects three or four bidders for Ellington, said yesterday
he was 'cautiously optimistic' his consortium would place a bid. But no
final decision on Ellington could be taken until his team could get
underground. He envisaged, he said, significant capital investment, giving
Ellington a long-term future.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940305

