FT942-12538

FT  29 APR 94 / Alarm bells ring for life insurers: Research into new
commission disclosure rules predicts extra costs


   By ALISON SMITH


The onus that will be placed on life insurance sales agents to volunteer
their commission is likely to lead to a 10 per cent drop in sales, according
to research published yesterday by the Securities and Investments Board, the
City's chief watchdog.
This fall was classified as a benefit to consumers by National Economic
Research Associates, the economic consultancy which carried out the
research. Its report was released to coincide with the publication yesterday
of the final forms of the documents that all sales agents will have to show
to customers from the beginning of next year.
That classification of a fall in sales as a 'benefit' is likely to reinforce
the industry's suspicion about the introduction of commission disclosure.
The findings themselves could well set alarm bells ringing more seriously.
The findings suggest there will be:
Benefits to customers of some Pounds 800m a year in reduced charges, taking
account of reductions in commission of about 20 per cent.
About Pounds 100m a year less in sales, with the main impact felt through
direct sales forces and tied agents.
About Pounds 100m a year in benefit from a reduction in the number of cases
where policies lapse in the early years.
One-off implementation costs to the industry of about Pounds 100m, excluding
management time.
Continuing costs of Pounds 50m a year to the industry.
Extra operating costs of Pounds 500,000 a year for the regulators, which
would be passed on to the industry.
The consultancy conducted its survey earlier this year, interviewing 24 life
insurers, including two banks and a building society, six large groups of
independent financial advisers and two friendly societies.
It set the estimated costs and benefits against the background of what has
happened in the life insurance industry since 1980.
It noted, for example, that the average actual commission rate for matched
policies payable to independent financial advisers seemed to be some 30 per
cent to 70 per cent above the 1981 levels, with many tied agents - those who
sell the products of one particular life insurer - receiving significantly
higher rates. The overall reduction in commission rates, which it expects to
reach some 20 per cent by 1997, would represent a direct benefit to
customers of some Pounds 500m a year, but would still leave commission rates
higher than their levels before 1990.
The consultancy estimates that competition would also drive down the charges
for maintaining policies in a way that would benefit consumers by about
Pounds 300m a year.
In terms of reduced sales, the consultancy noted that total premiums in
respect of new business were more than Pounds 17bn in 1992, and that they
expected them to be significantly reduced, perhaps by one-tenth compared
with what they would otherwise have been, as a result of disclosure.
Noting that the cost both to consumers and to the industry was high where
payments for regular premium policies were not maintained, the consultancy
said it had taken the view that the disclosure plans would cut the 'lapse
rate' - of policies which are given up in the early years - by 2 percentage
points a year.
It also saw an unquantifiable but significant benefit in the impetus towards
the design and selling of more suitable products and the general increase in
competition as a result of the new regime.
The three main costs it identified for the industry in introducing the
change were the initial costs, relating for example to computer systems,
training and new-product literature; continuing expenses; and the
opportunity cost of management time.
While the overall conclusion was that benefits far outweighed the costs of
commission and product disclosure, the consultancy did make a few
exceptions.
The main one was the need to prepare information specific to the client in
the case of policies where the premiums were very small - where the premium
paid in a year is below Pounds 120.
This could cover much of the 'industrial branch' business, in which premiums
are collected on a monthly or weekly basis.
Costs and Benefits of SIB Proposals to Increase Product and Commission
Disclosure in Life Assurance. SIB, Gavrelle House, 2-14 Bunhill Row, London
EC1Y 8RA. Pounds 100.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940429

