FT944-5952

FT  01 DEC 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Time to set up shop
in Japan - Openings for foreign retailers have improved


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


For years, foreign retailers eyeing up Japan have been thwarted by high
costs, investment restrictions and an intricate web of wholesalers and
distributors.
But a number of factors are opening up new opportunities for overseas
chains, notably consumer taste for discounts, own-label products and
imported goods.
Toys R Us, the US toy chain, was one of the first foreign companies to move
into Japan. But others, such as Marks and Spencer, the UK clothes and food
retailer, The Gap, the US casual clothing chain, and Tati, the French
clothing retailer, are considering entering the market.
Japanese consumers' enthusiasm for expensive brands has been diminished by
the downturn in the economy and corporate earnings. Also, as more Japanese
travel abroad they have begun to question the exorbitant prices back home.
Meanwhile, the sharp appreciation of the yen has lowered the price of
imports, while stricter enforcement of antitrust law has eased the grip on
retail prices of manufacturers and distributors.
Relaxation of laws restricting large supermarkets and retailers has further
opened up the sector. This has weakened Japan's traditional retailers - both
the small 'mom-and-pop stores' and the upmarket department stores, which
until recently have been protected by a multi-layered distribution system
and old ties with the manufacturers. Many large supermarket and discount
chains that have developed their own product sourcing and distribution
routes have managed to shed their 'cheap' image, and have become mainstream
outlets in the sector.
All these developments offer new business chances for foreign companies,
says McKinsey & Company, the business consultants. In a recent report* the
firm points out that Japanese businesses that have been most severely hit
are those with structural inefficiencies. Foreign companies with 'tried and
tested retailing skills' have much to contribute, either as partners for
domestic retailers or as new entrants on their own.
Traditional Japanese retailers are not only bound by established
relationships with suppliers and wholesalers; altering longstanding
organisational and management systems is difficult. For example, many large
Japanese department stores have modelled their personnel systems and
organisation on manufacturers. While main profit generation occurs on the
sales floor, many skilled and experienced managers are promoted to
administrative tasks, rather than focusing on the sales floor.
Foreign players, says McKinsey, have the advantage of being well-placed to
build relationships with suppliers from scratch, and design new ways of
operating that are beyond domestic retailers with established ties and
practices. They can also bring in new skills and systems in merchandising
and product procurement as well as new retailing strategies.
Without experience and understanding of the Japanese consumer or the retail
sector, it is essential to tie up with a Japanese partner, says McKinsey.
But while the emphasis for newcomers to Japan has been to do things the
Japanese way, McKinsey argues that relying on the Japanese partner's
traditional skills and systems could cause problems for those trying to
introduce new retailing expertise and ideas.
Toys R Us, for instance, which currently has 24 stores across the country,
cracked the conservative Japanese toy retail market with its use of direct
procurement combined with its store layout skills. However, it did lack
knowledge of running a chain in Japan, and so tied up with McDonald's Japan,
the fast food group.
'There is no need to be 'Japanised',' says Hirokazu Yamanashi, consultant at
McKinsey's in Tokyo. 'It is important not to fall in the same trap that the
Japanese players have found themselves in,' he warns.
*The Emperor's New Stores by Tatsuo Ohbora, Kanoko Oishi and Hirokazu
Yamanashi. Tel: Tokyo 81-3-5562-2100

The Financial Times


London Page 14

941201

