FT943-12726

FT  23 JUL 94 / Chinese dream sours for high-flying entrepreneur: The
detention of James Peng on suspicion of corruption has turned the spotlight
on a secretive and primitive legal system


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


For the past nine months, Mr James Peng, a China-born Australian
businessman, has been held without charge on suspicion of 'corruption' in
Shenzhen's Meiling detention centre in southern China. If Mr Peng is found
guilty of corruption he faces a minimum prison term of 10 years and possibly
the death penalty.
The fate of 'Jimmy' Peng, 35, is the story of an entrepreneur who flew too
high and was brought down by a Chinese legal system still secretive in its
methods and primitive in its treatment of suspects.
For a time Mr Peng was a local hero. His company Champaign, a textile,
property and trading group, was the first Sino-foreign joint venture listed
on a Chinese stock exchange. In 1991 he almost pulled off the HKDollars
1.14bn (Pounds 96.6m) sale of his controlling interest in Champaign to
Lolliman, a Hong Kong property investment company. But the deal came
unstuck.
And late at night on October 13 last year, Mr Peng was taken from the
Mandarin Oriental in Macao by the police and handed over to the Chinese
police, in an arrest which has raised international concern.
On June 9, after repeated demands by the Australian government for an
explanation, the Macao government said Mr Peng had consented to his return
to China to answer charges of corruption. But a spokesperson for the
Australian department of foreign affairs and trade said last week that
Canberra was dissatisfied with Macao's response.
On June 20, Senator Gareth Evans, Australia's foreign minister, wrote to his
opposite number, Mr Qian Qichen, expressing the Australian government's
'deep concern' at China's handling of the case.
Under China's criminal code a suspect can be held for two months without
charge, unless the National People's Congress, China's parliament, gives
written authorisation for an extension. On Thursday, the semi-official Hong
Kong China News Agency quoted an unnamed official from the Shenzhen People's
Procuratorate saying that Mr Peng's detention had been approved by the NPC
and was 'strictly within legal limits'.
Mr Peng's problems appear to relate to his ownership of Champaign.
In 1987 he acquired the loss-making Shenzhen Yuan Ye Textiles company and
the Shenzhen government approved its conversion into a Sino-foreign joint
venture with Mr Peng's Panco Industrial, a Hong Kong-registered private
company, owning 83 per cent of its Yn20m (Pounds 1.5m) registered capital.
This joint-venture company was listed on the Shenzhen stock exchange in
March 1990 as Champaign.
Between 1987 and 1990 Mr Peng appears to have performed wonders, with
Champagne's audited profits before tax at Yn31.4m in 1990. But he also
angered local officialdom with some deft financial footwork.
In July 1988, according to an August 1993 report by a committee established
by the Shenzhen government to restructure Champaign, one shareholder, Xinye,
a state-owned company, converted its ordinary shares into preference shares.
Xinye did this for an entitlement to dividend payments capped at a total of
Yn350,000.
Two months later Mr Peng revalued the company's assets. This increased Yuan
Ye's net worth by Yn25.7m and give Panco a windfall gain of Yn24.6m on its
investment.
The Shenzhen government's 1993 inquiry found that 'this action of
revaluation resulted in injury to the state.'
The first inkling that Mr Peng might be in trouble came in 1991 when he
tried to sell Panco (which then owned about 51 per cent of Champaign) to
Lolliman. Lolliman was well connected in China and was sold last year to the
People's Liberation Army and renamed Poly Investments.
But the proposed sale to Lolliman, unveiled in June 1991, fell through in
July. Lolliman cited complexities relating to the auditing of Panco's
interests in Shenzhen. Press speculation suggested the Shenzhen government
had intervened to stop the deal.
This was also suggested by Mr Peng in a letter he wrote to the Australian
consul in Guangzhou on September 28 last year from his home in Sydney.
By the beginning of 1992, Mr Peng says, he was negotiating with the Shenzhen
office of the People's Bank over the sale of nearly half of Panco's interest
in Champaign when first the Shenzhen government and then the People's Bank
called off the talks.
The central bank sent in inspectors and seized Champaign's accounts.
Champaign's bank accounts were frozen and the People's Bank stated that no
bank would be allowed to realise its security against Panco's mortgaged
Champaign shares.
This rendered unsecured loans that were previously secured. As a result, on
June 20 the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) sued Champaign in
the Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court for the recovery of a Yn20m loan.
The bank also alleged that Panco was not the legal owner of its interest in
Champaign in view of share trades which occurred in 1988.
The People's Bank sequestered Panco's investment in Champaign. Mr Peng
stepped down as chairman of both Panco and Champaign in an attempt to take
some of the heat out of the dispute.
On December 18 the Shenzhen court voided Champaign's loan agreement with
ICBC - even though Panco had paid off the debt before the hearing began - on
the basis that Panco's ownership of its Champaign shares was illegal. Panco
appealed to the Guangdong Higher People's Court.
At the beginning of May last year the Guangdong court overturned the
Shenzhen court's ruling. The court found that Panco did have legal title to
its shares in Champaign and could therefore use them as collateral for a
loan. However, it ordered ICBC to hand over the Champaign shares in its
keeping to the Shenzhen Securities Regulatory Office 'for further handling'
because the Shenzhen authorities had already decided to 'reorganise'
Champaign.
At this point Deng Xiaoping's niece, Ms Ding Peng, appeared on the stage. Mr
Peng says in his letter to the Australian consul that he hired Ms Ding - the
daughter of Mr Deng Ken, the younger brother of Mr Deng - 'to more
efficiently facilitate communications with officials in Shenzhen'.
According to Mr Peng's wife, Lina, relations with Ms Ding appeared to be
warm. Last week she said that her husband paid Ms Ding HKDollars 100,000 a
month and provided her with an office in Hong Kong.
In his letter to the Australian consul, Mr Peng says that Ms Ding and a Mr
Zheng Lie Lie, were hired to lead Panco's discussions with the Shenzhen
government-appointed Champaign Restructuring Group. In apparent defiance of
the Guangdong court ruling, Shenzhen proceeded with its restructuring of
Champaign in spite of the superior court ruling that Panco's ownership of
Champaign was legal.
In the midst of these talks Mr Peng discovered that Ms Ding and Mr Zheng
were attempting secretly to transfer Panco's shareholding in Champaign,
valued at HKDollars 450m, to a company they owned prior to its resale to
China Investments, one of Hong Kong's lesser 'red chips' (the mainland
equivalent of a 'blue chip' stock).
Mr Peng and associates immediately sought and obtained a Hong Kong High
Court injunction preventing the share transfer. However, developments across
the border were once again moving against him.
On September 5 last year the Shenzhen government convened a meeting of
Champaign's shareholders. Although Mr Peng alleges in his letter to the
Australian consul that a quorum was not present, the meeting voted to
confiscate Panco's shareholding in the company and divide it between
Shenzhen Municipal Development (Holdings), and Hong Kong China Project, a
company on whose board of directors sits Ms Ding.
Mr Peng immediately lodged a suit against the Shenzhen government with the
Shenzhen Intermediate Court but, to date, it has refused to accept his
application. Weeks after this suit was lodged Mr Peng was detained in Macao
and handed over to the Shenzhen police.
For corporate lawyers, the way local Shenzhen officials and others have
combined to confiscate Mr Peng's assets has caused alarm.
'The Shenzhen authorities have shown a flagrant disregard for the rights of
shareholders and creditors, which are the basic rights enshrined in all
company law,' says a Hong Kong lawyer. Furthermore, his case is cautionary
for ethnic Chinese businessmen who are nationals of another country.
The stakes were raised last week when Mr Peng's wife Lina decided to
publicise her family's relationship with Ms Ding. To implicate such a close
relative of Mr Deng Xiaoping's in this way could invite harsher treatment of
her husband. An adviser to Lina Peng agreed that it was a high-risk move -
'but it's been nine months that he's been detained and Lina has been through
most of the low-risk strategies,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940723

