FT944-14523

FT  22 OCT 94 / A nation desperate for relief: Iraqis' collective morale may
never have sunk so low


   By MARK NICHOLSON


Nothing demonstrates Iraq's isolation and deepening impoverishment more
starkly than the 1,000km desert highway that links Baghdad to Amman in
Jordan.
Traffic along the three-lane motorway, which has been Iraq's main link with
the world since flights were banned by the UN, has thinned to a dribble of
cars and an occasional truck. The country has run out of the means to afford
the imports of food and medicines that the UN permits. And the traffic that
does brave the highway is prey to highwaymen.
After 12 hours travelling Iraq's exposed, empty lifeline, vehicles reach the
anti-aircraft batteries of Baghdad's approaches. The highway then opens on
to the busy boulevards of a capital strewn with mighty monuments and
buildings: all in tribute to President Saddam Hussein and his ambition to
make Iraq an Arab superpower.
In spite of four years of sanctions, Baghdad has kept up appearances. With
dogged ingenuity, the Iraqis have rebuilt almost everything the
70,000-80,000 tonnes of allied bombs destroyed during the Gulf war in 1991.
They have chipped away broken concrete to recover reinforcing rods. They
have cannibalised spare parts. And they have rebuilt Iraq's main
telecommunications, power, water, sewage and road networks. Mr Saddam has
even had a new communications tower built, claimed to be the Middle East's
tallest structure, and is planning what officials call 'the biggest mosque
in the world'. The Saddam mosque, naturally.
Iraqis are proud of this rebirth, whatever they think about their leader -
something few Iraqis risk venturing to strangers. 'We hear all about
rebuilding Lebanon, rebuilding Kuwait - no one ever wrote about how we
rebuilt Iraq, without any foreign money or the original plans of the foreign
manufacturers,' said one Iraqi electrician. 'Do you know we rebuilt our
earth station? More than 100,000 fragments, all put back together.'
But towers, mosques and earth stations cannot hide the clear plunge in
Iraqis' living conditions in the past few months. As the same Iraqi put it:
'Sanctions are hurting now. The first, second, third years - then maybe we
were bluffing. It was for the foreign media, our suffering. But now it
hurts.'
There are plenty of signs that Iraq has reached a critical stage. Food
supplies are perilously short. Iraq imported 70 per cent of its food, at an
annual cost of Dollars 1.1bn, before the war. The government says it is now
spending an annual Dollars 700m on food, and cannot do that for much longer.
Last month it halved the basic rations of sugar, oil, rice and flour that
every Iraqi has been entitled to since 1990. This year's harvest is down by
a third on last year's poor crop. Farmers have not been able to get
pesticides or fertilisers and, after four years' cropping without fallow,
have leached their soil, say UN officials.
Rations only met 70 per cent of basic nutritional needs, before the cuts.
Hence the rise in the number of children with stomachs bloated by
malnutrition appearing in Baghdad's hospital beds. Doctors at the Saddam
Children's Hospital say that so far this year they have admitted 500
children with marasmus, a severe form of malnutrition, compared with about
65 a year before the embargo. They are also critically short of drugs.
Food prices have soared. Two dozen eggs or a kilo of lamb costs ID1,000,
about half an average government employee's monthly pay. One school teacher,
buying an ID500 tin of babymilk powder in the Shorjah souk, said this
represented a third of her monthly income. 'It's all the money I have, so I
must spend it for my children,' she said. 'Of course we can't manage.'
It is Iraq's salaried classes which are worst hit. Of Baghdad's 1m
middle-class Christians, more than 300,000 are thought to have fled since
1991. The government is trying to staunch the flow. Dina, a 23-year-old
secretary, says she qualified as a petrochemical engineer at Baghdad
university, but has not been granted her degree papers. 'Without it they
know I can't get a job overseas,' she says, adding that one college mate, a
mechanical engineer, has resorted to selling cigarettes by the roadside for
a living. Baghdad's souks are full of people selling the family silver -
literally.
The Iraqi dinar has become funny money - locals refer to it simply as
'paper'. Hard economic data are rare, but the government estimates that
prices have risen by 5,000 per cent since 1990. Exchange a Dollars 100 bill
in Baghdad and you receive a 15cm bundle of dinars. Banks ferry money inside
branches in supermarket trolleys and receive truck deliveries of notes each
morning. The few who are making money out of sanctions, such as spare parts
dealers, smugglers and the Baghdad-Amman taxi drivers in their hulking GMC
Suburbans, buy their cars and houses with 50kg sack-loads of dinars.
A grim pall has settled over Baghdad. The city's restaurants are dark and
empty. Public drinking has been banned. A rise in crime and low-level graft,
once almost absent, and army desertions has seen the government resort to
the severing of hands, feet or ears by way of punishment.
But while Iraqis' collective morale may never have sunk so low, there are
few signs that this is coalescing into any articulated, let alone organised,
opposition to Mr Saddam. Iraqis are keeping their private feelings private.
'Even if Saddam has lost support - and there's no doubt many hate Saddam -
people cannot react because they fear the regime,' says a diplomat. Another
suggests that with 'one in 20 working for the mukhabarat (secret police), at
a conservative guess', it is hard to assess what political forces are
stirring.
Another year without reprieve from the embargo would certainly aggravate the
ruin of Iraq's middle class and cause more crime and starvation, but it
still might not shift the Iraqi leader.
The hardship of sanctions may even be strengthening Mr Saddam's hand, some
argue. 'Put it this way,' says an ambassador in Baghdad, 'at present, who is
closer to the Iraqi people's concerns? The UN, the US and the exiled Iraqi
opposition who want to keep sanctions on, or Saddam, who is fighting to get
them lifted? Even those who hate Saddam are now in the same basket.'
No one wholly rules out a palace coup from within Mr Saddam's al-Takrit clan
elite, or a rising of disgruntled officers. But neither seems likely. And if
either occurred, it would come out of the blue even for the most plugged-in
observers.
The view from Baghdad is that Mr Saddam is staying, whatever the US, the UK
and the Iraqi opposition may hope.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941022

