FT942-12260

FT  30 APR 94 / Des res for buyer with Pounds 60m


   By JENNY LUESBY


The potential departure of the Treasury mandarins from their English
Renaissance-style building overlooking Parliament Square opens an attractive
site to the ambitions of property developers and those seeking a prestigious
London base.
The 646,000 sq ft offices, estimated to be worth about Pounds 60m, are
grand, well-located, loaded with contemporary political history - and faced
with refurbishments which may be too costly for the Treasury to bear.
One possibility is that Treasury Chambers will follow the fate of County
Hall, once the home of London's local authority, and provide rich pickings
for the leisure industry.
Whether dedicated to the great chancellors, or a chamber of horrors of the
others, the idea of halls alive with soundtracks and laser on the theme of
British government could prove irresistible to theme-park magnates. It has
the added benefit of being close to many of London's most popular tourist
sights.
Property developers suggest that a mixture of up-market apartments, a hotel
and offices would be its most likely future, with a high level of Far
Eastern interest in such developments. Alternatively the building could
provide an elegant headquarters for an international institution.
The completion of the new Gatt trade treaty has resulted in a beefed-up
World Trade Organisation, which will need more space than Gatt's current
Geneva base offers. The WTO is talking to the Swiss about expansion, but it
has received offers of buildings from Bonn, which is losing Germany's seat
of government to Berlin.
The problems for any new tenant would be the same as the Treasury's in terms
of the high costs of upgrading the building. Commercial property advisers
say only wholesale refurbishment would bring it up to modern standards.
The building's use would be constrained by its Grade II listing, which
covers internal features including a central marble staircase, panelled
offices and a circular inner courtyard.
Westminster City Council, the local authority, is wary of any use that would
generate traffic, particularly a stream of coaches, around Whitehall.
Another scheme for which the Treasury might be suited is the 'one-stop shop'
for international investors being promoted by the City Development
Corporation and Westminster council. Mooted as a contact point for the
international community and a public relations and information service for
London, it would house exhibitions and conferences.
Other interested parties might include the media, with the site offering
clear advantages for 24-hour news stations.
An unknown quantity, however, is the degree to which security considerations
would come into play. With Whitehall full of secret tunnels, communications
rooms and nuclear shelters, it may be that the site would have to be rented
to an organisation on the 'inside track'.
This might well rule out the chances of it becoming a 'centre of financial
excellence' through the takeover of its corridors by the London School of
Economics, which tried so hard to get County Hall.
The LSE's director, Mr John Ashworth, points out that the prospect of 5,000
LSE students camped so close to Downing Street is a scheme unlikely to
appeal to those in power. 'Can you imagine the signs that would be visible?'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940430

