FT942-16122

FT  12 APR 94 / Property yields fall back below gilts


   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent


The sharp recovery in the commercial property investment market over recent
months has pushed property yields below gilt yields for the first time since
1992.
Property yields, the ratio of income to capital value, have fallen at the
fastest pace on record since institutions returned to the property market in
force last summer. Since the market's turning point last June, property
values have risen by about 25 per cent, according to Hillier Parker,
chartered surveyors.
The Hillier Parker figures show that property yields fell from 9.2 per cent
in May 1993 to 7.3 per cent at the start of this month, when long-dated gilt
yields stood at about 8 per cent.
The cross-over of bond and property yields marks a new phase in the recovery
of the property market. Until recently, investors principally bought
property for the strength of its existing income, rather than for its
potential rental growth. The property market was largely driven by movements
in the bond markets, rather than the strength of tenants' demand for
buildings.
The re-emergence of a reverse yield gap between property and gilts suggests
that investors are sufficiently optimistic about the prospects for rental
growth to compensate for the extra costs and risks involved in owning
property, compared with gilts.
Average rents appear to have stabilised, after falling nearly 5 per cent in
the year to February, according to Hillier Parker. Most agents expect rental
growth to begin towards the end of the year.
Mr Russell Schiller, head of research at Hillier Parker, believed the
decline in property yields had diluted the argument for buying property. He
expected the market to plateau, as more property owners tried to sell and
investors' enthusiasm for buying property cooled.
In particular, investors are showing less interest in properties which have
poor prospects for rental growth because existing leases require tenants to
pay above-market rents. Hillier Parker expected the value of properties of
this type, particularly poorly located City office blocks, to fall by 10-15
per cent.
However, the large sums of money earmarked for property by institutions and
property companies is likely to continue to drive up the value of good
quality property, say many agents. The institutions, which spent more than
Pounds 1bn on commercial property in the last quarter of last year, are
still bidding up prices for properties which have good prospects of rental
growth.
The cross-over of gilt and property yields marks the end of the first period
since the 1960s when investors demanded higher yields from property than
from gilts. This reflected the property surplus following the surge in
construction at the end of the 1980s, weak demand from new occupiers and the
high risk of tenant default.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940412

