FT942-14874

FT  19 APR 94 / Bosnian Serbs consolidate in fallen Gorazde: UN commander
warns of 'major humanitarian catastrophe' for trapped Moslems


   By LAURA SILBER, JUREK MARTIN and LIONEL BARBER


   BELGRADE, WASHINGTON, LUXEMBOURG


Foreign ministers of the European Union pledged to restore the west's
shattered credibility over Bosnia yesterday as the Serbs consolidated their
newly established position in the enclave of Gorazde.
The UK and France pressed for a streamlined approach uniting the US,
Russian, United Nations and European peace efforts in Bosnia. It was also
aimed at avoiding fresh tensions between Europe and the US over Bosnia,
while preventing Russia from siding more closely with the Serbs.
In Washington, President Bill Clinton insisted that a negotiated settlement
was still possible. 'I do think that the big things are still working in the
long term in favour of peace,' he told reporters, while acknowledging that
recent news from Gorazde was 'grim and disappointing'.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, secretary general of the UN which has seen its
'safe haven' policy thwarted by the Serb advance, last night said he was
seeking more effective protection for all such enclaves in Bosnia. He has
asked Nato for stand-by authority to request air strikes  - as distinct from
the close air support for peacekeepers currently authorised - but Mr Yuli
Vorontsov, the Russian UN ambassador, said he opposed automatic use of air
strikes.
The Bosnian Serbs yesterday put forward their terms for the effective
partition of Gorazde as General Sir Michael Rose, UN commander in Bosnia,
warned of a 'major humanitarian catastrophe' for tens of thousands of
Moslems trapped in the enclave.
The Serbs reiterated promises, first voiced on Sunday night, to keep their
guns out of a 3km exclusion zone on the west bank of the river Drina, which
runs through Gorazde. That would formalise the existing situation.
The Serbs pledged to allow deployment of 300 UN soldiers in the exclusion
zone, which would effectively leave the eastern part of Gorazde under Serb
control. 'We will make a Serbian municipality on the east bank of the Drina.
We can discuss the fate of the other part of the city in peace talks later,'
said Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb leader.
In Luxembourg, EU foreign ministers tried to salvage something from the
wreckage of western policy toward Bosnia with an Anglo-French appeal for a
united diplomatic front to halt further Serb territorial aggression. The EU
called for an immediate, unconditional ceasefire in Gorazde and appealed to
the Bosnian Serbs to 'honour their word' in the UN-brokered peace talks.
Lord Owen, the EU mediator, said the strategy was to achieve a ceasefire,
deploy extra UN forces and quickly resume negotiations on a new map for
Bosnia.
European delegations expressed frustration that the US was holding back
funding to the UN, hampering efforts to provide extra forces. In London Mr
Malcolm Rifkind, UK defence secretary, said that of 8,000 additional troops
pledged to the UN force only the UK's battalion group and 300 other troops -
totalling 1,200 - had arrived.
The EU initiative came as Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian peace envoy,
attacked the Bosnian Serbs for breaking their promises to him. 'A group of
Bosnian Serb extremists have fallen ill with the madness of war,' he said.
Serbs rob west of Russian prize, Page 2
Idealism gives way to disenchantment, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940419

