FT943-12694

FT  23 JUL 94 / Lessons learnt the hard way: Robert Graham seeks
explanations for Berlusconi's political troubles


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


This has been the week that Silvio Berlusconi lost his political virginity.
For a man who has spent more than 35 years as a businessman and less than
six months as a politician, it was always a possibility that the Italian
prime minister's political inexperience would trip him up. But few imagined
Mr Berlusconi could commit such elementary errors.
Trying to hurry through a clumsy reform of Italy's system of preventive
detention, he brought his right-wing coalition government close to collapse
as alliance partners disowned his actions. The situation was only saved by
the withdrawal of the legislation at the expense of humiliating Mr
Berlusconi.
'The question now is whether Berlusconi can learn from his mistakes and put
the incident behind him,' observed one of his supporters, who has been
dismayed by the prime minister's recent performance. 'His image and his
self-confidence have taken a beating: but we can't tell yet whether he has
been permanently knocked off-course.'
Ironically, television, the medium which launched Mr Berlusconi, has become
the instrument of his embarrassment. A man who can establish himself with
extraordinary success in the public eye as a charmer and a winner, looks
vulnerable when the smile disappears and political setbacks take their toll.
Television viewers have seen Mr Berlusconi oscillate between hurt pride,
grim frustration and cold fury. He was even close to threatening his
resignation in a nationwide television broadcast on Tuesday. The TV cameras
were summoned to the prime minister's office but stood down at the last
moment when Mr Umberto Bossi, the astute leader of the populist Northern
League, promised to pull his party out of the coalition government if the
broadcast went ahead.
Yesterday, in a calmer mood, Mr Berlusconi admitted he suffered from
possessing too much self-confidence, hinting that an element of hubris had
set in.
But almost in the same breath he was talking revenge: 'As of Monday, I'll be
telling Italians the real story . . . You'll then see this affair will
boomerang for many people.'
The warning seemed addressed not merely to the League, which shamelessly
reneged on its cabinet endorsement of the preventive detention decree to
enfeeble Mr Berlusconi. It was also aimed at the press which this week
sensed the prime minister's weakness and turned hostile after giving him a
two-month honeymoon.
So far no one - neither Mr Berlusconi, his entourage, his coalition partners
or his opponents - has come up with an adequate explanation for the prime
minister's awkward behaviour.
After being in government only two months it seems improbable that Mr
Berlusconi should have been in such a hurry to tackle the judiciary's abuses
of their powers of arrest and imprisonment. It is also hard to understand
how someone so sensitive to public opinion would approve a decree that
allowed out of prison businessmen and politicians who have become figures of
hate for their involvement in large-scale corrupt practices.
Maybe the cabinet was unaware of these consequences and Mr Berlusconi
focused on correcting the genuine excesses of the magistrates who have used
imprisonment to extract confessions. Critics suggest Mr Berlusconi may have
been concerned to protect his own Fininvest media empire from closer
judicial inspection - though he would dismiss such claims as groundless.
Yesterday advance extracts from two weekly magazines, L'Espresso and
Panorama, suggested the Milan magistrates who resigned in protest over the
decree were investigating the links between a member of the Guardia di
Finanza (the financial police) arrested in April on corruption charges, and
Fininvest's tax department.
But even an element of self-interest does not fully explain an action which
has caused Mr Berlusconi such discomfort. Part of his self-inflicted damage
undoubtedly came from overestimating his skills as a politician and a
communicator in the wake of bathing in the international publicity of a
successfully hosted G7 summit.
A more complete explanation must come from the kind of advice the media
magnate turned politician has been getting from his close circle of
associates. Mr Berlusconi entered politics in January surrounded by a small
group of friends who were all either directly or indirectly linked to
Fininvest. They are still with him and have had to change from protecting Mr
Berlusconi's interests as owner of Fininvest to looking after these
interests as prime minister.
In any circumstances, the metamorphosis from being courtiers and managers to
executive politicians is a big adjustment. But to make this change at a time
when Italy has seen its traditional parties collapse and when complex
decisions are needed on economic policy and reform of Italy's institutions
requires a team of exceptional calibre. It is arguable whether they are up
to the task. Few have direct political experience beyond this year. The
group includes:
Mr Gianni Letta, former editor of Tempo, the daily linked to the Rome
Christian Democrats, and now the chief of staff in the prime minister's
office. He joined Fininvest as Mr Berlusconi's 'diplomatic' representative
in Rome at the crucial moment in the late 1980s when he was lobbying for
full commercial television licences.
Mr Marcello Dell'Utri, the manager of Publitalia, Fininvest's advertising
arm and friend of Mr Berlusconi since student days. He was instrumental in
encouraging Mr Berlusconi to enter politics and helped organise Forza Italia
as a political movement through the Publitalia network.
Mr Fidele Confalonieri, the chairman of Fininvest, another friend of student
days who helped Mr Berlusconi found his business empire.
Mr Cesare Previti, Mr Berlusconi's lawyer with a reputation as a successful
intermediary between business and government who is now defence minister (Mr
Berlusconi was talked out of making him justice minister).
If the government coalition were cohesive, Mr Berlusconi would probably have
felt more comfortable with a larger circle. But the two main partners, the
League and the neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance of Mr Gianfranco Fini, are
constantly afraid they will become submerged by the force of Mr Berlusconi's
personality and accumulated authority. This makes Mr Berlusconi wary of Mr
Fini and openly mistrustful of the League.
As a result his kitchen cabinet, though by no means unanimous, has
encouraged Mr Berlusconi to assert himself - hence his various
confrontations with Mr Bossi that reached a climax this week.
If Mr Berlusconi wishes to survive, he may have to adopt a more collegiate
approach to government. In this way, if the League challenges him again, the
blame for any public embarrassment could, unlike this week, be shared more
evenly.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940723

