FT942-15468

FT  15 APR 94 / Procedures that could have saved flyers' lives


   By BRUCE CLARK, Defence Correspondent


The tragedy in northern Iraq yesterday will sharpen the debate about
procedures and command chains in multinational UN operations, a question
rapidly becoming one of the hottest potatoes in international relations.
The incident may well be the cause of bitter, behind-the-scenes
recrimination as details of the circumstances emerge.
Rear-Admiral Eugene Carroll, director of the US Centre for Defence
Information, said there were at least three reasons why, if normal
procedures were being followed, it should have been virtually impossible for
the pilots of the two F-15 fighters which shot down the two UH-60 Blackhawk
helicopters to mistake them for a Soviet-built Hind helicopter gunship.
First, he said, the Hind (Nato's codeword for the Mi-24 class of helicopter
which Moscow developed in the late 1960s) has internally mounted engines,
but the engines of the Blackhawk are in part mounted externally and should
have been visible to the F-15 pilots.
Second, the Awacs surveillance and command aircraft over the area, which was
supposed to be in communication with the F-15s, had sensors and computer
systems powerful enough to monitor every flying object in the entire no-fly
zone of northern Iraq.
Third, both the F-15s and the Blackhawk should have been transmitting
continuous IFF (identification - friend or foe) signals, which would have
told the pilots that they had nothing to fear from one another.
Adm Carroll, a former pilot, said the incident might fuel controversy over
the rules of engagement in the no-fly zone, which permit western fighters to
open fire immediately on any Iraqi aircraft. 'These rules ought be
reconsidered because they make no allowance for the possibility that local
aircraft may be engaged in humanitarian tasks, such as medical evacuation,'
he said.
Some 70,000 soldiers are now involved in UN peace-keeping missions around
the world, many of them dogged by mistrust among the participating nations
and ambiguity over lines of command. Clarifying those lines has become one
the highest priorities for the UN secretariat, and for senior officers and
strategists in many armies.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940415

