FT942-14916

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (4): Cabriolets and the
over 40s - Poll reveals quirks of the mature manager


   By KENNETH GOODING


Now here's an interesting fact: the older the manager of a company car
fleet, the more likely he or she is to restrict the choice of car available
to employees.
This emerged from a recent survey by Lex Vehicle Leasing when more than half
the companies questioned said they would not allow employees to have
'exotic' vehicles such as four-wheel-drives, sports cars and cabriolets.
Lex's explanation: 'This suggests that, as far as the fleet manager is
concerned, a company car is a tool of the trade and to be used for the
company's purpose. Therefore, non-standard cars may be considered
inappropriate.'
Older fleet managers, those over the age of 46, were the most likely to
restrict choice of vehicles: 63 per cent of this age group offered no choice
of exotics compared with 47 per cent of those under 35. 'This may be
explained by the fact that older fleet managers are more likely to be found
in larger companies where company policy is likely to be more tightly
defined,' says Lex in its 1994 'Report on Motoring.'
Perhaps the most important trend to be pinpointed by the survey was that,
despite a reduction in Britain's white collar workforce, debates about the
future of the company car and imminent changes in the system of company car
taxation, there was no evidence that companies were phasing them out. Nor
were employees pushing for cash in lieu of a company car.
These findings are reinforced by research by PHH Vehicle Management Services
which showed no sign of any decrease in company car popularity.
Its survey revealed the most significant factor behind any increase or
decrease in a company's fleet size was a corresponding change in the size of
the workforce.
Only 1 per cent of company car drivers questioned for the Lex survey
reported that their company was phasing out company cars. More than half, 51
per cent, reported no change of any kind in their company's policy towards
company cars.
The most significant change in policy was that about one in every five
drivers, 21 per cent, said that their employers had delayed renewal of
company cars during the previous year.
The survey showed that only 2 per cent of those questioned had had to give
up their company car during the past two years. Of these, 65 per cent had
become ineligible for a company car either because they had changed jobs or
because they no longer had a job. Only 11 per cent of those who no longer
had a company car claimed to have opted for cash or a salary increase within
the same company instead of the use of a car.
The Lex survey, research for which was carried out by MORI last October,
showed most company car drivers seemed to think of their cars as 'tools of
the trade'. No fewer than 69 per cent of those surveyed believed their
vehicle to be essential for their job.
This rose to 96 per cent among those who travelled more than 12,000 miles on
business each year. In all, only 15 per cent of company car drivers thought
of their car as a 'perk' and simply part of their remuneration package.
Interestingly, over three-quarters of directors and partners considered
their vehicle to be essential to carry out their jobs effectively, compared
with fewer than half the senior managers questioned.
Changes to the personal taxation on the benefit of having a company car,
introduced in April this year, seemed to have had little impact on the
opinions or actions of company car drivers, says the Lex survey.
More than one in three of them, 36 per cent, had not or did not expect to
react in any way to these changes. However, 24 per cent of those questioned
said they had asked for, or were likely to ask for, a pay rise, because they
assumed the new tax system would make them worse off. Only 14 per cent of
drivers said they had asked for, or were likely to ask for, a cheaper car to
compensate for the rising tax burden.
Lex found that a high proportion, 38 per cent, did not know how much company
car tax they paid. It suggests that this might be because the tax is usually
wrapped into the driver's general tax code and paid via PAYE.
Company car drivers, particularly those who clock up more than 20,000 miles
a year, admitted to more motoring offences than private drivers. According
to Lex, more than three-quarters (76 per cent) admitted to speeding on
normal roads compared with 59 per cent of private drivers. Company car
drivers were also more likely to park illegally, intentionally drive through
a red light, not to 'belt up,' and to drive a car while over the legal
alcohol limit.
Paradoxically, despite this somewhat cavalier attitude towards motoring
offences, many company car drivers felt strongly about safety features in
cars. They appeared more interested in safety features than in security
measures.
The fitting of air bags, anti-skid breaking and side-impact protection bars
featured highly in company car drivers' aspirations. Nevertheless, Lex found
that company car drivers expected to have security features such as central
locking, car alarms and deadlocks on their cars.
In spite of recent reports about concern among women about their safety
while travelling alone, only 28 per cent of companies said they took special
measures to protect female company car drivers. Once again, the older the
fleet manager, the greater was his or her concern.
More than eight out of 10 (82 per cent) of the drivers questioned said they
would replace their car if they no longer had a company vehicle. Of these,
just under two-thirds (62 per cent) would replace their company car with a
used vehicle and 31 per cent said they would buy a new one. Most (60 per
cent) said they would buy a car of similar quality and type to the one
provided by their companies.
'The Lex Report on Motoring - the Company View,' Pounds 150 from Lex Vehicle
Leasing in the UK on 0628 898000.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940418

