FT942-15925

FT  13 APR 94 / Patten questions degree standards


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Quality control of university degrees must be tightened, Mr John Patten, the
education secretary, said yesterday.
Speaking to the annual conference of the Higher Education Funding Council
for England, the quango responsible for distributing funds to English
universities, Mr Patten said: 'I have heard suggestions, assertions and
allegations that examiners have been less demanding recently.'
He said the universities' own quality council, which is self-regulating,
'ought now to place more emphasis on broad comparability in the standards of
degrees offered by different institutions'.
Mr Patten refused to rule out linking future quality audits to government
funding, and announced new restrictions on creating universities.
Colleges of higher education seeking university status must now achieve a
track record of at least two or three years in providing degrees validated
by a university, and publish a long-term strategic plan, before they can
receive university status.
Mr Patten also suggested changing the funding councils' quality assessments
to split university departments into five grades, rather than three as at
present.
Professor Neil Buxton, vice-chancellor of Hertfordshire university, asked Mr
Patten to intervene with Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary, over the
local government review. This plans to replace county councils - which
distribute grants for individual students to universities - with smaller
unitary authorities.
Prof Buxton said: 'When we move to a whole network of unitary councils our
job collecting awards and grants is likely to be much more difficult.'
Mr Patten said he was in talks with Mr Gummer over reforms to the student
grant system, which would be enacted once the unitary councils are created.
These could involve removing both mandatory awards and possibly
discretionary awards from local authorities, some of which Mr Patten said
had been 'delinquent' in cutting discretionary awards.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940413

