FT942-16236

FT  12 APR 94 / Bosnian Serbs choose the hard option


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


By stepping up their attacks on Gorazde in defiance of Nato air strikes, the
Bosnian Serbs have chosen a course of confrontation with the most powerful
states in the world.
Bosnian Serb forces yesterday sealed off Sarajevo from the outside world in
an effort to show that they still controlled the destiny of the Bosnian
capital.
Meanwhile, Serb leaders hailed the Nato intervention as yet another example
of western betrayal and conspiracies against the Serbs.
If he allows them to stick to this collision course, their protector,
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, is in danger of finding himself
backed into a corner. On past performance, it is in just such a situation
that he is liable to take the most unpredictable and destructive decisions.
His calculation may be based on the belief that he can back his own putative
sponsor President Boris Yeltsin of Russia into a corner, obliging him to
take Serbia's side against the western coalition, which since the end of the
cold war has dominated the UN.
In previous crises in former Yugoslavia, such calculations have proved
false, leaving Serb leaders disappointed and Mr Yeltsin a target of
vitriolic abuse from Serbian political leaders and media.
This time Mr Milosevic appears convinced that he can get Russia on his side.
In a bid to drive a wedge between Russia and the west, Serb leaders
yesterday severed all relations with the UN, naming Mr Vitaly Churkin,
Russia's special peace envoy, as the only channel of communication.
Even if his gamble fails, Mr Milosevic has the upper hand over his Bosnian
Serb proteges, in that he has no particular stake in Gorazde.
Serbs appear to believe that he has fulfilled his pledge to stop the war at
Serbia's frontiers.
At the same time, he has succeeded in carving out a Greater Serbia, in fact
if not in name, through the creation of two sister republics on Bosnian and
Croatian territory.
Whether one of these republics includes the pocket of Gorazde is of little
or no consequence to most Serbs in Serbia proper.
They are tired of sanctions, imposed because of Belgrade's role in the
violent partition of Bosnia, and indifferent to the map of the new post-war
Bosnia. Mr Milosevic knows this and he wants to push for a deal in order to
get sanctions lifted. By contrast, the self-styled 'Serb Republic' covering
some 70 per cent of Bosnian territory, has been carved out over two years of
war.
General Ratko Mladic, Bosnian Serb commander, has repeatedly rejected any
proposal to hand back land, for which Serb fighters have fallen. The issue
for the Serbs in Goradze is obviously not whether they would be willing to
hand it back, since despite unremitting attacks, it is still under Bosnian
government control.
But its continued existence as a Moslem enclave prevents the Serbs from
consolidating their control over the whole of eastern Bosnia. Further,
Bosnian government attacks from Gorazde have disrupted communications
between Serb-held zones in the west and south, where a relatively narrow
corridor separates the enclave from Sarajevo.
Bosnian Serb leaders cannot be divided into hawks and doves. They all agree
that the war was an inevitable 'defence against the Moslem threat'. But the
air strike has given fresh impetus to those leaders who have always argued
that the UN was anti-Serb and may thus make it more difficult for Mr Radovan
Karadzic, Bosnian Serb leader, to compromise with western demands for
territorial concessions regardless of instructions from Mr Milosevic.
Mrs Biljan Plavsic, a Bosnian Serb leader, yesterday went so far as to
proclaim the UN as the new aggressor against the Serb people.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940412

