FT941-4055

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Murder most entertaining - Tragedy and trivia /
Manchester, City of Drama


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


This year, as you may have heard, Manchester is City of Drama - but why?
Certainly, 1994 is importing into Manchester a mass of high-profile national
and international theatre: Peter Brook's latest offering, Howard Barker's
new play (reviewed here by Paul Driver). Theatre de Complicite's staging of
The Three Lives of Lucie Cabrol had its premiere here in January and the
Ninagawa Peer Gynt comes to Manchester next week. But what kind of a city of
drama will Manchester be in 1995?
The city's most high-profile theatre is the Royal Exchange. Its present
production is Venice Preserved, Otway's 1681 tragedy. One feature made my
visit worthwhile - the passionate sincerity with which wonderful young Helen
McCrory plays the heroine Belvidera. The play is full of such high-flown
emotionalism that I had imagined that only a grand, stylised form of acting
could bring it off; but McCrory's extraordinary naturalism has changed my
mind.
The rest of the staging - directed Gregory Hersov - is both phoney and
tepid. Jonathan Cullen, who plays Jaffeir, is a curious case. He has shown a
remarkable edge in several modern roles, but recently he has forsaken that,
concentrating on classic roles which he plays with a strange mix of
obviously faked intensity and wimpish sensitivity. To one line in ten he
brings simple eloquence; to the next nine an unconvincing striving for
'musical' effects and febrile contrivance. Meanwhile his accent keeps
wandering between Leeds and Oxford.
A certain actorliness may do very well for Venice Preserved, but George
Anton's Pierre (spoken with a Scots accent) is artificially conceived, and
spoken with a chilling display of vocal tricks. As for David Gant's Priuli,
I have not heard such a canting piece of hamming since - oh - Cheryl
Campbell's Lady Macbeth. And she at least was brisk, whereas he intones
every line like a requiem for a dead archbishop.
Hersov and his designer have set the play in Victorian dress, and the
leading characters in drab colours. Even McCrory, who looked so captivating
in the crinolines of Trelawny, is cramped here by stiff, dull, concealing
costumes. Still, she is the one lamp amid the gloom, a constant ray of vital
energy. And the sheer spontaneity with which she ascends the high climaxes
of delusion in her final speeches is astonishing.
'Intrigue and passion in a perfumed oasis]' Thus the subtitle to Deborah's
Daughter, a brand new play by Pam Gems being given in Manchester's smaller
Library Theatre. There is a lot of Gems about right now: Piaf back in the
West End, Queen Christina at the Bristol Old Vic, Dusa, Fish, Stas and Vi
coming up at the Etcetera soon, and now this.
The action concerns a rich oil widow, Deborah Pedersen, her mother, Lady
Wiggins, and her teenage daughter Stephanie: all three in an unnamed Gulf
state, guests of Colonel Hassan Sa'id Ibn Said. Deborah - an important
research scientist until she married - has come to hand over a philanthropic
cheque for Dollars 20m to help the state through a drought. The Colonel,
however, may use it for military purposes. He manages at the same time (a)
to start to attempt seducing her (b) to launch a coup d'etat. Meanwhile he
may or may not be commencing an affair with her daughter. And . . . But do
you want to hear any more of this?
Deborah's Daughter is the most maladroit piece of playwriting I have seen in
a long while. Gems suspends both character consistency and the plot
regularly, simply to pursue cheap effects of suspense or surprise.
Half the time it is impossible to believe that Deborah is an intelligent
woman who takes responsibility for affairs, because she keeps dithering and
fretting hysterically; the other half she suddenly becomes cool and
self-possessed. This inner conflict might be interesting if Gems was
interested in making it so; but no, she just likes surprising us with
Deborah's changes of mind and tone.
Sue Dunderdale, directing, has tried to make the play more seamless than it
is. Anna Carteret does much to make the complex but nebulous Deborah come to
life, and it is good to see her playing so vulnerable a role. But she paces
her main speeches weakly, and overdoes the loud outbursts.
The role of Stephanie's boyfriend David is played by an appealingly
sensitive, willowy, young man (Philip Darling) when the words and action
make it plain he should be an insensitive, blundering, hunky young toff.
Jane Freeman over-coarsens the already indelicate Lady Wiggins. As Hassan,
Raad Rawi has to cope with lines like 'And your hair] The colour of pale
fire at night under the desert . . . '

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940312

