FT941-13103

FT  27 JAN 94 / Coal sector faces 'weak' bargaining power


   By MICHAEL SMITH


British Coal's chairman warned yesterday that some of its private-sector
successors would have 'weak, possibly very weak' negotiating power with the
electricity generators who will be their main customers.
Mr Neil Clarke warned of fresh pit closures this year as the corporation
published figures showing that 25,500 workers have taken redundancy in the
past 15 months. There are 14,800 employed in the collieries.
He told the Commons trade and industry committee that British Coal had
exceeded its forecasts of a year ago on improved efficiency. The cash
operating cost per gigajoule of coal was expected to be Pounds 1.40 in
1993-94 and 11 collieries were operating at Pounds 1.30 or less.
It emerged that none of the additional 700,000 tonnes of sales to generators
in recent months has qualified for financial aid. Mr Clarke said that
government subsidies to help British Coal win extra sales were 'quite
restrictive' and were not used in recent deals to supply more coal to
generators.
He said subsidies did not apply if additional sales were won for a colliery
in profit, for pits with stocks of coal, and for pits where costs were lower
than at opencast sites.
Additional sales would not be enough to avoid closures among the remaining
22 pits. Mr Clarke refused to be drawn on how many would close but market
analysts believe five to eight are likely to go.
Mr Clarke told the committee that the generators' financial resources, plus
the oversupply of coal and the availability of other energy resources, would
put the privatised companies at a clear disadvantage.
'I think the imbalance of power between the two big companies - and whatever
the structure of the industry - will remain.'
Mr Clarke pointed out that the big Selby coalfield in the Yorkshire region,
which will made up more than half of the northern company, depended entirely
on selling its coal to the Aire Valley power station.
'Against that imbalance of market power, I have to say, its (the company's)
negotiating position will be weak, possibly very weak. The generators will
make sure they have other sources of coal available.'
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, told the committee that he did not want the
nuclear review to drag into next year, and he hoped to announce the terms of
reference as soon as possible.
Mr Eggar told the committee he had 'scratched his head' after National Power
recently revealed figures showing that power from new gas-fired generators
was 30 per cent more expensive than that from coal-fired stations they were
replacing.
National Power said it is building gas stations in part because of
environmental considerations. 'The price difference is the cost of producing
cleaner electricity to meet new environmental standards,' it said.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940127

