FT942-16148

FT  12 APR 94 / Business and the Law: Dan Air sale evades merger rule's
scope - European Court


The European Court of First Instance has rejected Air France's appeal
against the European Commission's finding that British Airways' acquisition
of Dan Air was outside the scope of the European Merger Regulation.
The CFI said a public announcement by the Commission that an unnotified
merger did not satisfy the turnover thresholds of the merger regulation was
a decision reviewable by the Court. But it approved the Commission's
calculation of the turnover of Dan Air for the purposes of deciding whether
the merger had a Community dimension.
On October 23 1992, BA and Davis and Newman, owners of Dan Air, agreed BA
would purchase Dan Air's scheduled services. Davis and Newman agreed to sell
or discontinue Dan Air's charter business as a condition of the deal. Before
completion on November 8, the charter service was discontinued.
On October 30 1992, the European competition commissioner's press spokesman
made a public announcement, reported by Agence Europe, that the merger was
not of Community dimension as one of the quantitative thresholds fixed by
the merger regulation was not reached.
In calculating turnover, the Commission had used only the turnover in the
last available accounts relating to the scheduled services business bought
by BA, excluding the turnover of the charter business.
On November 2, the UK's trade and industry secretary decided not to refer
the deal to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Air France wrote to the European Commission disputing the turnover
calculation and the conclusion that the merger regulation did not apply. The
competition commissioner confirmed the Commission's position.
Shortly afterwards, Belgium asked the Commission to investigate the impact
of the merger on the Belgian market in accordance with merger regulation
rules permiting a member country to make such a request when a merger does
not have a Community dimension. On February 17 last year the Commission
ruled the merger did not create or reinforce a dominant position in Belgium.
Air France challenged the Commission's announcement that the merger did not
have a Community dimension before the CFI.
The Commission asked the court to dismiss the appeal as inadmissible on four
grounds: the announcement was not a decision because it had no legal
effects; its form was inconsistent with its being a binding decision; there
were other more appropriate proceedings available to Air France at EC and
national level; and, even if the announcement was a decision, it was not of
direct or individual concern to Air France.
The CFI ruled the appeal admissible, rejecting all the Commission's
arguments. Two aspects of the Court's decision are particularly significant.
First, it said it did not matter that the merger had not been notified, nor
that the announcement was not a formal decision taken under the regulation.
Second, the court found the decision was of direct and individual concern to
Air France because it was a competitor in the relevant market.
The CFI found against Air France on the issues of substance, however. The
underlying question was whether the Commission had correctly interpreted the
turnover calculation rules. Air France said it should have included the
charter business turnover. But the CFI said the Commission had correctly
interpreted the rules.
The general rule on turnover calculation required the Commission to take
into account the turnover of the undertakings concerned by the merger as
reported in the most recent published accounts. However, an exception
existed where only part of a business was being sold. In those circumstances
the Commission may only take into account the turnover of that part of the
business actually sold. It did not matter that the exception did not
expressly refer to the cessation of part of a business prior to merger as in
the BA-Dan Air case.
T-3/93: Air France v Commission, CFI 2 CH, March 24 1994
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940412

