FT942-14584

FT  20 APR 94 / Pretoria gets economic lift from Europe: Developing-nation
status granted to S Africa on market access


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


European Union foreign ministers yesterday agreed in principle to add South
Africa to the generalised system of preferences (GSP) under which developing
nations are granted virtually tariff-free access to the European market for
their manufactured goods.
The move should go ahead soon after South Africa's first universal suffrage
elections on April 26-28, when the EU should have finalised its 10-year
review of the GSP system, held up until the recent completion of the Uruguay
Round of world trade talks.
'This is aimed as a substantial gesture of support for the elections,' said
an aide to Sir Leon Brittan, EU trade commissioner. 'This is what both the
government and the African National Congress have been asking us for.'
But ministers resisted a British-led move to get the EU to commit itself now
to a fully-fledged trade and co-operation agreement with South Africa as the
next stage in closer links. France, Spain, Italy and Belgium prefer a more
evolutionary approach, and got reference to yesterday's decision as an
'interim' agreement struck out of the Council of Ministers' conclusions.
Behind their lukewarm enthusiasm is reluctance to treat South Africa as a
developing country, although its relatively high average earnings mask huge
income gaps within its population. Nevertheless, all 12 EU states agreed to
treat South Africa as a special case.
The EU runs a substantial trade deficit with South Africa, from which it
largely imports minerals and precious metals, most of which already enter
duty-free. In 1992, the Union had an Ecu3.7bn (Pounds 2.84bn) deficit on
imports from South Africa worth Ecu9.1bn, over two-thirds of which were raw
materials. For the first nine months of last year imports were Ecu6.7bn,
against exports to South Africa of Ecu4.1bn, for a deficit of Ecu2.6bn.
Because of the small flows of finished goods that South Africa exports, GSP
treatment will at first be of limited benefit, even with, as ministers also
agreed in principle, flexible rules on so-called accumulated rules of
origin, or treating as South African goods which include components from
neighbouring countries.
However, along with recommendations that member states conclude bilateral
investment protection and promotion pacts with South Africa, and a request
to the European Investment Bank to extend its development financing to the
republic, 'we are creating the climate for investors to take South Africa
more seriously,' as a British official put it.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940420

