FT942-16237

FT  12 APR 94 / Zhirinovsky fans the flames


   By Our Foreign Staff


Of the Russian reactions to the Nato attacks, none was more extreme, nor
more predictable, than that of the nationalist leader Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky, who yesterday called on Russia to bomb Nato bases in Italy in
response to the air strikes on Gorazde.
'They bomb one town, we bomb another town,' he said, immediately ahead of a
debate on the situation in the former Yugoslavia at the 32-nation Council of
Europe, which promotes human rights and democracy.
Mr Zhirinovsky, the leader of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, said
he favoured solving the issue of Yugoslavia by peaceful means, but insisted
that Nato had initiated the aggression.
'It's against Russia, it's for more interests of Germany in the Balkans, of
Nato in the Balkans, it's against the Orthodox, against the Slav people.'
Well known for his vitriolic attacks and statements, Mr Zhirinovsky
reinforced his image as an aggressor with an outburst on a group of
protesters on his way to the meeting. Spitting and hurling stones at a group
of Jewish students protesting against anti-Semitism, Mr Zhirinovsky said he
would 'break their heads.'
The man who has threatened to bomb the Kurile Islands and dump nuclear waste
on the Baltics suggested to the protesters that he would use his 'atomic
pistol' on them.
Mr Zhirinovsky's visit, which has provoked some unease in France, was
arranged as part of a wider visit by 18 delegates from different political
groups in the Russian parliament.
The Council of Europe was yesterday at pains to point out that Mr
Zhirinovsky was not invited explicitly by them to attend the conference on
the former Yugoslavia. 'It is not for us to choose who represents Russia -
the Russians chose groups from across the political spectrum - that's
parliamentary democracy,' one official commented.
France has warned Mr Zhirinovsky he faces expulsion if he makes trouble. To
show its displeasure at his presence in the official Russian delegation,
Paris has told him he may only stay for the one week of the session and may
not leave Strasbourg.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940412

