FT944-2616

FT  16 DEC 94 / Labour inflicts crushing poll defeat on Tories: Heavy blow
to Major as Dudley voters deliver postwar record swing in by-election


   By JAMES BLITZ and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


The Conservative party crashed to a record-breaking defeat against Labour in
the Dudley West by-election in the early hours of this morning.
In a disastrous blow for Mr John Major's government, Labour won the West
Midlands constituency with a 29.12 per cent swing - the largest from the
Conservatives to Labour at a by-election since the second world war.
The surge of support which has given Labour an unprecedented lead in recent
opinion polls helped Mr Tony Blair's party to convert a Tory majority of
5,789 at the last election into victory by 20,694 votes.
The Tory vote plummeted from 34,729 in April 1992 to just 7,706.
The swing was the second largest from the Conservatives to Labour in a
by-election this century.
It broke through the 21 per cent swing from the Tories to Labour in the
Mid-Staffordshire by-election in March 1990, which took place at the height
of the poll tax rebellion.
If this morning's result were repeated across the country at a general
election, it would leave the Conservatives with almost no seats in the House
of Commons.
The victory of Mr Ian Pearson, the Labour candidate, was instantly hailed by
the party's senior figures as evidence that it can win a constituency with a
broadly middle-class electorate which has been staunchly Conservative for
more than 15 years.
Mr Blair said the voters of Dudley had 'shown that the Tory agenda of the
eighties has run its course. People are tired of second best for Britain and
are looking to Labour to get Britain going again,' he said. 'We must not let
them down.'
Mr John Prescott, Labour's deputy leader, said: 'This is a remarkable
victory for us and a remarkable swing.'
The extent of the defeat stunned senior government figures. Mr Stephen
Dorrell, the heritage secretary, admitted the result was a very grim one for
the Conservatives. 'It's obviously a bad result for us,' he said, 'I don't
disguise that at all.'
The result is unlikely to put immediate pressure on Mr Major's position at
the head of the Conservative party because a leadership contest cannot take
place for another 12 months.
But it will compound the growing disarray among Tory backbenchers who are
already divided over the party's approach to Europe and tax cuts.
The defeat reduces the government's notional majority in the House of
Commons to 13, including the nine Tories who lost or resigned the whip after
a parliamentary rebellion on UK contributions to the European Union two
weeks ago.
However, the willingness of the rebels to continue to vote against the
government means that Mr Major now leads an administration with an effective
overall minority of five votes.
Government ministers found a few crumbs of comfort in the very low turnout
of around 47 per cent in the Dudley West poll. This was well below the 82.1
per cent turnout in the constituency at the last election, but broadly
similar to the figure for previous by-elections in December.
Senior Tory officials said the low turnout suggested that disillusioned
Conservatives had stayed at home rather than vote Labour.
They also pointed out that the total Labour vote had actually fallen from
the 28,940 polled at the 1992 election.
Labour's leaders argued that their campaign tactics, which stressed the
Tories' recent tax increases, had played an important part in the victory.
By contrast, the government's defeat in the Commons over the implementation
of VAT on fuel contributed to the problems faced by Mr Graham Postles, the
Tory candidate.
The swing to Labour yesterday was not as great as the 35 per cent switch
from the Conservatives to the Liberal Democrats at Christchurch last year.
But it was less than 1 percentage point below the largest swing this century
from the Conservatives to Labour, which took place at the Liverpool
Wavertree by-election in 1935.
Details, Page 8
Politics, Page 10
 --------------------------------------
Dudley West by-election
 --------------------------------------
Party Votes
Labour                       28,400
Conservative                  7,706
Lib Dem                       3,154
 --------------------------------------
Labour gain
Majority:                    20,694
 --------------------------------------
General election 1992
Conservative majority:        5,789
 --------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941216

