FT943-13193

FT  21 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Flotation gives Copyright Promotions Pounds
12m price tag


   By CAROLINE SOUTHEY


Copyright Promotions Group, best known for handling the marketing rights to
cartoon characters such as the Flintstones, Captain Scarlet, Mr Men and
Thunderbirds, is being floated via a placing and offer giving it a market
capitalisation of Pounds 12m.
It is being spun-off by Mosaic Investments, the mini-conglomerate. Mosaic
will receive Pounds 3m in cash raised from the placing and 3m shares worth
Pounds 3.6m at the placing price of 120p. The placing and offer is fully
underwritten by Charles Stanley, a small London broker.
A total of 3m new shares, out of a total of 10m, will be issued of which
half are subject to clawback by existing Mosaic shareholders on the basis of
one CPG share for every 29 Mosaic ordinary shares or 6.67 preference shares.
Mosaic will retain a 30 per cent shareholding. Four members of CPG's
management, including the company's co-founders Mr David Cardwell, chief
executive, and Mr Richard Cully, managing director, will hold a 40 per cent
stake.
Mr David Williams, Mosaic's chairman, will serve as a non-executive chairman
and Ms Sue Ball, Mosaic's finance director, has been appointed part-time
finance director.
Mr Cardwell said the listing would increase the profile of CPG and improve
its market position in the UK. CPG is also involved in advertising
consultancy and character costume manufacture.
Mr Williams said the underlying value of CPG was not fully reflected in
Mosaic's market capitalisation and the flotation would increase shareholder
value.
He added that CPG's performance had been overshadowed by difficulties at
Mosaic, which is engaged in licensing and design, display products and
specialist packaging.
Mosaic will set aside Pounds 1m of the Pounds 3m cash payment from CPG to
indemnify CPG against development costs incurred by ELG, its European joint
venture, and has also granted CPG a Pounds 750,000 two-year, interest-free
loan.
Character licensing generates more than 50 per cent of CPG's turnover. It
receives commission on gross royalty income by acting as the matchmaker
between character licensors and licensees such as manufacturers and
retailers like Marks and Spencer, Tesco, Mothercare, Burton and Pizza Hut.
Mr Cardwell said future earnings potential was underpinned by income from
long-standing 'classic characters' although it would be influenced by
revenue from new 'hot characters'.
The company expects income to be boosted in the coming year by royalties
from the Flintstones following this week's release of Steven Spielberg's
film of the famous American cartoon characters.
The company's costs were low, he said, with no stock and 75 employees.
In the year to April 30, CPG reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 567,000
(Pounds 212,000) on turnover of Pounds 4.95m (Pounds 4.07m).
Dealings in the shares are expected to begin on August 15.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940721

