FT944-14604

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (23): A manager may
want to borrow - The Investment Trust Alternative / This is a benefit
enjoyed by the other type of fund - but heed the discount


   By STEPHEN LODGE


With more than 1,500 funds, unit trusts might seem to offer more than enough
choice and cause for confusion. So why add to the pot the 300 or so
investment trusts available?
Investment trusts are the other main 'pure' investment fund on offer to UK
investors. 'Pure,' that is, in the sense of not being linked to a pension or
life insurance policy.
On first sight, the two types of fund might seem pretty similar. Investment
in UK shares, the Japanese stock market or a whole range of other markets is
on offer from both. You can even find unit and investment trusts bearing the
same name and managed by the same individual - for example, M&G Recovery or
Baillie Gifford Japan.
But there are important differences that make one or the other deserving of
more attention, depending on circumstances.
The fact that many experienced investors - including most professional
investors - swear by investment trusts should suggest that they are at least
worth considering. Supporters quote a number of advantages. The two least
open to dispute are investment trusts' ability to enhance returns through
what is known as gearing (in laymen's terms, borrowing money to invest); and
their more stable fund structure (called closed-ended) which gives the
manager greater flexibility to invest and therefore to perform.
Among investment trusts, warrants and the capital shares of split-capital
trusts are the extreme ways of getting a geared exposure. But beware. In
rising markets, gearing is great. In falling markets, it means a double
whammy, increasing your losses.
Being closed-ended means an investment trust does not have unpredictable
inflows and outflows of money to contend with, unlike a unit trust. An
investment trust manager does not have to sell holdings when you sell your
shares. He can can take a longer-term investment view and can more safely
invest in assets that are harder to resell (called illiquid).
Emerging markets and direct property are two currently popular investment
areas that are relatively illiquid, and therefore where the investment-trust
structure should have the edge. If, for example, emerging-market investors
panic and head for the door in large numbers - say, in a stock market crash
 -the investment trust manager need not worry about having his portfolio
stripped of assets he would prefer to keep and at prices at which he would
not choose to sell. He can carry on managing his portfolio better.
Authorised direct property unit trusts are required to hold a good portion
of cash and securities, to guard against liquidity problems. But that
threatens to dilute the property returns. And inflows of money can also have
their problems. The performance of one unit trust, Barclays Unicorn
Property, has suffered as a result of being swamped with new money that it
could not invest at a fast enough pace directly in property.
Investment trusts have also been promoted on the back of lower investment
and management charges, as well as a better past performance record than
unit trusts. However, investment trust charges have, in general, been
drifting upwards. And unit trusts in tax-free personal equity plan (Pep)
wrappers now offer some very good value.
The better past-performance record reflects, in large part, a one-off
benefit from - in technospeak - a narrowing of the discount to net asset
value (NAV) that investment-trust shares trade at. But the danger of
investing now is that discounts may widen again, leading to underperformance
in the future.
The price of an investment trust share does not directly follow the value of
its underlying investments. It fluctuates, and is normally less: the share
is then said to be at a discount to NAV. That fluctuation can be a risk or
an opportunity. If an investor buys when the discount is narrow and it then
widens, he will lose out. If the value of the portfolio does not change, he
still loses money, and in a rising market a widening discount means a drag
on returns. If, on the other hand, the discount narrows then the investor
gains: his returns are boosted.
The average discount to NAV among investment trusts this year has been 10
per cent or narrower. Few analysts see much upside. In broad terms, the
biggest worries lie over specialist trusts at very narrow discounts or even
premiums. The recent ratings of many trusts investing in Japan or the
emerging markets have been seen as particularly vulnerable, for example.
That said, what is a risky rating for one trust might be of less concern for
another, even for trusts in the same sector. Buying at a premium to NAV
should virtually always be ruled out, however.
Unit trusts, in contrast, do not have this discount risk, because their
value directly follows the price of the underlying assets. That, and the
fact that they cannot gear up like an investment trust, means that for
equivalent funds the unit trust is considered the lower-risk choice.
Nevertheless, certain kinds of lower risk-seeking investor should also look
carefully at some of the different types of investment trust share on offer.
Those looking for a specific lump sum in, say, five years time with no
income might consider buying zero-dividend preference shares. Their return
comes in the form of capital gain, which for many investors can mean
tax-free.
Income-seeking investors might be attracted by income shares that pay a high
and rising dividend - 8 per cent, for example - while also offering your
original money back if held from issue to maturity.
One final warning: stockbrokers tend to talk more of investment trusts;
independent financial advisers prefer to push unit trusts. Investors should
beware that recommendations to go with unit or investment trusts are not
simply dictated by their choice of adviser.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

941021

