FT942-12822

FT  28 APR 94 / No delight at Turkish central bank plan: Few bankers give
much credence to the guidelines behind autonomy move


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


The Turkish government has moved to restore confidence in the financial
system, implementing a new central bank law which strengthens the autonomy
of the bank.
The law also provides for a 'lifeboat' to help troubled banks through the
current money market turbulence, in the wake of the collapse of three small
private banks.
The moves come ahead of this week's mission from the International Monetary
Fund, to assess the austerity programme unveiled by the prime minister, Mrs
Tansu Ciller, on April 5. The Fund's approval would pave the way for
negotiations on a letter of intent and agreement on a standby facility which
would in turn open the way for Turkey to return to commercial debt markets.
Tension between the central bank and the Treasury has been at the root of
Turkey's economic malaise. Mrs Ciller's lax monetary policy and, in
particular, her use of central bank funds to finance the budget deficit has
helped fuel inflation by increasing money supply and has been the cause of
the resignations of two bank governors since she came to office last June.
The new law limits the extent to which the Treasury can tap the central bank
for short-term advances, reducing the amount from the current 15 per cent of
budget appropriations. However, given Mrs Ciller's record, few bankers are
giving much plausibility to the broader guidelines aimed at strengthening
the autonomy of the bank.
Bankers say the law also fails to address the more awkward issue of the lack
of effective supervision of the banking sector, which has been sharply
exposed by the current crisis.
The collapses this month of the Tourism and Investment bank (TYT), Marmara
Bank and the most recent casualty Impexbank - the small Istanbul trade
finance concern formerly owned by Mr Asil Nadir, the fugitive tycoon -
shocked the financial community, both in Turkey and abroad in the wake of a
four-month currency crisis which has seen a 50 per cent depreciation of the
lira against the dollar.
Bankers are asking how the government could have approved, last July, the
Dollars 213m (Pounds 142m) purchase by TYT's parent company Lapis Holding of
an 89 per cent stake in Disbank, the reputable trade finance concern in what
was then the largest ever Turkish bank takeover. The deal has now been
cancelled.
In a further indication of the inadequacy of accounting procedures, brokers
point to the anomaly that Marmara Bank reported a 700 per cent nominal rise
in profits for the first quarter, according to figures lodged with the
Capital Markets Board, the government stock exchange watchdog.
The lifeboat system envisaged under the new law will allow the treasury to
provide up to twice a bank's equity to help overcome a sudden run on
deposits. The move symbolically draws an official line under the crisis.
However, it also underscores concern to see it does not precipitate the
failure of one of the larger family-owned banks which, given the exposure to
industrial affiliates, could have widespread fallout for the economy.
It comes amid bitter recriminations between Turkey's state banks and the
Treasury, after revelations of the exposure of the state sector to the three
failed private banks.
Mr Ozal Baysal, head of the Turkish Development Bank (TKB), openly
criticised the Treasury for not forewarning about the health of TYT, where
TKB is said to have had Dollars 30m in foreign currency deposits.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940428

