FT941-13071

FT  27 JAN 94 / Technology: Biography of a book - The printing industry
presents unusual challenges to computerised manufacturing systems. Claire
Gooding continues a series on getting the most out of software / Software at
Work


   By CLAIRE GOODING


Pick up a copy of Jung Chang's bestselling novel Wild Swans and the last
thing you are likely to consider is the effort that went into printing it.
But books, like motor accessories and widgets, have to be manufactured, and
they present unusual challenges to computerised manufacturing systems.
Left-over pages from one book cannot be used elsewhere: each book comprises
components that are useless in any other product. Prints are likely to be
repeated, possibly in short runs, for which machines must be geared up.
HarperCollins Manufacturing produces books from raw material to finished
product, using various grades of paper. Owen Mitchell, HarperCollins's
business development director, considers book-printing a manufacturing
process much like any other, equally subject to current thinking on
just-in-time methods and low inventories.
On the shelf in Mitchell's office stand fat, glossy-covered hardbacks
including Wild Swans and the memoirs of Lady Thatcher and Sir David Frost,
reminders of the end-product of his 400,000 sq ft factory. 'Our customers
are the publishers, not the public. We make reprints or new titles to order
for HarperCollins, our main customer, but also for Headline and Simon &
Schuster (outside the US market), among others,' Mitchell says.
A full remainder basket is bad news for author and publisher alike, and
producing to demand ('make to order') introduces a delicate balancing act
between resources. Getting it wrong means keeping the customer waiting,
perhaps losing sales as interest in a book fades, while machines and staff
work overtime, only to lie idle the next day.
To avoid this, HarperCollins now runs a computer integrated manufacturing
(Cim) system called Mac-Pac, which includes a complex 'expert system' that
helps make decisions about scheduling.
'This division operates as a high-volume, make-to-order environment. One of
the business reasons for moving in the Cim direction was the pressure for
just-in-time manufacturing, small batches, and short lead times,' says
Mitchell.
In the early 1980s, most packaged software solutions were for make-to-stock
and assemble-to-order processes - which are inappropriate for books. Other
solutions came from low-volume 'make-to-order' suppliers. 'Getting behind
this distinction was important, because every book is make-to-order, but we
deal with more than 100 different titles every week.'
On average, the factory copes with 1,250 component orders a week (about 10
per book). Components in a book include the bundles of printed pages
(signatures - see Buzzwords), illustrations, covers, dustjacket, and perhaps
also a ribbon-marker for diaries and bibles.
The paper for the paperbacks is stored four hours away. 'We work as a
manufacturing business, so in manufacturing terms, a routine diary is just
as important as Sir David Frost's autobiography,' comments Mitchell.
'Our experience in the past has been with batch computer systems, updated
overnight and accessed for inquiries. What we have now is a system in which
participants dictate the programme. Their actions make a difference. There
are very few people who don't have a terminal - 450 users out of 480
employees,' he adds.
The new system has developed gradually. Outside consultants have
contributed, but it largely evolved from a painful process of
self-examination that started in 1989.
'We challenged and changed the way we do business as part of the preparation
for automation. The first question was whether we were ready for change, and
the answer was no. We faced the fact that customers were not well served by
the buffer times which were exposed. Inventories were no longer assets, but
earned a black mark,' recalls Mitchell.
'One of the first things to go was the shop-floor bonus which encouraged
over-production of components unique to one order.
'We used Computer Integrated Business - our version of Cim - as a catalyst
for change. From day one, I was concerned to get the message across that
there would be more people problems than technology constraints,' Mitchell
says.
'IBM's industrial design team gave us a vision and experience beyond our
own, and helped us develop a strategy that has held good to this day -
develop people, simplify processes, then automate.'
Initial inquiries involved 25 vendors, and a 70-page proposal synopsis was
sent out to a shortlist of eight.
Andersen Consulting's Mac-Pac software was fully integrated in its design,
and came closest to fitting the HarperCollins 'no modifications' policy.
Another attraction was the Expert Configurator, an 'intelligent' module that
works like many expert systems, to define the rules which govern a process.
A trip to the US to see Expert Configurator in action (there were no UK
users at the time) confirmed the choice.
Mac-Pac follows the business flow from start to finish. It can treat every
order and every title as an individual product. Each book is planned and
tracked through every process. Every component - printing plate, signature,
cover - is tied to its book and traceable through Mac-Pac.
'Setting the rules is an interactive 'conversational' process to create the
code. The two years it took to evolve was a combination of analysis,
simplification, and representation of what we do. No one individual has the
command of detail of the entire process. We did not pick the brains of the
existing mainframe system, we did it from scratch,' adds David Thomson,
manufacturing systems manager.
The process of preparation and training was also an eye-opener. 'We had
shop-floor personnel training the managing director - people found talents
they never knew they had,' says Mitchell.
In November 1992, HarperCollins announced 211 redundancies in manufacturing
which took effect just six weeks before implementation. The first Mac-Pac
product off the presses was a high-profile title, Jeffrey Archer's Honour
Among Thieves in May 1993. 'All this put a strain on the organisation. We
found that even 1,000 days of training was not nearly enough,' says
Mitchell.
The Andersen consultants insisted that HarperCollins should develop its own
rules and procedures, which was time consuming but worthwhile.
Users are enthusiastic. One claims to have learned as much in training as he
had in 20 years in the business. According to Irene Thomson, customer
services manager for paperbacks, previous manual systems were difficult to
control. 'Now we are more reactive, and customer satisfaction has improved.'
Fred Buchanan, the paperback planner, had previously worked with a small PC.
'We did not know if we could fulfil to order or not, now we can say yes and
mean it.'
Steve Melvin is a lead operator on one of the print machines, which has
produced 25,000 copies of Wild Swans every week for the last three months.
'The lead time for a paperback used to be four or five weeks. Now it is 10
days or less,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940127

