FT944-10925

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (24): Some things don't change - Gandhi's
social vision remains a dream


   By GORDON CRAMB


In mid-October, as the initial panic over the plague outbreak receded, the
Sunday Times of India ran a signed commentary, calling on local leaders to
'convert themselves into unpaid sweepers'.
The article was an extract from the collected works of the Mahatma Gandhi,
India's founder.
Top city officials in Delhi were spending part of their weekend being
photographed following Gandhi's precept. It was a token gesture, and
enduring answers to India's public health problems remain elusive.
After significant progress to improve the social framework since
independence in 1947, concerns are growing that sanitation, nutrition and
literacy for its 900m people are slipping down the government's list of
priorities even as liberalisation offers the prospect of rapid economic
growth.
Health care provision from all public sources is estimated to account for
only 1.5 per cent of gross domestic product, half its peak level. Some
states spend less than a dollar per head a year, and three quarters of rural
clinics are privately run.
Achievements on some fronts are diluted by a failure to provide matching
facilities in others. Some 78 per cent of rural dwellers have access to safe
water (although this may require a 2km return trip to collect) but,
according to Unicef, only 11 per cent have access to a latrine.
While the plague toll which alarmed the world reached only 55, someone in
India dies every minute of tuberculosis - the country has 40 per cent of the
world's cases - and up to 10,000 under-fives perish each day, largely of
pneumonia or of dehydration brought on by simple diarrhoea.
This is in spite of the halving of infant mortality rates since
independence. A mass immunisation programme launched in the 1980s achieved
80 per cent coverage. A few states such as Kerala and Tamil Nadu in the
south have demographic profiles approaching those of developed countries,
and aid agencies working in India argue that this shows large-scale
programmes can have a durable effect.
But as well as old problems such as the plague, new ones surface. Some 1.6m
Indians are estimated to be HIV positive, and research presented at the
international conference on Aids in Yokohama, Japan this August showed that
from an initial detection in 1986 the prevalence of the virus had spread
across the country and beyond high-risk groups such as prostitutes and their
clients. With heterosexual sex the main means of transmission, about half
those infected are women.
Incidence of the virus is 'strongly linked with other problems resulting
from overpopulation, poverty, disease, illiteracy and gender bias,' says Dr
Sengupta Sushma of the All India Women's Conference.
Many Aids-associated illnesses go unidentified, let alone treated, and
Indian pharmaceutical companies are just starting to develop diagnostic kits
suitable for the country. The Bombay-based Lupin Laboratories expects to
have one in production by the end of the year which will not be affected by
heat, a common problem when such materials have to be distributed by road to
rural centres.
According to health workers, Aids education in schools is bedevilled by
social taboos, while getting this and other messages across to adults is
made harder by the fact that 48 per cent of the population remains
illiterate.
India's target of universal literacy by 2000 is looking increasingly
unattainable. Unicef's Ms Gillian Wilcox describes 1995 as the
'make-or-break year' where those starting school need to be retained for the
five years of primary education which will provide their reading and writing
skills. Dropout rates can commonly reach 40 or 50 per cent in the first
year.
Government curricula are being re-examined in an attempt to make what is
being taught seem less alien particularly to rural children, and
experimental projects in various parts of the country show what could be
achieved more widely if the public education system is freed from some of
its rigidities.
At Turki, just north of the Ganges in poverty-stricken rural Bihar, 560
children attend what has become known as India's first 'school for
shepherds.' Its 25 acres provides grazing for their families' livestock
while, in addition to Hindi and arithmetic, they learn animal husbandry,
basket weaving and sandal making.
Mr Sita Ram Rai, the head teacher, says: 'Our basic aim is to make them
literate, then give them training.' Unusually, they get a midday meal and
they get paid to attend - one rupee a day for the lowest-caste children,
less for those who are more privileged.
In the central state of Madhya Pradesh a local non-governmental organisation
called Eklavya has been granted rare permission to use workbooks of its own
devising in government schools to foster activity-based learning. The
European Union is backing a Rs7bn programme to improve primary education in
deprived districts there.
First-year classes can have up to 80 students, and although facilities are
poor, donors are reluctant to put much money into bricks and mortar. In
Turki, some learn their lessons under a banyan tree.
Apart from a lack of resources, two main problems hamper education in India
as nowhere else: child labour (embracing perhaps 40m who should be in
school) and the caste system.
The two are related. When a lower-caste family withdraws a child from school
in order to work alongside its parents in the fields, it may be for economic
reasons. But the parents may also take the decision conscious that their
offspring has been made to sit at the back, or outside, or given menial
tasks like lavatory cleaning seen as befitting its status.
The belief that such work should be done only by those castes, who are then
reviled for doing it, goes to the root of India's health and literacy
difficulties, as Gandhi recognised.
'Primary education of its children must be undoubtedly an important item in
the work of a municipality. But I have not a shadow of doubt that sanitation
occupies the foremost place in its programme ... I hold it to be impossible
to give a healthy education to unhealthy children,' he wrote, arguing that
'Untouchability has a great deal to answer for the insanitation of our
streets and our latrines.'
In half a century, not much has changed.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

941108

