FT942-16173

FT  12 APR 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Bring on the clones - How
franchising can help companies grow


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Next weekend thousands of potential businessmen and women will flock to the
Spring National Franchise Exhibition at London's Olympia. For many the
exhibition may be the first step towards running their own business, be it a
fast food franchise, a printing company or a pawnbroker.
But it is also a first step for some of the companies selling franchises.
Nearly 50 years after franchising started in the US, there are signs that
large and small companies alike recognise its potential for accelerating
growth.
The success of chains like McDonald's, Burger King and Holiday Inn is plain
to see. Holiday Inn has grown from nowhere to more than 1,500 hotels in 20
years, a growth rate that would have been impossible if all the hotels had
been financed by the group.
In the UK franchising has had a slower start. But moves by Securicor Pony
Express, the same-day parcel delivery service, Yule Catto, the chemicals
company, and a host of smaller companies, demonstrate how franchising is
catching on.
Securicor Pony Express leads the same-day market through the 35 branches
which it owns; it is also about to sell a similar number of franchises. Tony
Mundella, national franchising manager, says Securicor was impressed by the
way franchising worked for other parcel delivery groups like Business Post,
Amtrak and Interlink Express.
Like many companies attracted to franchising, Securicor wants to involve
people who would be more highly motivated than employed managers. An equally
powerful motive is the realisation that customers need and demand constantly
improving levels of service. 'The general feeling is that the well-run
franchise will deliver higher degrees of service than an operator-owned
outlet,' says Sinclair Beecham, managing director of Pret a Manger, the
London sandwich chain that has just begun selling franchises.
Yule Catto became a franchisor for a similar reason. Three years ago its
Neilsen car care line was becoming a tired brand. Sales were stagnating,
despite extra marketing effort, and the customers were demanding more of a
just-in-time service - smaller quantities delivered more frequently.
Yule Catto decided it was too expensive to meet this customer demand with
its managed sales force and started converting to a franchised sales team.
Each franchisee will buy stock from Yule Catto and sell from seven-tonne
trucks, or mobile showrooms, in 75 territories around the UK.
Chris Gater, franchising manager, says Yule Catto had to have deep pockets
because converting to franchising is a long-term investment. In the
transition, profits have been hit by the continuing overhead of the old
sales team, a fall in the value of sales (to give franchisees their margin)
and the cost of setting up the franchise infrastructure.
But despite the distractions Neilsen has responded with a 20 per cent
increase in sales volume. 'It is not easy and it is expensive,' he says.
'But it will work.'
Converting part of the company to franchising is not a decision to be taken
lightly. 'Franchising is not the easiest way of running a business,' says
Brian Smart, director of the British Franchising Association.
For one reason, franchising can create a culture clash. Holland & Barrett,
the health food chain, took the franchising route in the 1980s but abruptly
stopped in 1987. The group is widely seen to have had trouble handling
independent franchisees within a culture established to manage
corporately-owned shops.
Tie Rack, which has had a mixed franchising record, had similar problems.
'When it works it works very well because you have a highly motivated
group,' says Nigel McGinley, chief executive. But the group could not always
control its franchisees and now prefers to open new stores in the UK under
its own management.
Such well-documented cases explain why many new franchisors are making only
cautious forays into franchising. Pret a Manger, which owns 17 sandwich
shops in London, has decided to roll out its brand across the country, but
is testing the formula initially in only four franchises.
'We are holding at that level till we understand the difference between a
business managing its own shops and one managing a franchisee,' says
Beecham, who opened the first shop with chairman Julian Metcalfe in 1986.
Some companies that set out with the intention of building a franchising
network from scratch make an equally cautious start. Prontaprint, which
started 20 years ago and has 260 high street copier shops, took three years
establishing its system and reputation before selling franchises.
Signs Express, a Norwich-based sign maker, followed a similar route. David
Corbett, managing director, says the company slugged it out for three years
from one shop against 59 local competitors before selling the first
franchise last year. He sold 11 franchises by the end of the second year,
wants 40 at the end of this year and plans on 70 by the end of the fourth
year.
Marks and Spencer, which has 74 franchises overseas, uses the system as a
way of testing new markets. But for smaller companies, the main reason for
becoming a franchisor is to finance a faster rate of growth.
As such the growing company does not have to buy or lease new outlets or
finance inventory. It also gains from bulk buying of products, services and
advertising, and has lower head office overheads; it needs no distribution
system and has no sales force to manage.
Martin Mendelsohn, partner at solicitors Jaques & Lewis, believes many more
companies could consider franchising. 'As a rule of thumb any business that
has the potential of being run under management has the potential of being
run as a franchise,' he says.
The reason more do not follow this route is a lack of understanding of how
to set up a franchise infrastructure, Mendelsohn suggests. 'You are asking
the franchisee to set up a business as an independent business but you are
asking them to run it within a controlled environment. It is a conflict
situation.' Visitors to Olympia would do well to remember that message.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940412

