FT942-14733

FT  19 APR 94 / Storehouse falls on news of Mothercare departure


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Storehouse, the retail group, saw its shares fall 11p to 218p yesterday
after it announced that Mothercare chief executive Ms Ann Iverson was
leaving to join Melville, one of the largest diversified retailers in the
US.
The resignation of Ms Iverson, who developed a 'fun' store concept including
talking trees and singing clocks to revitalise Mothercare, is a blow for
Storehouse, which also owns the BHS clothing chain. It comes little more
than a year after the departure of Mr David Dworkin, the American chief
executive credited with turning the group around, who recruited Ms Iverson
from the US.
Mr Dworkin quit in February 1993 to become chief executive of Carter Hawley
Hale, the US department store group - shortly after receiving a Pounds 2.7m
bonus.
The City regarded Ms Iverson as a source of stability who would continue Mr
Dworkin's work. But the offer to become president and chief executive of
Kay-Bee, Melville's toys division with 1,200 stores and annual turnover of
more than Dollars 1bn, proved too attractive. 'We tried hard to keep her,'
Storehouse said. 'We were hoping she would stay at least another year.'
News of Ms Iverson's departure comes only days after the resignation of Mr
Jim Maxmin, the American chief executive of Laura Ashley, the clothing and
furnishings group, after disagreement over investment levels.
Storehouse said Ms Iverson's decision did not result from any disagreement
with its new chief Mr Keith Edelman. She had received an attractive offer
and was keen to return to the US to be closer to her two children.
Ms Iverson was stores director at BHS before becoming Mothercare chief
executive in June 1992 and a Storehouse director in February 1993. She
earned Pounds 265,000 a year plus bonuses.
She helped Mothercare turn a Pounds 4m loss into profits of Pounds 5m last
year, on sales of Pounds 258m. Ms Iverson refocused its strategy,
concentrating on the twin markets of mother-and-baby products and children's
clothing, and developed the store design to provide an attractive
environment for young children.
'There is a blueprint in place now,' one analyst said. 'If she had gone a
year ago it would have been disastrous, but there is tangibly a recovery
story at Mothercare.'
Ms Iverson's departure will focus attention on management stability at
Storehouse. In addition to the departures of Mr Dworkin and Ms Iverson,
Storehouse has had three finance directors since 1990.
Lex, Page 18; Market Report, Page 42

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940419

