FT942-12735

FT  28 APR 94 / Technology: Digital dream come true - Xerox is hoping for a
document 'highway'


   By ANDREW FISHER


Documents are going digital. Electronic printing 'on demand' is likely to
become as common in offices, factories, universities and libraries as
voluminous files of paper and shelves of books are today. Some companies
already save time and money by storing, sending and printing their
information digitally.
Xerox, the US document processing company, has even invented a new term for
this. Just as people are getting to grips with the information superhighway,
it has come up with the notion of the document superhighway. There are even
'on ramps' and 'off ramps', in the form of equipment such as document
scanners and printers, to link users to the new digital communications
networks (the data highways) being set up worldwide, notably in the US.
As with many announcements in the computer and electronics world, the
message Xerox sought to put across in New York last week was somewhat
overwhelmed by the breathless show business nature of its presentation. It
mixed in news about improved equipment, software to integrate the stages in
the life of a document from creation to printing, and alliances with other
companies to help develop the
manufacturing and operating standards for future products and services.
Beneath the hype, though, Xerox's basic message was simple: that the
worldwide users of the many billions of business, government, educational
and other documents would increasingly be able to collect, store, distribute
and print them electronically where, when and in what form and volume they
pleased - 'the ability to plug in and publish anywhere and everywhere,' as
Peter van Cuylenberg, Xerox executive vice-president, puts it. This would
mean big savings on logistical and transport costs, which RR Donnelley, the
US commercial printer, says can account for more than half the cost of a
document.
'Today,' adds van Cuylenberg, 'you can pick up and telephone anywhere and
call anywhere else. It should be the same with documents and publications.'
But there is a long way to go before this digital dream is realised and the
offset printing industry loses large chunks of business to electronic
techniques. Current digital technology allows only black and white printing
with colour highlights, though Xerox says colour is on the way; full offset
quality (using plates and ink) will still be demanded by many document
users.
Xerox recognises this. 'They're not going to roll over and play dead,' says
Paul Allaire, the group's chairman, about the offset printers. 'We
understand that.' Even so, it intends to capture as large a slice as
possible of the section of the offset market which could eventually go
digital. This amounts to some Dollars 93bn (Pounds 64bn) worldwide,
according to a study by the US Department of Commerce and Gartner Group, a
consultancy.
While commercial book printing could also become digital eventually - some
educational publications are already printed this way, especially in the US
 -the main switch from offset is expected to occur in the more mundane area
of business forms, training manuals, brochures and newsletters. Offset
printers will still compete for this business, as will other companies in
the digital document business such as Hewlett-Packard and Kodak.
Document users who have started taking the digital route have achieved
significant savings. Tektronix, the Oregon-based computer graphics, video
system and measurement company, can now print its complicated product
manuals electronically at a day's notice compared with up to 28 days by
conventional methods. It can insert changes more easily and its whole
printing operation runs in line with the product manufacturing process.
At the Los Angeles county health department, responsible for six hospitals
and 50 clinics, annual savings of some Dollars 220,000 have been made by
moving to digital methods. Massachusetts-based Technical Documentation
Publishing saved 26 per cent of the cost of one job for a client wanting
bulky files sent to Europe; it sent them electronically to the UK for
digital printing.
The industry buzzword for all this is 'connectivity'. John Seely Brown,
Xerox's chief scientist, describes it as 'taking the sides off the boxes
(the high-speed document scanners, storage devices and printers) and making
the machines truly modular'. Towards the end of 1994, it will sell new
software called DocuSP (document services platform) to integrate the boxes
and link them with personal computer-based desktop publishing operations.
Looking to the future, Xerox is entering into alliances with more than 50
information technology concerns to speed the development of new open systems
which can be used by all equipment and software suppliers.
It also announced a link-up with AT&T in the US to enable document data to
be sent along telecommunications lines. Similar deals are being made with
Belgacom, the Belgian telecommunications operator, and PTT Telecom
Netherlands.
Yet all the digital expertise in the world will not help if document users
cannot keep a close eye on the growing mass of information bombarding them.
Xerox has thus evolved new ways of viewing large amounts of data so that
items of varying importance and relevance can be seen together without
cluttering up the screen.
Its Information Visualizer, based on scientific and psychological research,
will enable users to call up files and keep them in context. One method
already in use is the 'cone tree' on which file names can be identified as
this is rotated, then pulled out to examine data. Another is to put file
names on a computerised wall which can be moved to view items of both
central and peripheral interest.
Seely Brown, who also heads the group's Xerox Parc research unit, believes
such technological changes will help take the growing chaos out of office
work by making complex equipment easier to use. 'I have the feeling that
technology is finally getting powerful enough to get the hell out of the
way.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940428

