FT943-765

FT  28 SEP 94 / Wide relief over arms embargo: Bosnian Moslems accept delay
in ending ban


   By BRUCE CLARK and GEORGE GRAHAM


There were sighs of relief in a bizarre mixture of places - from Downing
Street and the Elysee to the embattled enclaves of eastern Bosnia - as it
became clear yesterday that Bosnia's Moslem leaders would not press their
friends in the US administration for an early end to the arms embargo.
Foreign ministries in at least three European capitals - London, Paris, and
Bonn - were taking quiet pleasure in the fact that the one of the bitterest
transatlantic disputes since the second world war has for now been averted.
Senior European officials had been warning that the standoff over arms
supplies to Bosnia had the potential to create the biggest diplomatic row
between the US and its closest European allies since the Suez crisis of
1956, when Washington opposed the Anglo-French intervention in Egypt.
They have stressed the devastating blow which such a crisis would deal to
Nato's credibility, far exceeding any damage which the alliance may already
have suffered from the relative mildness of its air activity over Bosnia.
In their worst nightmares, the European states which contribute ground
forces to the UN in Bosnia had imagined a heavily contested withdrawal -
with the risk of heavy casualties - as the Serbs took revenge on the
international community for arming their Moslem and Croat enemies.
Nato contingency plans for a withdrawal in hostile conditions have yet to be
finalised, and it has never been made clear how much help the Americans
would offer.
European governments have said such an operation would require the
involvement of US ground troops; but the US might be reluctant to commit
soldiers to an operation in which many could be killed.
In Washington, US officials said the Bosnian government's willingness to
wait six months more for the lifting of the United Nations arms embargo
gives further opportunities to press the Bosnian Serbs to accept a peace
settlement.
'That five or six months could be very important in trying to persuade the
Bosnian Serbs that they should accept the peace plan put forward by the
contact group,' said Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state.
The contact group, which includes the US, Russia, the UK and France,
proposed a settlement that would give the Moslems and Croats 51 per cent of
the territory of Bosnia-Hercegovina and require the Bosnian Serbs to reduce
the portion they now control to 49 per cent.
But the Bosnian Serbs continue to reject the plan, and pressure has been
steadily mounting in the US Congress to compel President Bill Clinton to
break the UN-imposed arms embargo by supplying weapons to the Bosnian
Moslems.
Mr Christopher insisted that the idea of delaying the lifting of the arms
embargo came from Bosnia, not the US.
Nevertheless, the move offers a welcome relief to the US administration,
which has been backed by Congress into a corner where it might be forced to
break a UN embargo against the opposition not only of Russia but also of
France and the UK, which have peacekeeping troops at risk in Bosnia.
Mr Haris Silajdzic, the Bosnian prime minister, first broached the idea to
Mr Christopher last week and Mr Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnia's president,
discussed it with Mr Clinton on Monday.
Mr Christopher said Bosnia's reasoning was affected by the onset of winter
and the military situation.
'They have indicated they thought in their own self-interest it was better
not to have the lifting at this time,' Mr Christopher said.
Some observers have warned that the immediate effect of lifting the arms
embargo might be to harm the Bosnian Moslems more than the Serbs. It might
be particularly disastrous for the Moslem enclave of Srebrenica, which is
surrounded by Serb forces in eastern Bosnia.
Mr Clinton, meanwhile, warned in his speech to the UN on Monday that the
Bosnian capital of Sarajevo 'once again faces the prospect of
strangulation'.
This is a term which can trigger air strikes under the existing policy of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
Mr Clinton called for 'a new resolve by the United Nations to enforce its
resolutions', a call which administration officials said reflected
frustration at the unwillingness of UN forces in Bosnia to respond to Serb
aggression.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940928

