FT942-15775

FT  14 APR 94 / Schneider crisis threatens jobs, Kohl warns banks


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


Chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday intervened in the financial crisis
surrounding Jurgen Schneider, one of Germany's biggest property groups,
warning creditor banks against rushing to force the company into bankruptcy.
Mr Kohl said banks should be mindful of their responsibility to jobs and
businesses which depend on the company's continued survival.
According to a briefing after yesterday's cabinet meeting in Bonn, Mr Kohl
and other ministers expressed concern about the Schneider group's troubles.
Mr Gunther Rexrodt, economics minister, is heading a task force to examine
ways of limiting the impact of Schneider's problems on the small business
sector.
The company was plunged into crisis following Friday's disappearance of Mr
Jurgen Schneider, the founder and chief executive. Schneider said yesterday
the 59-year-old entrepreneur's whereabouts were still unknown. Mr Kohl's
intervention preceded a meeting today of representatives of more than of 40
of the company's creditor banks. According to unconfirmed reports, the group
owes DM9bn (Pounds 3.5bn) - DM5bn to bankers and a further DM4bn to trade
creditors.
It is widely expected that the group, based at Konigstein near Frankfurt,
will file for bankruptcy, a step which Mr Kohl's remarks seem designed to
avert. Schneider employs more than 2,000 people throughout Germany, but many
thousand more jobs are at risk among the small businesses and craftsmen in
the construction and building supplies industries.
Mr Hinrich Lehmann-Grube, mayor of Leipzig, the eastern German city where
Schneider has a significant presence, said at least 3,000 jobs in the
Leipzig area depended on the troubled group. The IG Bau-Steine-Erde building
union said the true figure was 5,000.
Chambers of commerce throughout Germany are asking local companies to
register their exposure to Schneider. The economics ministry stressed it was
too early to calculate the exact consequences of the debacle as nobody -
including the bankers who meet today - appears to have an overview of the
group's assets and liabilities.
The politicians' early concern seems driven by the possible impact of job
losses on this year's crop of regional and national elections. An
unconfirmed report in the authoritative Borsen-Zeitung newspaper said that
about a dozen, exclusively German banks were owed more than DM100m each by
the company.
Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank, is thought to have the largest
exposure, with credits outstanding of DM1.3bn. Dresdner Bank, Germany's
second biggest bank, is thought to be owed about DM330m, while Hypo-Bank is
thought to be the next biggest creditor with a loan of DM270m. Deutsche
Hypo, a mortgage banking unit of Frankfurt-based BHF-Bank, said its exposure
to the financially troubled Schneider real estate group amounted to about
DM200m. 'The loans are first mortgages secured on completed and fully rented
out properties,' Deutsche Hypo said. It did not expect Schneider to default
on the loan.
Commentators compared the group's difficulties with those of
Metallgesellschaft, the Frankfurt-based mining metals and industrial group
which came to the brink of collapse earlier this year owing in excess of
DM9bn.
Editorial Comment, Page 23
Ask my bank, said Schneider, before the fall, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940414

