FT942-12558

FT  29 APR 94 / Tokyo policy on Iran seen as being naive


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


   TOKYO


The revelation that Iran may have been training Japanese terrorists to
conduct assassinations in Europe and the US will produce acute embarrassment
in Tokyo.
The discomfit is caused not merely because members of the Japanese Red Army,
one of several left-wing terrorist groups which burst onto the international
scene in the 1970s, might be planning attacks in western cities, but because
of Japan's controversial policy of courting Iran with aid and finance.
The warnings yesterday by the US and UK governments that Iran must halt its
apparent support for terrorist groups will put pressure on Tokyo to review
its own policies towards that country, which have been based on the idea
that it is assisting moderates in Tehran.
This justification for Japan's policy, formulated by Mr Kunihiko Saito, a
permanent foreign vice minister and former ambassador in Tehran, is that the
moderate and technocratic faction in the Iranian government is being led by
President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani. This faction, argues the foreign
ministry, wants to develop economically - and therefore socially and
politically - and should be encouraged.
Japan's western allies believe the Japanese foreign ministry is being naive.
They say no evidence exists that President Rafsanjani opposes state
sponsorship of terrorism. Indeed, they insist he in fact heads the top-level
Supreme National Security Council which orders executions.
The Tokyo policy, motivated, at least in part by Japan's desire to secure
adequate energy for a country that has almost no natural energy resources,
has included providing Tehran with much needed aid and finance. During late
1992, Tokyo, in spite of western reproaches, resumed aid to Iran, and the
following May released Y38.8bn (Pounds 255m) for the Karun Dam project. A
second tranche is due to be provided shortly.
Last month, in a separate move, the governor of the Central Bank of Iran
announced Tehran had arranged the final details necessary to reschedule
Dollars 2.3bn (Pounds 1.57bn) in loans from Japan. The terms allowed a grace
period of 24 months and the loans would be repaid over the following three
and a half years.
Both the US and Britain have been anxious to prevent Tehran rescheduling its
short-term debt as a means of bringing pressure to bear on Iran and its
shaky economy which has been crippled by the Iran-Iraq war and the low price
of oil.
They hope solidarity among the G7 on terrorism and the case of Mr Salman
Rushdie, the author of the controversial work, The Satanic Verses, should
help force a change in Iran's policies.
Western diplomats are bewildered by the Japanese policy, particularly as
they believe Japan has suffered from Iranian-inspired terrorism. In July
1991 Professor Itashi Igarashi, the Japanese translator of Mr Rushdie's
book, was murdered.
Japanese police believe the assassination was the work of trained assassins
from Vevak, the Iranian ministry of intelligence and security headed by Mr
Ali Fallahian. The Iranian embassy in Tokyo provided logistical support for
the killers.
In addition, say western diplomats, the North Korean missile programme
threatening Tokyo is being developed with Iranian money and technical
co-operation.
North Korea's Rodong-1 missile is being tested in Iran, for example.
Western governments are clearly anxious to use the latest revelations to
bring pressure to bear on Tokyo.
However, the foreign ministry in Tokyo yesterday insisted it had not so far
seen any conclusive evidence of Tehran's involvement in state-sponsored
terrorism. If the British government could provide clear evidence,
appropriate action would be taken, it added.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940429

