FT943-12973

FT  22 JUL 94 / Europe's new parliament shows it means to be taken
seriously: MEPs issue wake-up call to Twelve with narrow vote for Santer -
Yesterday's meeting marked turning point for Strasbourg assembly


   By LIONEL BARBER


The European parliament came of age yesterday. Casting aside a reputation
for low attendance and long-windedness, newly elected MEPs staged a
thoughtful debate on the nomination of Mr Jacques Santer which culminated in
a nerve-wracking climax.
The narrow vote in favour of Mr Santer, the Luxembourg prime minister and
one-time MEP, should serve as a wake-up call. Governments (and national
parliaments) who would like to condemn the parliament to irrelevance will
have to adjust to an institution which is determined to be treated as an
equal partner alongside the Council of Ministers and the Commission.
Mr Gijs De Vries, leader of the Liberal group, echoed a widespread sentiment
at this week's inaugural parliamentary session Strasbourg. 'We are
determined not be taken for granted. The net result of today's vote will be
greater parliamentary influence over the Commission.'
The relief on Mr Santer's face in victory suggests that he senses the
potential shift in power; so too, Mr Klaus Kinkel, German foreign minister,
who promised to consult more closely with the parliament in the choice of
future presidents of the Commission, a post which remains the most powerful
non-elected executive job in Europe.
British officials were more cautious. They recalled that, in 1979, the
newly-elected European parliament, the first elected by universal suffrage,
voted down the EU budget. This vote was also a muscle-flexing exercise aimed
at creating a crisis with the Council of Ministers, but it did not lead
immediately to new powers to control expenditure.
The parliament's threats of provoking an institutional crisis have
periodically led to accusations that its members are pursuing 'Duke of York'
tactics, marching its troops to the top of the hill and retreating at the
first whiff of cordite from the Council of Ministers.
Only a few months ago, MEPs backed off from threats to delay enlargement
because the Council refused to streamline voting procedures to make
decision-making easier once the European Union takes in Austria, Finland,
Sweden and Norway as members next year.
Many suspected that criticism of the nomination of Mr Santer to succeed Mr
Jacques Delors as Commission president was empty talk, too - though an early
warning of trouble came on Tuesday when MEPs used the Maastricht treaty's
powers to cast the first-ever vote of rejection against a Council of
Ministers' decision to liberalise the voice telecommunications market by
1998.
Two days later, the parliament tackled the Santer nomination. It was
encouraged by a selection process for the Commission president which was at
best ham-fisted, at worst a quick-fix which produced the lowest-common
denominator candidate.
The process began last year with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany vetoing
Mr Ruud Lubbers, the Dutch prime minister, on personal grounds; it continued
with Prime Minister John Major of the UK vetoing Prime Minister Jean-Luc
Dehaene of Belgium last month to shore up his own position with Eurosceptics
in his own Conservative party; and it ended with Mr Kohl producing Mr Santer
last week as the candidate who, by his own admission, would have happily
remained in Luxembourg.
The debate on the Santer nomination suggests that new forces are at work,
unleashed by an influx of MEPs eager to take advantage of expanded powers
which the parliament gained in the 1991 Maastricht treaty. One such power
gives members the right to be 'consulted' on the Commission
president-designate, as well as the right to vote down the president and his
chosen team later in the year.
Until yesterday, most observers compared rejection of the Commission
president-designate to the equivalent of pressing a nuclear button. But more
than half of the present parliament are new and determined to make their
mark.
Many, such as Mr Michel Rocard, former French prime minister, or Mr Piet
Dankert, former Dutch minister for European affairs, have no hesitation
about lobbing political grenades. Others, such as Mr Bernard Tapie, the
maverick businessman and leader of a new populist Socialist group in his
native France, are natural performers.
Ms Pauline Green, the former British policewoman who now heads the powerful
Socialist group, ridiculed the selection process. The European Union
lectured the rest of the world on democratic rights, 'but these same
countries are willing to connive at some of the most squalid, shabby and
ill-judged practices to put in place the president of the European
Commission'.
Many members argued that a vote for Mr Santer would be equivalent to
condoning Mr Major's veto. Echoing widespread criticism of the UK
Conservative government, Mr Rocard said British objections to Mr Dehaene had
nothing to do with vital national interests and therefore amounted to an
abuse of the power.
Mr Gerhard Schmid, head of the German Socialists, had no qualms about
suggesting that Mr Santer simply lacked the stature and imagination for the
top job in Brussels. Quoting the German philosopher Ernst Bloch, he
declared: 'We need a president who is prepared to dream about the future.'
Mr De Vries wound up the debate by declaring that the selection process had
been akin to a cattle-market; Mr Santer was the tenth choice; and he lacked
the kind of inspirational leadership which Mr Delors had shown during his
near 10 years in Brussels. 'Jacques Santer will turn out to be more a man of
the past than a man of the future,' he said.
Yet other MEPs, particularly the tiny Luxembourg contingent and fellow
Christian Democrats, sprang to Mr Santer's defence. They noted that he had
been a top-notch prime minister of the Grand Duchy for 10 years, and that he
had contributed effectively to both the Single European Act and the
Maastricht treaty.
But it was Mr Kinkel, speaking for the German presidency, who made the most
effective contribution. Germany, he said, had fought hard to expand the
powers of the European parliament. Was the reward now to be a decision to
torpedo the Commission president-designate, the unanimous choice of the 12
member state governments?
'Do you want to punish Europe, punish the people of Europe? Give Jacques
Santer a chance,' he declared.
His appeal succeeded, albeit narrowly and only after a bizarre alliance of
forces came to Mr Santer's rescue. In the final count, the lucky
Luxembourger needed support from the Spanish Socialists (who did not want to
upset Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez) the Greek Socialists (who felt
similarly about Mr Andreas Papandreou), and the neo-fascists in the
parliament to squeeze out the 22-vote majority.
This ad hoc alliance underlines that the new parliament is likely to be
unpredictable and not easily intimidated. The next few months will see
further tests of strength with the Council, tempered only by the knowledge
that parliaments need to show responsibility, too, if they are convince the
outside world of their maturity

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940722

