FT941-17012

FT  06 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Incoming Chilean copper chief
objects to military burden


   By DAVID PILLING


   SANTIAGO


Codelco, Chile's state copper company, should not be obliged to hand over 10
per cent of its earnings to the armed forces, according to Mr Juan Villarzu,
who takes over as the company's president in March.
Under legislation brought in by Chile's former military government, Codelco
last year financed the armed forces to the tune of some Dollars 190m, about
a fifth of the defence ministry's total budget.
'The way funds are channelled at the moment is not appropriate from the
point of view of economic efficiency or the functioning of the country,'
said Mr Villarzu, who was appointed head of Codelco by the president-elect,
Mr Eduardo Frei.
The removal of the requirement to supplement the armed forces budget would
be an essential step towards any long-term plans to privatise Codelco, since
no private company would be willing to take on such a heavy burden. However,
Mr Frei's administration has ruled out any question of selling off the state
entity, which is considered to be of 'strategic' importance to the Chilean
economy.
Instead, Mr Villarzu has promised that he will push ahead with modernisation
plans aimed at boosting productivity, which is necessary because of
declining ore grades, years of inadequate investment and the appreciation of
the Chilean peso. He has fully backed moves to split Codelco's four
principal mines into autonomous divisions, each of which would be expected
to turn in a profit.
It was 'perfectly feasible' to expect the modernisation plans, which
included the gradual reduction of staff, to improve productivity
'significantly' within five years, he said.
Mr Villarzu also said that a more efficient Codelco should be in a position
to develop important new ore bodies such as Radomiro Tomic and Mansa Mina.
He rejected as 'pressure from certain elements on the right' suggestions
that Codelco should exploit such reserves through joint-venture operations
with private mining companies.
'We don't see the necessity of this,' he said. 'We believe that Codelco can
exploit such reserves on its own, but only when there are clear guarantees
that it has achieved better management.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940106

