FT944-2382

FT  16 DEC 94 / Letters to the Editor: New jobs orthodoxy not reality


   From Mr JOHN SHELDON


Sir, It was a refreshing change to see a combination of common sense and
healthy scepticism in Richard Donkin's piece on the 'end of jobs for life'
debate ('Don't throw away those gold watches', December 14).
The zealots of the New Right have, until now, managed to create a new
orthodoxy in the reporting of the world of work by mixing in a teaspoonful
of truth with a barrel load of half-baked, politically driven science
fiction.
In this brave new world, everybody is (or will soon be) a tele-worker on
short-term contracts, paid entirely on the basis of some form or other of
performance remuneration with an individualised relationship with the
employer, moving rapidly between different employers and types of jobs, all
requiring different skill mixes. Not only is this paraded as fact, but as
desirable from the point of view of both individual employee and employer.
Away from Star Trek, this is far from the reality, but there is a danger
that it will become reality by default. I have lost count of the number of
times that senior civil servants and ministers have repeated with tedious
regularity that 'the old days with jobs for life have gone for ever' and
then make some reference to the latest headline-grabbing burial of lifetime
employment as though it was justification for this or that cutback or
privatisation.
This represents the real use of the set of anecdotes and impressionistic
observations that masquerades as a theory of trends in working patterns. It
serves as an academic cover for the conscious political decision to attack
conditions of service, particularly in the public sector - and to increase
insecurity at work.
As Richard Donkin's article suggested, as a personnel strategy it is as
damaging to employers as employees. Nothing is inevitable here and one of
our objectives as a trade union is the preservation and further creation of
real, secure employment options.
John Sheldon,
general secretary,
NUCPS,
124/130 Southwark Street,
London SE1 0TU

The Financial Times


London Page 18

941216

