FT942-12563

FT  29 APR 94 / Lula wins hearts, minds, not the media: Brazil's
presidential frontrunner evokes a mixed response


   By ANGUS FOSTER


Mr Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, leader of Brazil's left-wing Workers' Party
(PT) and frontrunner for president in October's elections, visited the
sleepy coastal town of Sao Luis earlier this month hoping to grab headlines
with his plans for agricultural reform and improved social welfare.
Instead, the Estado de Maranhao, a conservative local newspaper, printed a
storming editorial against the PT's liberal attitude to homosexuality and
its calls for easier access to abortions, a sometimes sensitive but never
national issue.
It was a strange choice of topic in a country with one of the world's most
unequal income distributions and as many as 30m people suffering real
hardship and hunger.
But the incident highlighted Mr da Silva's election problems. He faces a
largely hostile media, mainly controlled by the right and business
interests. Although Mr da Silva is a moderate, the media and his opponents
are playing on the public's perception that his party is filled with
radicals who threaten to shatter Brazil's consensual politics with
controversial change.
Mr da Silva, usually known as Lula, is leading his nearest rival, Mr
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, former finance minister, by 35 points to 20 in
most polls. A former metalworker and unionist, Mr da Silva helped found the
PT as Brazil emerged from the harshest period of military dictatorship at
the end of the 1970s. An amiable man with a liking for Cuban cigars, his
biggest political assets are his rousing oratory and bridging role between
the different wings of the PT.
Recently, he appears to be winning an argument within the party to present
an electorally acceptable rather than ideologically correct manifesto.
Recently, he and other moderates defeated calls for a PT government to
declare an immediate moratorium on the country's foreign debt.
The PT's draft manifesto, still subject to further discussion, is remarkably
thorough and details the party's proposed policy on subjects ranging from
farm subsidies to road deaths. It is an unusual document in Brazil, where
politicians usually offer little except vague but tempting promises.
The document is also full of good ideas to reform the bankrupt state, reduce
corruption and tackle poverty. It includes policies which might normally be
associated with the right, for example government decentralisation and
reduced resources for the state.
There are also sections which will be less appealing to business interests
and foreign investors. The document calls for a freeze on privatisation and
introduction of potentially expensive minimum wage laws. However, private
investment in key sectors such as telecommunications will be allowed, so
long as the state retains overall control.
Mr Alozio Mercadente, a close adviser to Mr da Silva and a possible finance
minister, says the party would concentrate on four areas: reducing hunger,
improving education, starting rural reform and creating jobs. 'This is not
an ambitious programme, but it is incredible that a society like ours can
end the century talking about basic problems like hunger,' he says.
The PT's policies are regularly criticised by its opponents as too expensive
for a developing country like Brazil. There are doubts that PT pledges to
more than double education spending to 10 per cent of GDP are feasible, even
over the medium term. Mr Mercadente says precise spending and budget
projections will not be ready until later this year.
But he says the programme will be bankable, and will be paid for by better
public spending and - in another policy idea reminiscent of the right -
fewer taxes but better tax collection.
Mr da Silva is especially vulnerable to charges that the PT lacks experience
in government, although it is gaining local government experience and making
impressive changes. In Diadema, an industrial suburb of Sao Paulo under PT
control since 1982, infant mortality has fallen from 92 to 20 per 1,000 due
to healthcare improvements. The number of health workers has increased from
300 to 1,800. Violence is decreasing and there are less than five murders a
week compared to five a day 10 years ago.
In the lobster fishing village of Icapu in Ceara state, eight years of PT
rule have cut illiteracy by more than half. Money which used to disappear in
expensive public works and corruption is now being used to improve services.
These changes were introduced by a simple, but in Brazil still rare, method
of local democracy. Budgets and spending plans were discussed with the
community and different priorities assessed. According to Mr Jose Airton,
recently re-elected mayor, the aims were popular participation, government
transparency and decentralisation. 'These ideas can be applied anywhere in
Brazil. There is no secret, it's simply the will to work with the
population,' he said.
However, there have been setbacks, including disappointing PT governments in
Sao Paulo and Fortaleza, while Icapu and Diadema still face serious
problems. And, even if Mr da Silva wins, the PT is a small party which will
have difficulty governing effectively without alliances in Congress. In
Brazil, alliances often spell compromise and inaction.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940429

