FT943-925

FT  27 SEP 94 / Arts: Philadelphia, Here I Come - Theatre in New York


   By KAREN FRICKER


The New York theatre season is off to a promising start with Joe Dowling's
top-notch revival of Brian Friel's early play Philadelphia, Here I Come, at
the Roundabout Theatre.
After the Broadway failure last year of Friel's strained, heavy-handed
Wonderful Tennessee, New York needed to see this Irish playwright at his
best. And Philadelphia, which premiered in Dublin in 1964 and on Broadway in
1966, is echt Friel: poetic, wistful, aching, and funny, it is full of the
playwright's characteristic fascinations: memory, the isolation of a
transcendent moment of happiness and, above all, the Irishman's search for
personal and national identity.
Like many of Friel's plays, Philadelphia is set in the fictional town of
Ballybeg, on 25-year-old Gareth O'Donnell's last night in Ireland before he
leaves, probably forever, for America. Gar is of two minds about going away,
which Friel represents quite literally: two actors play Gar, one his outer
self (Jim True), and the other his private thoughts (Robert Sean Leonard).
His mother long dead, Gar lives and works with his uncommunicative father
(Milo O'Shea), who still treats the young man as if he were a child. In the
play's best scene, father and son exchange banalities at the dinner table,
while Gar's alta ego mocks, curses, wheedles and exhorts the expressionless
older man.
Even more tragic than the boy's non-relationship with his father is his
estrangement from himself. Behind closed doors, both public and private
selves come alive, but around other people, Gar watches life happen,
inwardly commenting on the action but unable to participate. Gar's passivity
has already bred one cataclysmic mistake: he let the girl he still loves
(the radiant Miriam Healy-Louie) get away, a painful episode he recalls in
flashback.
Most of the play, however, progresses in real time, as various people pass
through the house to give Gar their regards. As much as Friel casts a
cynical eye on Irish society, he does not romanticise the alternative:
America's representative is Gar's brash and pretentious Irish-American aunt,
whose invitation to Philadelphia offers Gar his escape.
Dowling's production has a marvellously directorless quality, as if the
events on stage were happening for the first time. The two young actors are
excellent. True plays outer Gar like a brooding time bomb, while Leonard is
a fine inner Gar, capturing both the character's cynicism and his
childishness. The redoubtable O'Shea and Pauline Flanagan fit so naturally
into their roles as the father and his loving but acid-tongued housekeeper
that John Lee Beatty seems to have designed them as part of the
picture-perfect set.
American appetites whetted for more Friel will be sated later this season:
Noel Pearson is planning a Howard Davies-directed Broadway production of the
playwright's 1981 Translations in March, and talk of bringing Friel's
latest, Molly Sweeney, to New York has surely escalated after the New York
Times' rave review of its premiere production at Dublin's Gate Theatre
earlier this month.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940927

