FT942-15799

FT  13 APR 94 / International Capital Markets: Mexico to go ahead with
Telmex issue


   By DAMIAN FRASER and STEPHEN FIDLER


   GUADALAJARA


The Mexican government is planning to go ahead with an important
privatisation offering in the international markets, in spite of recent
turbulence in the country's financial markets.
Mr Guillermo Ortiz, deputy finance minister, said that an offering of about
Dollars 500m in convertible bonds covering the government's remaining stake
in Telmex, the national telephone company, could be offered 'soon'.
He said that the turmoil in Mexico's markets that followed the recent rise
in US bond yields and the assassination last month of ruling party
presidential candidate Mr Luis Donaldo Colosio appeared to be coming to an
end.
He added that over the last four days capital outflows have slowed
significantly and central bank foreign exchange reserves are close to the
level at the end of last year, when they stood at more than Dollars 24bn.
Financial analysts believe reserves peaked at just over Dollars 30bn in
February.
The government has, however, decided to postpone a planned Dollars 1.5bn to
Dollars 2bn offering of its remaining equity in Bancomer, the country's
second largest bank, and more than Dollars 500m of bonds backed by revenues
from a state-owned toll road. 'We are not desperate for money,' Mr Ortiz
said.
The Telmex offering is being managed by Merrill Lynch. As a convertible bond
issue, offering regular interest payments if the share price does not rise,
it should be easier to place in a falling market than a straight share
issue. Mexico's stock market has lost nearly a quarter of its value since
the high in early February, although Telmex shares have held up better than
the average.
Mr Ortiz said the government would not seek to revive Mexico's stagnant
economy through an increase in public spending, arguing that the impact of a
loosening of fiscal policy would in any case be felt after August's
elections. The government therefore intends to run, as planned, a balanced
budget this year.
Mr Ortiz added that he believed that interest rates were close to or at
their peak. Short-term interest rates on government paper rose to 14.31 per
cent last week.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940413

