FT941-3594

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (9): A niche and 40 titles - In
profile: Two publishers of business books


   By TIM DICKSON


Nicholas Brealey knows all about the anguish of starting a small business.
Just a day after his first five titles had been delivered to the warehouse,
the company which printed them went bust.
'I had no credit status at the time and had had to put money up front,' he
recalls with due humility. 'If the receivership had been 48 hours earlier I
would probably have abandoned the whole venture. As it happened, in all the
chaos they forgot to send me the invoice, so what was a potential nightmare
turned into a valuable lesson in cash flow.'
Two years later Nicholas Brealey Publishing has carved out a profitable and
instructive niche in the business book publishing world. The company now has
some 40 or so titles on its list, including Lester Thurow's Head to Head,
Fons Trompenaars' Riding the Waves of Culture, and one of last year's big
international successes Re-engineering the Corporation, by Michael Hammer &
James Champy.
It is about to publish Global Paradox, by John Naisbitt (author of
Megatrends) and Robert Waterman's Frontiers of Excellence. On the back of
tripled turnover in 1993 and optimism about the outlook for the year ahead,
Brealey has just hired two new people and moved to new offices in London's
Bloomsbury Square.
The venture is by no means the only small independent publishing house to
have tasted success recently. But Brealey bridles at the cottage-industry
image of tatty amateur. On the contrary, he believes that in a global world
apparently dominated by the big multinational houses, there is every
opportunity for small, focused operators like himself to reach the
bestseller list.
Partly this is because of what he sees as the 'diseconomies of scale' in
many people based businesses. 'If I was in a multinational I would be in
meetings all day trying to persuade others to publish books rather than just
getting on with the job,' is how he puts it.
There is also the question of whether the much trumpeted international
synergies actually work. The Re-engineering book and Daniel Yergin's Russia
2010 are examples of books published in the US by multinationals  - but by
Brealey rather than their local offshoots in Europe.
'Many consumer publishing companies have massively cut back on their lists
to the extent that they are really only interested in potential top-10
winners,' suggests Brealey, who worked for several big houses himself before
creating NB through a buy-out from the Industrial Society. 'It just happens
that business books in this country are not seen in this category.'
Arguably, the trend towards outsourcing has also helped a new player. All
the 'heavy stuff', such as invoicing, credit management, warehousing and
distribution, is sub-contracted out: 'Almost everything except the editorial
policy and marketing - which is what I think a publisher should be,'
Nicholas Brealey adds.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940315

