FT944-2470

FT  16 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Four nations sign up to Mercosur customs
union


   By ANGUS FOSTER


   OURO PRETO, SOUTHERN BRAZIL


The four member countries in the Mercosur customs union, launched in 1991,
yesterday began a final meeting setting the seal on the formal establishment
of the trade area on January 1.
Foreign ministers from Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay met in the
southern Brazilian town of Ouro Preto, a colonial gold mining centre, to
agree final details about the customs union. The four presidents are due
tomorrow to sign the Protocol of Ouro Preto, which will put the union into
effect and spell out the workings of Mercosur institutions including
procedures such as appeals.
Ministers are also negotiating final lists of products to be exempted from
the free trade area within the four countries, and also from the common
external tariffs (CET) of 0-20 per cent on imports from outside the union.
Mr Jose Artur Denot Medeiros, Brazil's main Mercosur negotiator, said
between 5 and 10 per cent of total trade would retain domestic tariffs for a
further four years to give uncompetitive industries more time to prepare for
customs union. Tariffs would be retained to protect such items as Argentine
paper and Brazilian processed fruit, but will be phased out according to
pre-arranged timetables.
A further 10 per cent of items, mainly sensitive products such as high
technology and capital goods, will not adopt the CET until early next
century. This is designed to help Brazilian companies which are currently
protected by tariffs of 20-35 per cent. Brazil's tariffs will fall, again by
a pre-arranged timetable, to meet the CET of 14-16 per cent for these
sectors.
Brazil and Argentina, which account for more than 95 per cent of Mercosur's
GDP, are also expected to announce details of a package of compromises to
help Argentine wheat compete in Brazil against subsidised exports from North
America. The two countries are also due to approve closer integration
between their two car industries.
Mercosur has led to a rapid increase in trade between the four countries as
tariff and other barriers have been progressively removed. Trade within the
four partners increased from Dollars 3.6bn in 1990 to Dollars 8.7bn last
year. Despite the success of the venture, Brazil and Argentina now want to
consolidate recent gains rather than push for a full common market.
Decisions will continue to be taken by the four countries' governments and
there are no plans to set up a European-style Commission. Brazilian and
Argentine fears about diminished sovereignty snuffed out a Uruguayan
proposal for a supranational court to rule on trade disputes. Instead, the
four countries are expected to announce a complaints process with final
appeal to a previously established, but so far untested, arbitration
tribunal.
Leaders are expected to discuss in detail Mercosur's role within the Free
Trade Area of the Americas, which all American leaders except Cuba last
weekend agreed to set up by 2005 at last week's Summit of the Americas in
Miami. Mercosur has already invited Chile and Bolivia to join as free trade
rather than customs unions members, and both countries will attend the Ouro
Preto summit as observers.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941216

