FT943-930

FT  27 SEP 94 / Technology: Ship-shape for the high seas - Robert Corzine
explains why floating oil production systems may prove increasingly popular


   By ROBERT CORZINE


Like its mythological namesake, the Gryphon, a tanker-like vessel anchored
in the North Sea 200 miles northeast of Aberdeen in Scotland, is an unlikely
combination.
From a distance it looks like any other large oil tanker. But whereas most
such vessels measure their lives in millions of miles travelled, over the
next 15 years or so the Gryphon is unlikely to move more than a few metres
from its present position.
Part ship, part crude oil and natural gas processing and storage plant, the
Gryphon represents the latest thinking on how to exploit remote offshore
petroleum deposits too small to justify building a large and expensive
conventional platform fixed to the sea bed.
Roy Phillips, an executive with Kerr-McGee, the US company that operates the
Gryphon, says the decision to use a floating production, storage and
offloading system (FPSO) saved 40 per cent over the cost of a conventional
platform.
In addition, the early availability of the ship, which had been built as a
floating oil storage vessel on a speculative basis in Spain, meant the
company was able to produce the first oil from the field in October last
year, about a year after the go-ahead was given. First oil production from a
conventional platform would not have been possible until early 1996, he
says.
Although the Gryphon is the only FPSO operating in the UK sector of the
North Sea and one of only a dozen or so in the world, industry observers
expect them to become an increasingly common sight in coming years. Wood
MacKenzie, the Edinburgh-based oil consultants, earlier this year estimated
that nine UK North Sea fields being considered for development will use some
form of floating production system, with two-thirds expected to adopt a
ship-shape solution similar to the Gryphon.
The effectiveness of FPSOs have been enhanced by progress in a number of
technical areas. The method used to keep the Gryphon on station is
straightforward: a turret at the centre of the vessel is secured to the
seabed by 10 anchors, each weighing 35 tonnes. The vessel, which has five
thrusters mounted along its hull, is able to rotate around the turret so
that it is always lying head to the wind.
The 'smart' part of the system lies within a sophisticated computer software
system. It receives precise navigational data from automatic electronic
identification systems, or 'transponders', on the seabed and satellite
transmissions. It also receives constant weather data and updates on the
stresses on each anchor chain, before recommending to the crew that they
activate one or more of the thrusters.
The system can also 'learn the weather and react to it', according to the
Gryphon's crew. Its effectiveness is such that the maximum lateral motion
experienced by the ship in last winter's Force 10 gales, with winds gusting
to 120 miles an hour, was 30 feet, although it can move more than three
times that.
Other technical advances have also made FPSOs more cost-effective. New metal
alloys, for example, have helped to reduce the cost of the flexible pipes
which lead from the wells, located on the sea bed 1,500 metres from the
ship.
Kerr-McGee executives expect the operating costs of the Gryphon to be
relatively low. The vessel is not due to return to port during its planned
15-year stay in the North Sea. The double-skinned hull allows inspections to
be made on site, says Roy Phillips, while the hull is protected from
corrosion by an electrical system, or anode array.
But the big cost advantage of FPSOs over their fixed counterparts will come
when the field is depleted. For the Gryphon, with a life expectancy of 40
years, will be able simply to weigh anchor and steam to a new site anywhere
in the world.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940927

