FT941-3461

FT  16 MAR 94 / Arts: Beckett's Footfalls - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Long after the performance of a Samuel Beckett play ends, its meanings go on
gathering. Plays seldom come shorter than his Footfalls (1976), and yet its
brief mysteries lodge such a wealth of suggestion and connection in your
head that it can effectively fill a whole evening.
The play, which lasts less than 20 minutes, has just come to the West End
for a week, two performances per night (7.30 and 9.30), all tickets at
Pounds 4, with Deborah Warner directing Fiona Shaw and Susan Engels. The
problem is whether Warner and Shaw help you to attend to the play as much as
to their own way with it.
The two women of Footfalls are mother and daughter. The mother is a voice
(Engels), unseen; the daughter, May (Shaw), a woman now in her forties, whom
we see, continually and audibly paces this way and that, as she goes over
the past in her mind. She has never recovered from some early shock or
shocks; it is possible that she has never recovered from being born. Voice
of mother: 'I had you late. (Pause.) In life. (Pause.) Forgive me again.'
Each woman looms in the other's mind. May (after pacing): 'Were you asleep?'
Voice: 'Deep asleep. (Pause) I heard you in my deep sleep. (Pause) There is
no sleep so deep I would not hear you there.'
Here, as throughout, how many implications a line can have. The numerous
implications of this last line include: Big Mother is hearing you; so deep
is my love for you that your voice will never go unheard by me; the
umbilical cord between us is unbroken and troubles me still; I would sleep
easy were it not for you; you are a voice in my dreams; I will hear you even
when I reach the great sleep of death; you keep breaking into my sleep and
you always will; I can never sleep easy where you are concerned. . .
Since we never see the mother, we may well come to interpret her voice as a
voice within her daughter's mind: in which case that line acquires further
connotations: Mother, I will always wake you; Mother, you will never escape
me; Mother, I will always haunt you; and more.
There is probably not a meaning in the play that Fiona Shaw and Deborah
Warner have not thought about - though they choose to ignore a few of
Beckett's precise instructions. (He required that May's feet be heard but
not seen, and that she have grey hair and a gray wrap. Shaw's stockinged
legs and sandalled feet can be seen; likewise her dark hair and red dress.)
Shaw's obsessive intensity, her wit, her ability to alternate voices, her
Irishness, all pay dividends. And so does Engel's ponderous, cultivated
contralto.
Warner's most daring stroke is to have Shaw spend most of the play not
onstage but on a special platform in the centre of the dress circle; and to
have Engel's voice emerge from beneath her, so that Shaw, in the very centre
of the audience, seems to pace upon her mother's tomb.
But must Shaw and Warner reveal their talent in so self-advertising a
manner? Shaw's withered-old-maid posture is too obviously contrived; her
sexually frustrated fiddlings at the folds of dress before her crotch are
over-emphatic; and her little-girl petrified-virgin voice makes the whole
affair artificial.
In some ways, Footfalls seem to encapsulate all those other Shaw-Warner
collaborations that London has seen in recent years (Electra, The Good
Person of Sichuan, Hedda Gabler). I do not mean that as much of a
compliment. Thanks largely to Warner, Shaw has developed in recent years a
dreadfully solipsistic way of acting, as if there were no one else onstage;
thanks also to Warner, she has become our most emphatic exponent of female
neurosis and/or victimisation and/or masochism. True, Footfalls is a far
more appropriate vehicle for all this than those other plays - but those of
us who have been through the other Shaw-Warner collaborations may well feel
that this is just more of the same.
At the Garrick Theatre until April 19.
Presented by Deborah Warner and Maison de la Culture, Bobigny, Paris.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940316

