FT942-15955

FT  13 APR 94 / World Trade News: France backs China to join new world trade
body - The final Gatt meeting in Marrakesh


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


France yesterday threw its weight behind China's application to join the
planned World Trade Organisation, but said Beijing would have to comply with
any standards on workers' rights and labour conditions agreed by the new
body. Mr Gerard Longuet, French industry minister, also said his
government's controversial demand for a 'social clause' in the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was intended to prevent an outbreak of
protectionism in Europe, not to promote one.
Mr Longuet, who recently returned from an official visit to China, said his
government favoured the country's membership of the WTO, successor to Gatt.
However, he said: 'If one is in the Gatt, one accepts the disciplines. One
cannot make a special case for China. When one mentions a social clause and
China's WTO entry, it is with the idea of the most basic principles.'
China's application to join the WTO when it is set up early next year is
expected to be discussed at length at a four-day conference of Gatt
ministers from more than 120 countries which began in Marrakesh yesterday.
The issue has already been raised in bilateral talks here involving Mr Peter
Sutherland, Gatt director-general, and will be a high priority at a meeting
tomorrow of the 'Quad' powers - the US, EU, Japan and Canada.
Mr Longuet, who was speaking after a meeting with Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade
representative, said they had agreed that labour standards, completion of
negotiations on liberalising trade in financial services and widening an
agreement on aircraft subsidies should be the WTO's top priorities.
He said France and the US were in full agreement on the liberalisation of
financial services.
Mr Longuet appeared to have obtained little clarification from Mr Kantor
about whether the US expects to maintain its Section Super-301 provision -
allowing Washington to impose trade sanctions - after the Uruguay Round
takes effect next year.
The French minister hoped that would become clearer when the round was
presented to Congress for approval.
He expected that international negotiations on restricting civil aircraft
subsidies would resume next month in the Paris-based Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development. The negotiations aim to extend to
other industrialised countries an agreement reached last year by the EU and
the US.
Mr Longuet insisted that France's demands for a Gatt 'social clause' - which
have divided the EU and been criticised by developing countries - were not
'a scarecrow or a protectionist measure'. He also did not want labour
standards to be imposed on Gatt members.
His government was seeking a debate on the question so that it could respond
to a 'protectionist and populist trend' which questioned the benefits of
free trade. 'If we do not reply, there will be a risk of a protectionist
reaction,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940413

