FT942-15865

FT  13 APR 94 / Wrigley gives pledge on displays after rival complains


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


Wrigley, the US company which supplies nearly 90 per cent of the UK's
chewing gum, has given an assurance that it will not remove competitors'
display stands from shops without written permission from the retailer
concerned.
The assurance was given to the Office of Fair Trading, which was
investigating a complaint from Warner-Lambert, the US drugs and consumer
products group, which is the only other significant chewing gum supplier in
the UK.
Warner-Lambert claimed that retailers had been complaining since 1988 that
Wrigley's sales representatives had sometimes removed Warner-Lambert display
stands or shifted them to a dark corner of the shop.
'This was a situation the retailers didn't enjoy. It was not being done with
their agreement,' said Miss Caroline Horrill, UK marketing director of
Warner-Lambert Confectionery, whose brands include Dentyne, Stimorol and
Clorets.
Miss Horrill said most of the complaints about the market leader had come
from small shops. Warner-Lambert had not experienced difficulties displaying
its products in large retail outlets. 'With major retailers, one has a more
disciplined environment,' she said.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, said yesterday that in
view of Wrigley's undertaking, he had decided not to mount a formal
investigation of the chewing gum market.
Sir Bryan said Wrigley  - supplier of Juicy Fruit, Doublemint and Spearmint
gum  - had also undertaken not to discriminate in favour of retailers who
did not stock competitors' products. He said that Wrigley had agreed within
one month to bring these assurances to the attention of any of its employees
who dealt with retailers.
Sir Bryan added: 'I shall be keeping this market under review and should not
hesitate to consider more formal action should matters come to my attention
that suggest further action to be appropriate.'
However, Wrigley said the assurances merely reaffirmed the company's
existing trading policy. Mr Philip Hamilton, managing director, said: 'It
has been and remains the Wrigley company's policy not to offer inducements
to remove or to exclude competitors' displays or products from retail
outlets.'

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940413

