FT941-5505

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: A flawed but fabulous Peer - Alastair Macaulay on
Yukio Ninagawa's staging of Ibsen's classic play


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Mesmerising, pretentious, bold, gimmicky, revelatory, exasperating - Yukio
Ninagawa's staging of Ibsen's Peer Gynt has arrived at the Barbican, fresh
from its world premiere at the Winter Olympics, and ready to visit
Manchester and Tokyo.
It is, at every level, full of contradictions. It uses both sophisticated
video effects and old-fashioned two-dimensional scenery. The text used is an
audacious new translation by Frank McGuinness, but some important roles (the
Troll King, the Buttonmoulder) are played by foreign actors whose diction
blurs important lines; there are some beautiful performances - yet the
constant air-conditioning whirr renders their softer lines inaudible. But
the main performances carry the show.
Ninagawa's overruling gimmick is to begin and end Peer Gynt in a modern-day
cityscape, with street noise and rock music and neon signs. Peer Gynt is a
lone dreamer amid all this Babel. Rolling video fantasias - his fantasies -
appear on a scrim: the planet turning in space, an onion revolving. Masterly
stuff, but what follows is simpler and finer. Through the scrim, we see
Peer, now hero of his own daydreams; and his daydreams are the wild,
psycho-spiritual folk tale of Ibsen's play, into which Ninagawa plunges us
so keenly (most of the time) that it becomes a bore whenever the production
returns to its video effects accompanied by tepid Jap-pop muzak by Ryudo
Uzaki.
Peer himself is 25-year-old Michael Sheen, whose tour de force performance
is the heart of the whole production. The entry he makes in the third scene
 -zooming on through the crowd, leaping up onto a table and vaulting right
off it again, legs wide apart, curly-maned - sums up his exhilarating,
tearaway, Puckish force. In Acts I, II and III, he is a light-voiced, Welsh
country boy, his eyes alight with youth and fancy; in Act IV he plays at
being a mature English toff, a debonair poseur abroad; and in Act V he is a
weary old man, his voice heavy, dark, his eyes anguished and lost. This is
sensational, heart-catching acting.
The wedding scene into which he comes over that table is the most marvellous
of all. Long before the bridegroom speaks, he is brilliantly impinged on our
minds - feckless, knock-kneed, drunken and forlorn, unable to find his
bride, pathetically copying Peer. (He tries to vault the table, and fails.)
When Solveig (Catherine White) arrives, quiet and soft-spoken with haunting
Meryl Streep cheekbones, she is shyly luminous. Then Ase, Peer's mother
(excellent Paola Dionisotti) enters, angry, loyal and defensive, leaning on
a stick yet furiously kicking her heels in the air. Wonderful, every bit of
it.
By making the Nordic scenes Irish, McGuinness's translation catches the
resemblance of the first three acts to the naive ebullience of Playboy of
the Western World. There are a few needless liberties; but this version
conveys the play's wonderful mixture of colloquialism and metaphysical
poetry.
Too bad that the trolls are crummy Kabuki gonks; and that the rake's
progress scenes of Act IV are (Ibsen's fault) too long; and that there is no
great tension to the Buttonmoulder scenes in Act V. All Peer's human
relationships are vividly achieved. Glorious to see how both Peer and his
mother have the same way of hitting out at the air; how, after Peer has
knocked himself out by charging into a wall, the Green Woman comes jumping
on, over his supine body; and how old Solveig rests the aged Peer's head on
her breast as she sings him a lullaby - the mother to this prodigal son, the
Gretchen to this Faust. Flawed; and fabulous.
At the Barbican until March 12; at the Palace Theatre, Manchester, March
17-19; and at the Ginza Saison Theatre, Tokyo, April 20, for 10
performances.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940305

