FT941-5682

FT  04 MAR 94 / Report criticises Italian minister


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


A parliamentary report has criticised Mr Nicola Mancino, Italian interior
minister, for lacking proper control of the domestic intelligence service.
The report, given to parliament in mid-February but published yesterday, was
prompted by concern that the intelligence services had been acting as a law
unto themselves and lacked adequate ministerial and parliamentary
supervision.
This followed the discovery of wide misuse of the organisations' funds and
suspicions that members of the services had been involved in the planting of
last summer's bombs in Florence, Milan and Rome. In the past nine months
magistrates have arrested a number of senior figures in both the domestic
and military intelligence networks on grounds of misuse of funds at present
totalling L60bn (Dollars 35.5m).
The report says Mr Mancino lacked 'effective control' and received only
episodic information on the activities of the domestic intelligence service
(Sisde). More often than not, he was told only after operations were over.
However, his supervisory role was handicapped by the 1977 laws setting up
the Sisde, which gave its officials virtual autonomy. Mr Mancino yesterday
claimed the report vindicated him.
The misuse of intelligence funds has concerned both budgeted money and
secret monies annually made available to the Interior Ministry.
The allegations have even been directed against President Oscar Luigi
Scalfaro, who was a Christian Democrat interior minister from 1983 to 1987.
The president has consistently denied these suggestions and Rome magistrates
again yesterday said he was not on the list of persons under investigation.
The Ciampi government last July initiated a reform of all the security
services, bringing them under the direct control of the prime minister's
office. But a big shake-up can only come after the March general elections
under the next parliament.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940304

