FT942-14631

FT  19 APR 94 / Markets Report: Fed raises rates again


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The dollar finished higher on foreign exchanges yesterday after the US
Federal Reserve surprised markets with a further tightening of monetary
policy, writes Philip Gawith.
The extent of the move was not announced, but is assumed to involve the
federal funds rate rising by 25 basis points to 3.75 per cent, the third
such increase since early February when the Fed started tightening credit
policy.
The Fed's announcement came against the background of very quiet trading as
markets struggled to find direction. The dollar rose on the news by more
than a pfennig to a high of DM1.7220, but closed lower in London at
DM1.7202.
Elsewhere, markets in Europe were focusing on the outlook for the weekly
German repo auction today to see by how far interest rates fall after last
week's cut in official rates.
The Fed caught the market off-balance with most observers expecting the next
policy move to come after the May 17 meeting of the policy-making Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC). The Fed last tightened on March 22.
Analysts said the change confirms that the Fed is acting pre-emptively to
combat the risk of future inflation. The consumer price index rose by only
2.5 per cent in the year to March.
Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ International, said the timing
confirmed, as did the March tightening, that the Fed was 'not reacting to
any particular figures.' Industrial production and capacity utilisation
figures released last week showed no urgent need for tighter credit.
The IBJ analyst said the Fed was in a process of normalising interest rates,
'moving them to a level that is more appropriate for this advanced stage in
the economic cycle.' He believes the Fed tightening has 'a lot further to
go', with nominal short-term rates rising to 6-6.5 per cent from 3 3/4 per
cent now. 'We have only just started this process of normalisation,' says Mr
Hannah.
Mr Gerry Holtham, chief international economist at Lehman Brothers, said the
market was anticipating short-term rates over 5 per cent by the end of the
year. This level was 'in the market' and hence the dollar was unlikely to
rise on Fed moves unless they were so large, or early, as to 'push up year
end expectations.'
Yesterday the futures market was discounting year-end rates of about 5.8 per
cent. Mr Michael Burke, economist at Citibank, said this was 'more than a
little aggressive' about what the Fed was likely to do. He predicts a
cautious approach.
But with the market anticipating US rates rising above German rates in the
third quarter, Mr Burke added: 'There must be a big suspicion that we're
close to the top end of the dollar's range.'
The results of today's weekly repo auction in Germany will be keenly watched
for any indication that the pace of US tightening is slowing the rate at
which German rates fall. Yesterday Mr Edgar Meistner, a Bundesbank board
member, said in a speech that German rates would continue to fall.
The slow pace of Bundesbank easing has been cited by some observers as a
reason for dollar weakness. Indeed, Lehman's Mr Holtham argues that the fate
of the dollar lies more in the hands of the Bundesbank than the Fed.
Market forecasts range between a 3 basis point and a 15 basis point fall in
the repo rate, from 5.7 per cent. Call money rates eased to 5.50/5.60 per
cent from 5.55/5.65 per cent on Friday. Traders predicted that with ample
liquidity in the system, banks might be prepared to risk lowering their
bids.
In the futures market, the June euromark contract closed unchanged at 94.66
and the December contract was unchanged at 94.99.
The D-Mark had a mixed day in Europe. It was marginally stronger against the
French franc, at FFr3.422 from FFr3.421. It was weaker against the Italian
lira, which closed at L954.5 from L956. The Italian currency was bolstered
by weekend political developments which favour the formation of a new
government.
Sterling finished half a pfennig up against the D-Mark, closing at DM2.5288
from DM2.5233. The UK currency was helped by the stronger dollar. It closed
slightly down against the US currency at Dollars 1.4701 from Dollars 1.4735.
Sentiment about a rate cut - buoyed by good inflation data on Friday -
soured after the Fed tightening. The June sterling future contract closed at
94.71, down from 94.73 on Friday and off a high for the day of 94.78.
IBJ's Mr Hannah said the US move complicated UK monetary policy. With the US
having lifted rates, despite 'excellent' inflation figures, it was clear
that Friday's good retail inflation figure in the UK was 'by no means a
sufficient condition for cutting rates in the UK'.
Mr Holtham said fears about the political consequences of having to raise
interest rates might dampen any government enthusiasm for an early easing of
policy. In the money markets the Bank of England provided Pounds 971m of
assistance after forecasting a Pounds 950m shortage.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940419

