FT941-3527

FT  16 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Gatt members warm to China's entry


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


Members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, with the notable
exception of the US, yesterday expressed strong support for an early
resumption of China's Gatt membership and welcomed recent moves to
liberalise trade and relax foreign exchange controls.
However, the row between the US and China over human rights, which could
lead to non-renewal of China's Most Favoured Nation trading status in the US
market, is proving a big stumbling block to faster progress in the
negotiations on Gatt entry terms. China wants to rejoin Gatt by the end of
this year, so it can be a founder member of the World Trade Organisation
which succeeds Gatt in 1995.
Entry negotiations resumed yesterday after a six-month gap, allowing Chinese
officials to present details of Beijing's latest foreign exchange and trade
reforms. These included the unification of exchange rates and a managed
float of the currency since January, with a promise of full convertibility
by the year 2000, as well as tax reform and reductions in a wide range of
tariff and non-tariff barriers.
The response yesterday was generally favourable. The European Union said the
reforms appeared to be going in the right direction, and it and Japan
expressed hopes for an acceleration of the negotiations. However, the US
said it was not prepared to subscribe to 'an artificial deadline' for
Chinese membership.
At the same time, western nations are united in pressing China to pay a
still higher Gatt entry fee, including lower barriers to trade in industrial
goods and agriculture, improved market access for foreign services companies
such as banks, and better protection of intellectual property rights. Gatt
members also seek further moves to cut state intervention in the economy and
ensure trade rules are applied consistently.
China was an original member of Gatt but pulled out in 1950 after the
Communists came to power. The Beijing government applied to re-enter Gatt in
1986 and has taken a full part in the Uruguay Round of global trade talks.
However, progress in the membership talks, which began in 1987, has been
slowed by human rights concerns as well as the difficulty of getting to
grips with China's rapidly evolving trade regime.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940316

