FT943-12779

FT  22 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Albanian agriculture faces
struggle in the free market - The condition of the farming sector after a
counter-revolutionary land share-out


   By GEOFF TANSEY


In Albania, they joke 'What did you get in the land distribution? I got one
hectare and 10 bunkers'.
It refers to the many hundreds of thousands reinforced-concrete
mushroom-like defence bunkers built by a paranoid regime that finally
collapsed in 1991. They greet you on landing at the airport, dot the fields
and hillsides all over the country and take up valuable space in the tiny
newly-created private farms - average size 1.4 hectare.
Behind the joke lies a total transformation of Albanian agriculture in the
past three years, perhaps greater than in any other former eastern European
country.
Mr Daut Karamuca, an ex-wine technologist, in Babji village in the hills of
central Albania received 0.8 ha, scattered in several parcels, and one big
bunker (most are small, one to two person affairs) in the land
privatisation. He does not regard the bunker as an asset but makes the best
of a bad job by housing his eight sheep and seven goats in it.
A radical reform distributed the 70 per cent of the land formerly worked by
600 agricultural co-operatives to the villagers living on it and gave the
workers on the rest, in the 120 state farms, the right to farm it privately.
By law, the total amount of land associated with a village should be divided
equally among the inhabitants. Usually, each family got some good land, some
less good and some poor. In some areas, however, it was distributed
according to ownership patterns before the communist take over and disputes
still rage in some places over ownership.
Amazingly, Mr Daut says he has had a cow for many years - despite a law
passed in 1976 forbidding villagers to keep livestock - not so much as a
chicken. Everything had to be kept and managed in the communes' facilities.
When the old regime collapsed, most of these common facilities were smashed
up in a widespread, popular burst of anger at all that represented the old
order. The livestock were distributed to the 400,000 farm families created
following the collapse.
The transition was not easy, nor is it complete - land sales are forbidden
as titles have not all been given out. Yet, from being the most isolated
communist country in Europe, Albania has become perhaps the most ardently
free market oriented.
When the previous regime collapsed agricultural production slumped,
precipitating a major food crisis. The country's 3.3m people, with a 1993
per capita GDP of USDollars 330, received over Dollars 1.4bn in aid between
1991 and 1993, according to the Albanian Economic Tribune, much of it
emergency food aid - almost Dollars 700m in food and distribution costs in
1991-92 alone.
Agricultural production is climbing back up after a fall of almost a quarter
in 1990-91. By the end of 1993, some 16 different donors had agreed to
provide almost Dollars 238m in project funding to improve agriculture. About
Dollars 70m had been spent by the end of 1993, according to the 1993
Agriculture and Food Statistics of Albania produced by the Ministry of
Agriculture and Food.
The aim is to create a market-based food system. Everywhere, people have to
learn how to run a small farm business and have problems marketing what is
produced - as the previous distribution system has collapsed and few food
companies operate. They also need market information and more knowledge of
how to farm more efficiently.
Most farmers were workers in the old regime and have little if any
experience with livestock, for example, which are mainly looked after by
women. Reaching them, is essential to improve dairy production and village
cheese making, says Ms Rebecca Balogh, director of the small Land O Lakes
dairy development project. She and her team have organised some 260 village
women as volunteer key leaders, each of whom works with 15 women in her
village, to improve milk quality, animal health and cheese making.
In the mountain village of Guri i Bardhe in central Albania, Mr Hamid Murati
and his family struggle to plough their 800-square metre patch, They plant
maize for fodder while other villagers gather leafy branches from trees in
the surrounding hills for winter feed. Everywhere farmers harness up any
animal they can - horses, donkeys, bullocks, even cows - to work their land
as tractors are scarce and expensive.
Officials also face difficult adjustments. The ministry has been reorganised
with support of Dollars 3m under a UN Food and Agriculture Organisation
project. It now has to provide the kind of technical and market information
useful to small farmers through radio and TV, the only media to reach them.
An essential need in situations like Albania's is to provide business advice
to farmers, farming association and food businesses, believes Mr Sergio
Giorgi, FAO adviser to the agribusiness advisory unit. He is working with a
farmers association - 'co-operative' is not a politically-correct term in
the new Albania - established three years ago on a family basis, to set up
an accountancy system and financial control. He is also advising the first
wholesaler buying local produce and selling to transporters and state
agriprocessing plants, moving about two tonnes a day.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940722

