FT941-17130

FT  06 JAN 94 / Pleasure boat industry stays afloat: Manufacturers have
survived the recession by increasing sales abroad


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


The London Boat Show, which opens at Earls Court today, features a model of
the west coast of Scotland, complete with a working ferry and marinas.
The exhibit brings some novelty to the event, which in other respects is a
repeat of previous shows. For the past three years, manufacturers have been
arriving with the same message: trading conditions are dire but the British
leisure boat industry has survived by seeking out new export markets.
Sunseeker International, the UK's second-largest manufacturer, will be
showing off its new 63ft Predator, the largest boat it has built. Sunseeker
has sold five of the boats, at a price of Pounds 575,000 each.
One of the buyers was Venezuelan, one Mexican, one Malaysian and two North
American. The company is now selling 40 per cent of its output in North
America, compared with less than 3 per cent at the beginning of the 1990s.
Despite downturns in demand the UK boat building industry, the largest in
Europe, has largely survived.
The number employed in the industry and associated services such as marinas
has fallen to 18,000 from just under 20,000 in 1990, according to Mr Tony
Beechey, chairman of the British Marine Industries Federation. He adds that
only 2 per cent of the federation's 1,250 members have gone out of business
since the recession began.
The Southampton Boat Show last September provided the first indications that
UK buyers were returning. But Mr Robert Braithwaite, Sunseeker's managing
director, says that two months later the market appeared to die again.
The London show, which brings buyers from around the world, should provide
some indication of whether the international market is reviving. It forms
part of the international circuit of large boat shows that began in Paris
last December and moves on, over the next three months, to Dusseldorf and
Miami.
British boat builders have also travelled to the smaller shows in search of
orders. When Dubai held its first show last May UK boat build-ers formed the
biggest contingent.
The UK industry's strength is the small and entrepreneurial nature of its
companies, says Mr Nigel Musto, sales director of Musto, an Essex-based
concern that manufactures sailing clothing.
While shipbuilding in the UK has declined, the manufacture of pleasure boats
and accessories has survived because it is staffed by enthusiasts. 'Nobody
likes to walk into the yacht club, where we spend half our lives, to be told
that someone has come out with a better product than ours,' Mr Musto says.
The industry does suffer, however, from the weakness of other sectors of UK
manufacturing. Mr David King, managing director of Marine Projects, the UK's
biggest boat maker, says he has to import his power boat engines from
abroad.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940106

