FT942-16037

FT  12 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Wood pulp prices go higher
still


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


North American and European wood pulp producers are taking advantage of
unexpectedly strong paper markets to push through another hefty price
increase.
Several companies have notified customers of a 10 per cent rise in northern
bleached softwood kraft pulp, the industry's staple product, bringing the
price to USDollars 560 a tonne.
The latest increase means that pulp prices have soared by more than 40 per
cent since the market first came to life last autumn, but they remain far
below the peak of Dollars 840 a tonne reached in the late 1980s.
Mr Roger Wright, a UK-based pulp and paper consultant, said there was 'a
50-50 chance' of prices rising to Dollars 600 a tonne by the end of the
year, but he predicted some weakening before then. Mr Timo Poranen, chief
executive of Metsa-Serla, the Finnish forest-products group, forecast a
price of about Dollars 550 at the end of 1994. Mr Poranen said that the pulp
market had undergone an important structural change in recent years, as a
widening variety of grades had lifted total stock requirements.
Demand for paper is especially strong in Europe, where prices for printing
and writing grades rose by 10 per cent in the first quarter and are expected
to climb by a similar margin over the next three months. Mr Wright said that
delivery times had lengthened from two weeks last autumn to between nine and
12 weeks.
Pulp prices have also responded to disruptions in wood supplies from Russia
and Finland, and higher prices demanded by eucalyptus woodlot owners in
Spain and Portugal.
Pressure to rebuild stocks has been heightened by fears of a strike at
British Columbia pulp mills later this year.
But many of these factors could prove temporary, with wood and pulp supplies
rising sharply later in the year. Mr Wright said that past experience
indicated that pulp producers 'shoot themselves in the foot when they're in
a strong position'.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940412

