FT942-14505

FT  20 APR 94 / Arts: Two Parisian Hamlets - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


'Helas] pauvre Yorique. Je l'ai connu, Horatio . . .' Right now, Paris has
two French-language stagings of Hamlet - Georges Lavaudant's at the
Comedie-Francaise (with Redjep Mitrovitsa), and Terry Hands's at the Marigny
(with Francis Huster as Hamlet). The hero's name is pronounced 'Hum-lett' at
one theatre, 'Am-lett' at the other.
Naturally, the compare-and-contrast exercise is rife. To a British observer,
however, what they have in common is equally striking. French actors are
full of old-fashioned virtues: no one comes onstage as if by accident, all
of them know how to let their faces catch the light, each of them knows how
to project his or her voice into the auditorium in fluent phrases. Though
both stagings were heavily cut (running at just over three hours), both were
played with liberal supplies of calm and silence. In the closet scene, both
Gertrudes kept their tears pianissimo or silent. Above all, both Hamlets
were spoken with marvellous clarity, and performed with physical authority.
One goes to see the French perform Hamlet, not to catch some reproduction of
what has succeeded in English stagings, but for whatever the French can
reveal in it. And it is the Comedie-Francaise Hamlet (no interval) which is
the more French and, to this Briton, the more remarkable. I have never seen
Hamlet performed with so much stillness and economy; or so constant a supply
of vocal beauty. These actors know how to stand and how, without gesturing,
to project physically to the other people onstage (as well as to the
auditorium), so that a scene for three people creates a visually compelling
triangle. The tall, elegant, bronze, box set (by Jean-Pierre Vergier), with
a door at the rear and two further entrances downstage, never changes,
except as Lavaudant's lighting sets it in different hues. Vergier has
costumed it in 16th-century garb; Gertrude and Ophelie might have stepped
out of Holbein. As for the melodramatic pomposity which can be so deadly at
the Comedie-Francaise? Confined to the peripheries. The core of this Hamlet
is serious and fresh.
Redjep Mitrovitsa - an actor at the same time classic, Romantic, and modern
 -is the main reason for this. He is slight but commanding. The small head
is dominated by massive, downward-slanting cheekbones, and large, deep-set
eyes; the hair, like Olivier's in the movie, is dyed white-blonde; the voice
is a full, deep baritone so perfectly projected that a fortissimo was
employed only two or three times, and even then without any kind of
shouting. He can quickly alternate between anguish, philosophical enquiry,
and sardonic wit.
What one remembers most is his sheer stillness. The first third of the 'Etre
ou non etre' soliloquy, spoken at the front of the stage, is delivered
without movement. During the second third, he simply raises his arms, holds
them during a climax, and then lets them drop. The last third is again all
stillness. The auditorium hangs upon his eyes and his voice - and upon the
agony of mind which is Hamlet's legend and is vividly present here.
Terry Hands's Hamlet, taken at a brisker lick, has altogether more movement.
Not, however, more naturalism. 'Etre - ' says Francis Huster's Hamlet; then
tumbles to the floor; where he lies supine and says ' - ou non etre'. He
rises, gestures, and then says 'Voila le question: est-il plus noble . . .'
Huster, who must be well into his 40s (and often brings Michael Pennington
to mind), is a star who has assembled this company and organised this
Marigny season. Cid). He emphasises Hamlet's rhetoric. A light, dry
baritone, he has energy, charm, and edge without great depth.
Hamlet at the Comedie-Francaise is in repertory with other plays until June
30. Hamlet at the Marigny is being given until May.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940420

