FT944-14421

FT  22 OCT 94 / How to Spend It: Making up is so very hard to do - How a
skilful artist can transform your appearance


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


If you are by nature shy and retiring, if you feel at home with the refined
no-make-up-look faces of the Armani or Calvin Klein woman, prepare for a
tough season.
All those pale skins, non-descript beiges and all that exquisite
tastefulness, are being replaced by something much more alarming - up-front
reds, look-at-me fuchsias, smouldering eyes and aggressively manicured
nails.
There is a brashness, a feistiness abroad. That at least is the message
peddled by designers, make-up artists and models but, as with most such
messages, it is first aired in an extreme and exaggerated form. After all,
if it was not, would anyone take any notice?
For those who live in the real world, and have to get by without top-model
Nadja Auermann's platinum hair, dangerous eyes and towering body, adopting
this look wholesale would probably be unwise but, nevertheless, there has
been a mood-change and there are ways of reflecting it without looking . . .
well, daft.
If you want to know how, there are few cleverer exponents of the art of
making-up than leading make-up artist Kevyn Aucoin. In a book to be
published shortly he takes us on a trip through the world of gloss and
foundation, powders and potions, brushes and blushers.
The photography is beautiful and wonderfully explanatory. The end result may
look like alchemy but Kevyn Aucoin gives us the nitty-gritty details. There,
for instance, is Kate Moss, the role-model of waifdom and grunge, newly done
over in 1990s' glamour.
There, too, is model Patti Hansen, made-up to show us how one face can
project a powerfully different image by using different colour combinations:
pale, luminous with light eyes and mouth; then chicly dramatic with a
slicked-back bob, light eyes and vermilion mouth; 'European-style' glam, all
dark mouth and dark eyes; finally, we have her in what he calls the most
sophisticated mood - dark eyes and light mouth. All these looks - he swears
 -are created with minimal changes so that a fresh, light look for daytime
can be easily and quickly intensified for evening.
To show the chameleon-like ability of hair and make-up to project powerfully
different images, he presents a fascinating selection of make-overs - these
are the favourite stuff of magazine picture editors, for the photographs are
convincing evidence that almost all who want to look good these days can
look good. But Aucoin himself approaches make-overs with diffidence. 'When I
think of make-overs, I think of those awful 'before' pictures in which the
woman is captured sitting under a fluorescent light with no make-up on, her
hair frizzed out, wearing the expression of someone who has just been told
something terrible. Who wouldn't look better in the 'after' shot?'
Nevertheless, I defy any woman to look at the 'befores' and the 'afters' and
not be encouraged - fairly ordinary-looking women have been transformed by
skilful make-up, good hair-cuts and marvellous photography.
Although Aucoin is informative on all the techniques of making-up he is,
perforce, short on giving details of products.
I therefore asked Val Garland, a British make-up artist working in the
fashion field, to give us some tips of her own.
Colour, she says, is the make-up statement of the season - and the hottest
colour to grace lips and nails is red. But bright, brilliant red, she warns,
may do wonders for Paloma Picasso but does not suit every skin-tone. 'There
are other ways of using red,' she says, 'than just one brilliant slash of
colour. Many of the cosmetic companies have produced soft red stains - Mac
(only available at Harvey Nichols) and Clinique for instance. If you have a
dark red that you find too strong you can dilute it with some of Keihls
lip-balm for a softer look. You can apply a real red to the centre of your
lips and blend it out to the edges with a lip brush or cotton bud for a more
subtle look.
'Those going for the really bold approach should use a lip-liner to form a
perfect lip outline (Mac has a true red pencil). This will help prevent the
colour bleeding. Then the chosen red should be applied with a lip brush, it
should be blotted with a tissue and then reapplied. This way your lipstick
should stay put.
'At night you may want a stronger red - Helmut Newton-style. After you have
applied the lipstick as outlined earlier you should then put some lip gloss
in the middle only of the lips (if you put it near the edges it will
smudge).'
Her favourite reds for this season are found at Mac, Prescriptives (by
Clinique), Paloma Picasso, Chanel (Rouge Coromandel for those who like it
bright, Rouge Star for a subtler look) and Yves Saint Laurent.
The Art of Make-up by Kevyn Aucoin, (Prion, Pounds 40, 175 pages) is
available from November 1. On Tuesday, November 8, he will be demonstrating
his skills and signing books at Harrods, Knightsbridge, London SW1 from 12
to 2pm.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

941022

