FT943-902

FT  27 SEP 94 / Russian bear's new clothes: A survey which dispels many of
the myths about the country's new business class


   By IGOR BUNIN


A new business class is emerging in Russia, rapidly and from nowhere. But
its unfamiliarity and a lack of information have led to a distorted image of
the Russian businessman in the public mind.
Since 1992, a group of sociologists at the Centre for Political Technology
in Moscow has been studying the backgrounds and attitudes of these Russian
entrepreneurs. Their findings, drawn from interviews with the leaders of 60
big and 50 medium-sized and small businesses and 10 directors of state
enterprises, do much to dispel the myths about the new business class.
These businessmen have come from a variety of backgrounds: some worked in
the black economy during the period of 'stagnation' (under Leonid Brezhnev);
some are from the old nomenklatura, those appointed to top jobs in the
communist period; some are repainted 'red directors', the former factory
bosses; and some are 'new Russians', entering business for the first time.
The new Russians seem to be the dominant element in this rising class. The
overwhelming majority of entrepreneurs are men aged between 30 and 40, with
a reasonable education.
Of those surveyed, more than 80 per cent had completed higher education.
Many are graduates of the most elite institutes in the country, some with
two degrees, some having held posts as scholars. The majority are
second-generation intelligentsia (that is, their fathers also had higher
education).
The belief that the new business leaders are mainly from national minorities
 -such as Jews, Armenians and Georgians - is not borne out by the survey, or
any other research. Figures show that 84 per cent of small and medium-sized
business leaders are ethnic Russians, which is slightly higher than their
representation in the population of Russia.
However, in big businesses, only 63 per cent of business leaders are ethnic
Russians, with a higher-than-average proportion of Jewish business leaders.
Before perestroika, business was the only area in which Jews could get
ahead.
There was no evidence in the survey that non-Russian entrepreneurs were
founding business clans composed solely of their ethnic kin - their hiring
practices were based on merit.
Findings such as these are at odds with the views about Russia's business
class which are widely held by the public. But the survey also shows the
extent to which successful Russian businessmen owe little to the past.
A few of those surveyed said they had taken part in the 'shadow' economy -
trading in foreign jeans during their student days, for example. But the
majority said they had never been part of the black economy.
Nor were many of the successful business leaders from the former communist
nomenklatura of state factory bosses, secret police and second-level
bureaucrats. Many of these ex-officials moved into business, often
privatising state property into their own hands - a practice known as
'grabitisation'.
However while the practice was widespread, it has not created successful
business leaders. The former nomenklatura survive only in regional or
sectoral pockets of economic activity.
They have not succeeded in becoming a powerful and cohesive economic group,
having entered the market independently of one another, often in competing
or conflicting activities. The survey found just a couple of clear examples
of grabitisation among the business leaders surveyed.
The idea that former 'red directors' have been the driving force behind the
market also appears ill-founded. There are almost no former factory
directors among the country's well-known entrepreneurs. Indeed, the survey
results suggested that experience has made these men too conservative to
succeed in business.
Their average age is significantly higher than that of the entrepreneurs;
more of them come from workers' families; they have often graduated from
technical colleges, while the entrepreneurs have received a higher and more
broadly based education.
The professional experience of the former 'red directors' is more limited:
they have usually worked all of their lives in one plant, rising from the
ranks of worker to that of director, or made their careers in branches of
the industrial ministries.
These directors now appear disoriented. In the past, they were guided by a
patriarchal philosophy, acting as guardians to their workers and as the
fathers of their enterprises. The power of a director depended on the number
of workers - or 'sons' - in his enterprise. Many of these directors now
understand the need to cut the workforce to raise productivity, but in
practice they find this hard to do.
Instead, they continue to hope for cheap credits from the state or rack up
large mutual debts with other enterprises. These people are unlikely to be
creators of financial or industrial empires; they can at best fulfil their
traditional role of worker-managers.
In setting up businesses since 1987, the leaders surveyed fell into two
types. The first type of entrepreneur was created to supply the party or
state, and was given first call on resources such as land and funds. The
second type began with nothing, compensating in large part for his lack of
resources with new ideas.
The borders between state-sponsored and independent businesses are fuzzy. A
number of the new enterprises, especially the medium-sized ones, steer clear
of involvement with the state machine. But the development of powerful
financial and industrial empires is impossible unless close relationships
are formed with the state.
Many of the entrepreneurs surveyed had acquired state assets on the cheap
(for instance, by buying shares in former state enterprises very cheaply
from workers), or even stole them during the haphazard break-up and sale of
state property.
Indeed, an entire philosophy seems to have been created to justify this type
of activity. Respondents explained to interviewers that they were the only
people capable of breathing life into dead state assets.
Businessmen have also managed to invest illegally-acquired capital, often
former party funds, in the developing market. However, the centre's research
suggests that the role of laundered capital has been greatly overstated.
Bribery is, however, a common practice among the new business class. Some 70
per cent of respondents in the state sector and 76 per cent in the private
sector reported that bribery was habitual, in which they were quite ready to
take part. Many pointed to the difficulty of running a business on any other
basis in a market still dominated by a state with a strong tradition of
bureaucratic corruption.
The rules for doing business remain ill-defined. However, entrepreneurs seem
to realise that it is impossible to work in a permanent state of disorder
and lack of trust. There is a standard of morality springing up between
business partners, which, by Russian standards, is high.
The new class is also developing its own value system - abandoning the
traditional Soviet notions of state tutelage in favour of the principles of
individualism and equality of opportunity. The new entrepreneurs see life as
a contest in which the strongest and the worthiest win - they wholly reject
the idea of social equality, believing instead in the creative qualities of
each human being.
And gradually, society appears to be accepting both the new rich and their
values. Between 15 per cent and 20 per cent of the population believe that
only entrepreneurs can save Russia, according to polls by the Russian Centre
for the Study of Public Opinion.
However, entrepreneurs are still more likely to be viewed favourably by
those who have gained most from the new economic conditions. The majority of
Russians of a high social status said entrepreneurs were useful to Russia,
while those of a low social status believed they were damaging the country.
Overall, there remains some distance to go before the market is widely
accepted as the main organising principle of the emerging society.
Igor Bunin is director of the Centre for Political Technology.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940927

