FT943-13089

FT  21 JUL 94 / BoJ Quarterly Economic Report: Japan heads for recovery


   By GERARD BAKER


   TOKYO


The Japanese economy is at last headed for recovery, the Bank of Japan said
in its quarterly economic report published yesterday.
Buoyed by rising consumption, fiscal and monetary policy stimuli and
expansion in overseas markets, Japanese business was emerging from the long
recession, the central bank said. But it warned that the pace of recovery
would be slow as private sector investment remained weak and unemployment
drifted upward.
In its last report issued in April, the Bank said only that the economy had
'stopped declining', but in recent months it has become much more optimistic
about the prospects for recovery. Yesterday's report underlined its sanguine
view. It said the recent sharp rise of the yen against the dollar might not
be as damaging as some industrialists have feared, since it could be offset
by world economic recovery and cost-cutting in Japanese businesses.
Most components of aggregate demand would support recovery in the current
year, according to the Bank. Income tax cuts and price stability would
bolster personal consumption. Public sector investment was rising, and even
private sector investment, which has been particularly sluggish in the last
three years, was expected to stop declining in the latter part of the year.
Only exports were expected to show a decline as manufacturing production
continued to shift overseas.
The risks to the recovery remained strong, however. Corporate indebtedness
continued to act as a brake on private investment, and import penetration of
Japanese markets posed a threat to companies' prospects.
In a separate report yesterday, the research institute at the Long-Term
Credit Bank of Japan said it was raising its forecast for growth in the
current year to 0.7 per cent from minus 0.2 per cent in its last forecast in
January. The institute said the improved prospects were due to unexpectedly
strong recovery in personal consumption and robust private housing
investment.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940721

