FT942-15337

FT  15 APR 94 / UK Company News: Going for gold as rivals drop out - Kenneth
Gooding on the fortunes of Cookson as it focuses on precious metals


   By KENNETH GOODING


It is the hope of every company in an overcrowded and competitive market
that some of its rivals will pack up and leave. It is rarely fulfilled.
Yet that is what has enabled Cookson to emerge as one of the world's five
biggest suppliers of semi-fabricated precious metals to the gold jewellery
and silversmith industries.
In the past four years the specialist industrial materials group has been
hauled back from financial disaster by a new management team led by Mr
Richard Oster, chief executive.
He is now busy refocusing the group. It is withdrawing from non-core
businesses such as the engineering operations, sold recently, while precious
metals fabricating has been carefully reconstructed to become one of the
biggest core divisions.
In North America Cookson was already the largest fabricator of gold for the
jewellery industry, processing more than 1.5m troy ounces of gold and
several million ounces of silver. This followed the merger five years ago of
the two biggest US companies, Stern and Leach. Cookson took full control in
1992.
Its biggest rival in the US quit in 1991. Engelhard, the precious metals
group ultimately controlled by the Anglo American Corporation of South
Africa, first attempted a sale to Degussa of Germany but the deal fell
through and companies were either sold individually or closed.
This left Cookson's Stern Metals business, based in Attleboro,
Massachusetts, with 70 to 80 per cent of the US market for supplying gold to
the jewellery industry and 50 per cent of the silver market.
The next step was obvious: tackle Europe.
In February last year Cookson made a start by buying some of the assets of
Knight & Day in the UK from the receiver for a knock-down Pounds 350,000. It
took on the staff of 105 but the number is now down to 62.
Then in December it paid Pounds 37m, including Pounds 20m for precious
metals stocks, for the jewellery materials operations of Johnson Matthey,
another company ultimately controlled by Anglo American.
With annual sales of Pounds 44m, JM was the UK market leader. Its operations
in Dublin and Birmingham have been merged with those of Knight & Day (also
in Birmingham) and the combination renamed Cookson Precious Metals.
Some analysts suggest that Cookson's move into the UK market and its obvious
intentions of becoming a serious force in continental Europe triggered JM's
decision to move out. JM said the business did not fit its strategy and that
it was achieving only a 2 per cent return on net assets against a required
level of 20 per cent. Stern is sure CPM can reach the 20 per cent target,
mainly because of book-keeping differences, JM bought all its precious
metal, but Stern's policy is to lease metal.
Mr Jake Conley, president of Stern, said the JM acquisition gave Cookson the
critical mass to compete in western Europe with the likes of Degussa as well
as Hereaus of Germany and CLA (Chaudronnerie Legere d'Argenteuil) of France.
He said: 'This is a mature business with little growth. But the last
survivor is going to do well and we (Cookson) are heading in that
direction.'
He would not be surprised to see Handy & Harman, the remaining big
competitor in the US, quit, or to see CLA give up in Europe. He also
suggested it was likely that Engelhard would ease out of the remnants of its
jewellery materials business in the UK.
Stern Metals had sales of Dollars 230m (Pounds 158m) and an operating profit
of Dollars 26.1m last year for an 11.4 per cent return on sales, up from
Dollars 204m, Dollars 22.6m and an 11 per cent return in 1992.
The group employs 527 people and specialises in turning alloys containing
pure gold and silver into more than 2,000 different items such as metal
wire, sheet, tubing and casting grains. Its customers make these into
anything from cheap, 14-carat gold chains to some of the most expensive
jewellery in the world.
The activities also include APM-Sterngold, the oldest dental attachments
company in the US, which processes more than 50,000 ounces of precious
metals annually and last year reported a remarkable 73 per cent return on
net assets.
Mr Fred Hammerle, Stern's chief operating officer, suggested the success
sprang partly from its 'incentive-driven' workforce. For example, the
Stern-Leach mill products operations have an incentive scheme called TCP -
Teamwork + Cost Control = Profit - which last year paid a total of Dollars
1.8m, equivalent to nine weeks pay, for each of the 452 people included. The
minimum payment was Dollars 2,761 and the maximum more than Dollars 25,000.
Mr Dick Smith, president of Stern-Leach, explained: 'The scheme encourages
people to work smarter, do their own quality control. They don't make scrap.
There is more awareness of how the job should be done. They don't want us to
hire more people. They don't like people goofing off.'
With more than 1,600 customers, many of them small businesses, credit
control is also an important element in Stern's success. Any debt above
Dollars 200,000 must go to the credit committee. Customers get 30 days to
pay and then are charged at an annual rate of 15 per cent up to 60 days.
Some of this expertise can be passed on to the newly-acquired UK companies,
as can many of Stern's production techniques - although Stern also expects
to learn from the former JM people. Transatlantic exchanges of key
production people already are being made.
Mr Conley says that tube, sheet and wire will be exported from the US, where
there is very little incremental cost when output is increased, to the UK
for reworking. This should shorten UK delivery times.
'Our main priority will be to rationalise the mill and dental operations.
That should take nine months.'
Then CPM would start looking seriously at exporting to Spain, Greece, east
Asia and Australia. JM's export experience would be of great value. Also,
JM's contacts with Britain's National Health Service should help the US
dental business.
'But first we have to digest what we have so far. We want to make sure
Cookson gets the return we promised.'
Mr Geoff Allum, analyst at NatWest Securities, saw no reason why targets
would be missed.
'With a good management team and a high market share you can rake it in. I
can't see what's to stop them taking Europe by storm.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940415

