FT943-730

FT  28 SEP 94 / Former agent sues Lautro over work ban


   By PETER MARSH


The self-regulating body for the life insurance industry is being sued by a
former sales agent who says that one of its rules contravenes the Treaty of
Rome by preventing him practising his trade.
The action has been brought against Lautro but is in effect against the
Personal Investment Authority, the new watchdog for the private investor
which is taking over Lautro's role.
If successful, the case could open the way for similar actions brought by
some of the 100,000 former insurance agents who have lost their jobs in the
past four years.
Liability for any damages would lie with the PIA's member organisations,
which include banks, life insurers and independent financial advisers.
The action centres on a rule operated by Lautro since 1991. This says that
sales agents who owe Pounds 1,000 or more to a Lautro-registered insurer are
not allowed to work for any other Lautro member. The rule has been adopted
by the PIA.
The rule is highly controversial. It can be used by insurance companies as a
lever to force former agents to repay commission after policies have lapsed.
Behind the rule is the idea that agents with big debts are more likely to
offer consumers poor advice and mis-sell policies. Most insurance
representatives are self-employed and paid on a commission basis so they
have a motivation to maximise sales.
The writ against Lautro - on which neither it nor the PIA wanted to comment
 -has been brought by Mr Charles Bunbury. He says that Lautro's rule stopped
him gaining further work as an insurance agent after he left Oaklife
Insurance in 1991 with a debt of Pounds 17,000. He was unable to pay off
this debt, became bankrupt and is unemployed.
Mr Barry Abrahamson, Mr Bunbury's solicitor and an associate with
Silvermans, a London legal firm, said: 'It's difficult to argue that the
rule protects the public. It really protects other Lautro members by helping
them collect debts. If insurance agents are going to mis-sell they will do
it irrespective of money owed to former companies.'
The writ says the rule contravenes three articles of the Treaty of Rome
which protect individuals' general rights to conduct a business and prevent
companies from exploiting a dominant position.
The rule's operation is also being monitored by the Office of Fair Trading
on the grounds that it could impede the transfer of staff between companies
and discourage industry competition.
Mr Fraser Younson, employment partner in Baker & McKenzie, a City legal
firm, said: 'Public policy is trying to increase job opportunities and the
mobility of the labour force, and this rule could be a bar to achieving
this.'
Mr Alex Bevan of Bevans, the Bristol legal firm, is an expert on legal
disputes involving the insurance industry. He said the case 'had very wide
implications' since it appeared that in many instances the rule operated
harshly.
In Mr Bunbury's case his lawyer is thought likely to argue that the PIA's
members should be liable for damages of several hundred thousand pounds to
compensate his client and restore his financial position. The case is
unlikely to come before the High Court before the end of next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940928

