FT944-10877

FT  09 NOV 94 / World Trade News: World's car makers prefer the Thai tiger -
An opening market in a sea of protection makes Thailand the region's leader


   By VICTOR MALLET


The campaign by US manufacturers to break into south-east Asia's vehicle
markets - including a recent trade mission to Bangkok, Jakarta and Kuala
Lumpur - has highlighted the importance of Thailand in the rapid growth of
the motor industry in the region.
Hardly a week passes without an announcement of plans to invest in the
manufacture of cars or trucks somewhere in south-east Asia.
Toyota is considering increasing production capacity at its factories in
Indonesia and the Philippines; Chrysler is planning a Dollars 100m joint
venture in Vietnam to build minivans and possibly Jeeps; Rover, the UK
carmaker controlled by BMW of Germany, has signed a memorandum of
understanding with Malaysia's Proton about the possible manufacture of Rover
engines in Malaysia.
But it is Thailand that has emerged as south-east Asia's most attractive
investment location for vehicle and component manufacturers. 'I've never
seen it as active and energetic as it is now,' says Mr Michael Dunne,
president of Automotive Resources Asia, a Bangkok-based consultancy.
Honda, for example, announced in October that it was investing more than
Dollars 100m in a new plant that would double its capacity in Thailand and
could produce a popular small car for Asian markets. Toyota has set aside
more than Dollars 500m for expansion in Thailand.
Japanese brand names account for more than 90 per cent of vehicles sold in
Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia. But US carmakers want to use their
new-found confidence and profits to invest in a region they abandoned to
their Japanese rivals 20 years ago.
Ford, which closed its assembly line in Thailand in 1976, is considering
producing pick-ups in the country in association with Mazda; Thailand is the
world's second-largest market for pick-ups after the US.
Thailand's regional pre-eminence as a car market is partly a function of its
size and wealth. The population of 60m is large enough to create a viable
domestic market, and with an average annual income per head of over Dollars
2,000, more and more Thais are rich enough to buy cars or pick-ups.
Another reason is that since 1991 Thailand has liberalised the motor trade.
It has cut import tariffs and encouraged new foreign investment, especially
in the components sector, in an attempt to make itself a regional automotive
centre.
Indonesia and Malaysia, on the other hand, maintain high protective barriers
around their domestic markets. Malaysia, which protects its
Mitsubishi-derived Proton cars because of what Mr Dunne calls 'romantic
nationalism', limits imported cars by quota; Indonesia has lifted an import
ban but applies tariffs of up to 275 per cent.
'Relatively speaking, Thailand is way ahead of its neighbours in terms of
opening up the market,' says Mr Dunne. 'Thailand's component industry is
five years ahead of the others.'
Even Thailand, however, is likely to remain a well-protected car market for
several years. Although it is the largest vehicle market in south-east Asia,
the country does not have the economies of scale that are regarded as
necessary in Japan and the west; a dozen different assemblers accounted for
Thailand's total 1993 sales of 456,461 units.
'Japanese manufacturers and their Thai joint venture partners have a
formidable store of vested interests and carry tremendous influence in
policy-making circles,' noted a report last year on the Thai automotive
industry prepared for the country's Board of Investment. 'Liberalisation
policies directly threaten the comfortable operating environment they have
constructed over the past 20 years.'
US vehicle makers will find it hard to establish networks of Thai suppliers
to match the ones that now cater to Japanese companies and help them fulfil
local content rules, but the Thai authorities appear to be serious about
allowing new entrants to compete fairly.
When Chrysler wanted to assemble Jeep Cherokees in Thailand, it found that
the Cherokee was defined as a passenger vehicle subject to an excise tax of
36 per cent, while the equivalent Mitsubishi Pajero was treated as a pick-up
with zero excise. But in March this year the Thai government put both
vehicles into a new four-wheel-drive category with a 27 per cent excise, and
Chrysler is proceeding with its investment plans.
Even the comfortably protected Japanese assemblers and parts suppliers and
Thai component makers are starting to accept the inevitability of gradual
liberalisation and are trying to improve the prospects for regional trade in
automotive parts.
One way of doing this - especially for companies such as Toyota with a
strong presence throughout the region - is to use the 'brand-to-brand
complementation' scheme embracing Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and the
Philippines.
The scheme, which has worked only fitfully so far despite the best efforts
of the Japanese beneficiaries, gives companies rewards in the form of tax
benefits and allows them to enjoy economies of scale by centralising
production of different components in different countries instead of
producing small volumes in each market.
Thai exports of vehicle parts continue to rise steadily. In 1991 such
exports were worth Bt3.7bn; last year the amount was Bt13.2bn (Dollars 528m)
 -and that has already been exceeded in the first seven months this year.
A pattern is emerging of a small but growing trade in vehicles and parts,
both within south-east Asia and with industrialised countries, particularly
Japan. Thailand is likely to be one of the main beneficiaries.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941109

