FT942-14847

FT  19 APR 94 / World Trade News: Local finance fuels Malaysia energy
projects - Kieran Cooke on ambitious domestic financing


   By KIERAN COOKE


These are interesting times for Malaysia's banking community. Financiers
have just had to digest the news of further travails at Bank Negara, the
central bank, in the aftermath of multi-billion dollar foreign exchange
trading losses.
Now Kuala Lumpur's banking boardrooms are abuzz with talk about the
country's largest ever internally generated debt financing package - a
MDollars 3bn (Pounds 820m) loan signed last week for the construction of a
power station.
Malaysia, whose economy has grown by more than 8 per cent in each of the
past six years, has been suffering power shortages. To speed up the
implementation of power projects and spread the financial burden involved,
the government is privatising a large chunk of the power sector.
So far five licences to generate power have been given to independent power
producers (IPPs) on a build, operate, transfer (BOT) basis.
A local company and recipient of last week's record loan, Sikap Energy
Ventures, won the licence to build and operate a 1,300MW combined cycle
plant at Lamut on peninsular Malaysia's west coast. YTL, another local
company, signed a MDollars 2.66bn domestic loan agreement late last year for
financing of a similar IPP project.
The Sikap loan is made up of a MDollars 1.5bn fixed rate bond facility from
the state run Employees Provident Fund (EPF) and a MDollars 1.5bn floating
rate loan jointly underwritten by Bank Bumiputra, the Malaysian state-owned
bank which in the past has been dogged by controversy and bad debts, and
Maybank, the country's biggest financial institution, also government
controlled. Details of the interest rates on the loan were not disclosed.
Mr Abdul Aziz Othman, Bank Bumiputra's chief executive officer, said many
had expressed reservations about the capacity of the local capital market to
fund such a large project.
'For a project this size, it is remarkable that only three institutions are
involved at this stage,' said Mr Abdul. He said that both the YTL and Sikap
loans showed that Malaysia's capital markets were maturing.
Bank Bumiputra Bank and the EPF also played a leading role in the YTL loan.
YTL is one of Malaysia's largest construction companies but has little
experience at managing power projects. It has brought in Siemens of Germany
and John Laing of Britain to carry out much of the work on its power
stations.
Sikap is controlled by a subsidiary of the Malaysian Resources group (MRCB),
a fast expanding conglomerate controlled by a group close to Mr Anwar
Ibrahim, Malaysia's finance minister. MRCB controls Malaysia's biggest
publications group and a privately run TV station but has no track record in
the energy sector. Asea Brown Boveri, which will build the Sikap plant, has
a 20 per cent stake.
Banking debate is focused on two questions: whether it is wise for domestic
banks to be so exposed to one sector and why foreign institutions were not
involved in such large lending exercises.
Malaysia's banks have benefited from Malaysia's strong economic growth of
recent years. They are flush with funds. Some bankers say that in the
circumstances it makes sense for as much project financing as possible to be
generated locally. They say foreign banks have tried and failed to get a
piece of the action. 'It's all sour grapes,' said one local financier.
But this is by no means a generally held view. Malaysia is embarking on a
wide ranging programme to build up its infrastructure. A new international
airport is being built outside Kuala Lumpur. A mass transit system is being
planned for the capital. Multi-million dollar facilities are being built for
the Commonwealth Games, due to be held in Malaysia in 1998. Nationwide water
and sewerage schemes are under way. Domestic funds could be severely
squeezed if more recourse is not made to foreign borrowings.
Some financiers say that by diversifying fund sources the IPPs would
probably have won better terms. But foreign institutions decided against
participating.
'The whole area of IPPs is still very new,' said a Singapore-based merchant
banker. 'BOT arrangements are also largely untried. I think foreign
institutions got cold feet about getting involved.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940419

