FT943-13309

FT  20 JUL 94 / MEPs veto move to free European phone market


   By LIONEL BARBER, EMMA TUCKER and ANDREW ADONIS


   STRASBOURG, BRUSSELS, LONDON


The newly-elected European Parliament flexed its muscles with an
overwhelming vote yesterday in favour of blocking legislation to liberalise
the European market in voice telephony by 1998.
The vote, in the parliament's inaugural session in Strasbourg, signals MEPs'
determination to gain equal decision-making rights to the Council of
Ministers on European Union legislation.
It could throw into disarray plans to open the EU's telephone market to
competition. At present, only the UK allows competition in basic telephone
services. Pressure from EU ministers is the driving force behind the early
introduction of competition in most of the other 11 states.
The parliament's decision means that the European Commission must return
with a modified proposal on the liberalisation of voice telephony to pave
the way for a future compromise between the Council and MEPs.
However, member states are already working towards the 1998 deadline, with
new operators lining up to offer services.
Furthermore, the Commission and the Council are trying to accelerate the
pace of telecoms liberalisation by allowing operators to build their own
infrastructure. The EU heads of government meeting in Corfu last month
endorsed the principle of infrastructure competition, and Commission
proposals are expected within months.
MEPs argued yesterday that deregulation could hurt consumers through higher
charges. But the Parliament appeared concerned to establish equal status
with the Council and the Commission on the passage and implementation of
legislation.
The parliament required 284 votes to block the Council. In the event, 373
out of 430 MEPs present voted in favour of a motion not to adopt the
decision. Officials said there was room for a compromise in September.
Pressure for faster telecoms liberalisation reflects concern across European
industry that existing telecoms monopolies are keeping prices artificially
high.
An industry committee, chaired by Mr Martin Bangemann, the industry
commissioner, reported last month in favour of rapid telecoms
liberalisation, emphasising the danger of Europe trailing the US and Japan
in the development of 'superhighway' services.
Mr Bangemann yesterday stepped up pressure on EU member states to liberalise
their telecoms markets warning 'a race is on at a global level'. Presenting
an action plan for implementing the recommendations of his group, he said:
'Those countries which adapt themselves most quickly will set technological
standards for those who follow.'
He said the Commission wanted agreement on a deadline for liberalising
infrastructure, likely to be 1998 if that survives as the date for opening
telephone services to competition.
The Commission will publish a report before November 1996 on guaranteeing
universal service of voice telephony.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940720

