FT942-15873

FT  13 APR 94 / Leading Article: Defence mergers


Cuts in military budgets have put defence contractors under strain around
the world. On each side of the Atlantic, arms-makers are choosing different
paths to seek compensation for falling orders. In Europe, companies are
increasingly joining forces in collaborative international arrangements, as
in the prospective Anglo-French-Italian frigate project or the joint venture
in missiles being discussed between British Aerospace and Matra. In the far
larger US market, reorganisation is taking place through mergers and
disposals. The latest example was Northrop's takeover of rival aerospace
company Grumman, agreed last week.
The moves outlined yesterday, under which the US government may ease some
defence mergers by taking a softer line on anti-trust considerations, show
how the Pentagon hopes to steer the restructuring process. While spending a
lot less on weapons, the US has a crucial interest in maintaining the
industrial and technological capabilities that underpin its status as the
world's sole superpower.
The defence industry has been lobbying hard for explicit changes in
anti-trust rules, a step the government rules out. The Federal Trade
Commission in 1992 turned down a prospective acquisition by the Alliant
ammunition group, which would have given it a virtual monopoly of the tank
ordnance business.
With annual US arms procurement spending down by 60 per cent in real terms
from 1985 levels, the administration is watching defence consolidation with
mixed feelings. On the one hand, the Pentagon has the chance of putting
equipment purchases on to a more rational basis, where decisions are driven
by need rather than political pressures. On the other, the sector's
shrinking base presents a long-term challenge. A shortage of competing
suppliers can impede the drive for better value for money. In extreme cases,
the government can be forced to take uneconomic industrial policy decisions
to maintain sources of domestic supply.
Already, in purchases of tanks and nuclear submarines, the US is now
dependent on a single supplier. The Pentagon apparently believes that only
two-thirds of necessary consolidation has so far taken place. Northrop's
acquisition of Grumman indicates how takeovers can improve industry
structures, since the company will now be in a better position to compete
with the three main combat aircraft-makers  - McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed
and Boeing.
The trend towards more mergers seems likely to continue as the procurement
budget shrinks. European partners should use the opportunity of new thinking
in Washington to press for greater US-European tie-ups. If the US wants to
improve the structure of its defence industry, then European companies
seeking entry to the American market should be allowed to play a fuller role
in the process.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940413

