FT942-12177

FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: How to take care of yourself


   By BETHAN HUTTON


If you become old and frail, whom do you expect to look after you? And whom
do you expect to pay for the care?
Recent research by PPP Lifetime, a provider of insurance to pay for
long-term care for the elderly, shows that there is a wide gap between
people's expectations of care in their old age, and what is likely to
happen.
PPP's survey found that only 18 per cent expected to pay for their own care,
whereas in fact more than 60 per cent of elderly people in residential care
contribute to its cost. There was a widespread feeling that as people had
paid taxes all their lives, the state would provide. The reality is that
state help is means tested, and anyone with savings and assets above Pounds
8,000 will not receive much state support.
In developed societies, people are surviving longer, but are often
incapacitated in their final months or years. Relatives are less likely to
be willing - or able - to look after them, as more women are working, more
marriages end in divorce, and families are scattered over wider areas.
The number of elderly people will rise sharply over the next few decades: in
20 years' time, there will be 50 per cent more people over the age of 85,
and fewer people of working age to care and pay for them.
The UK's response to impending need lags behind that of some countries. In
Germany, for example, the government recently introduced a 1 per cent extra
tax to pay for long-term care.
A paper in the Consumer Policy Review this month says: 'The general picture
is one of the state reducing its commitment to open-ended financing of
long-term care. As people become more aware of this, they may become more
receptive to the idea of pre-funding their own care.'
The paper says possible ways of funding care include: pensions - but the
government has banned the only pension scheme which made direct provision
for care needs; general savings - an inefficient method; raising funds from
housing assets - this has possibilities, but not all elderly people are home
owners; or insurance products.
Long-term care insurance has been available in the UK only for the past
three years or so; the number of policies sold represents a tiny proportion
of the potential market.
But it is already proving its worth: last month PPP started paying its first
claimant, a man in his mid-60s who took out a policy a few months ago. He
has since suffered a stroke, leaving him unable to carry out a number of the
'activities of daily living', such as bathing and eating unaided, on which
claims are assessed.
PPP says its main buyers are 65- to 75-year-olds, but there are signs of
interest from the sandwich generation - middle-aged people caring for
parents and children.
Commercial Union, another of the main care insurance providers, says
two-thirds of its policyholders are women, and two-thirds are over 60, many
single or widowed. According to CU, the peak buying times are between 60 and
65 - ie around retirement time, when many people will have lump sums to pay
for single premiums - and for women, in their 70s, often when they are
recently widowed.
But it is not just single people who should consider making provision for
their care needs. Married couples cannot afford to assume that they will be
able to look after each other - a frail 80-year-old is unlikely to be able
to lift a marginally frailer spouse of the same age into their bed or bath.
Usually it is not necessary to cover the entire amount of Pounds 20,000 a
year or so needed to pay for full-time nursing home care - just the
shortfall between available income and the cost of a nursing home.
Comprehensive policies pay a reduced amount if you become mildly
incapacitated and need part-time care at home. Most allow you to use up to
half the annual sum insured to pay for home alterations, such as
stair-lifts.
A woman wanting Pounds 10,000 a year of top-up cover for both mild and
severe disability, increasing by 5 per cent a year, would pay Pounds 55.80 a
month if she took out a Commercial Union policy at age 45, Pounds 73.80 at
age 55, or Pounds 110.90 at age 65. A man would pay Pounds 37.70, Pounds
53.30, or Pounds 76. A glance around the female-dominated sitting room of
any nursing home is enough to explain women's higher premiums.
Excluding mild disability, or not allowing for inflation, will reduce
premiums. You can also pay a single premium: a 65-year-old man would pay
Pounds 11,006.54 for the cover above, while a woman of the same age would
pay Pounds 20,685.58.
The earlier you take out a policy, the cheaper it is, as premiums do not
rise with age for existing policyholders. Obviously, you may pay more if
your medical history presents a higher risk. However, once you have a
policy, new medical problems will not affect it.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940430

