FT941-4049

FT  12 MAR 94 / Fashion (The Global Wardrobe - At a Wedding): The bride
wears white but the guests are a mess - In the last of our series on dress
codes around the world, FT writers attend a wedding / London


   By BRENDA POLAN


The wedding, part formal religious rite, part informal affectionate
celebration, can cause the guest as many headaches as it does the bride.
What to wear was once simply answered: one wore one's Sunday best with a new
hat and a corsage of symbolic flowers. Only the immediate wedding party
deemed the enterprise needful of new clothes and those, until this century,
tended to be practical, wear-again choices.
Over the years, the celebration or reception (once a simple wedding
breakfast for the family and immediate friends) has become longer and more
important than the ceremony, particularly a civil ceremony. At the same
time, the romantically archaic element has been highlighted.
It was once standard practice for men to wear the morning dress of a late
Victorian gentleman and for the women to choose gowns that had nothing to do
with current fashion but much to do with fairy tale illustrations and
Victorian Christmas cards.
Today, the level of formality of dress tends to be indicated on the
invitation with a curt instruction to the men. Women are left to
extrapolate. What is appropriate next to morning dress? What is suitable
adjacent to a tuxedo? What looks right on the arm of a lounge suit?
Possessors of wardrobes full of elegant, flattering clothing go
panic-shopping, opting in confusion for the brightest and most formal
daytime ensemble they can find on the rails - an unhappy compromise between
fancy dress and real life.
The results are obsessively, often shrilly, colour-coordinated, overly
trimmed and fussily detailed, frequently in fabrics inappropriate for the
weather - outfits, in fact, the like of which are seen at Royal Ascot and
nowhere else.
And just as at Ascot, the hats veer towards the fantastical: in the
millinery department they looked witty, jaunty, celebratory; en masse,
surrounded by their peers, they look strange, their wearers slightly
deranged.
Just as troublesome is the relaxed register office wedding for which no
particular form of dress is specified.
Usually the bride's mother has refused to miss her moment and has shrugged
into many matching layers of tulle and chiffon, while half the guests could
be on their way to Tesco. The other half have dressed for a job interview.
Everyone hits the champagne feeling anxiously under or over-dressed and the
pictures are an embarrassed mess.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940312

