FT942-16069

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: BR Distribuidora float pays off
 -Brazil's petrol distributor is proving itself


   By PATRICK MCCURRY


When investors snapped up shares in BR Distribuidora last December they were
buying into Brazil's largest petrol distributor and a company widely
regarded as the best-run subsidiary of Petrobras, the state-controlled oil
company.
Since the offer, which saw 26 per cent of the company sold in non-voting
shares mainly to institutions, BR has announced net profits up 50 per cent
for last year. It is now considering an issue of American depositary
receipts this year.
Investors were attracted because BR is considered to be a well managed,
profitable company with no bank debt. This is possibly because petrol
distribution has long been open to private competition. While Petrobras'
exploration and refining are a government monopoly, BR has had to prove
itself in a highly competitive sector against some of the world's largest
oil companies.
Despite this threat, BR has maintained a market share of 36-37 per cent,
compared with 22 per cent for its nearest rival, Shell Brasil.
Shortly after the share offer, which raised Dollars 250m for Petrobras' own
projects, BR announced net profits of Dollars 110m for the year to the end
of December 1993, up from Dollars 73m in 1992.
Financial director Mr Reynaldo Aloy said the increase was due to higher
profit margins following a partial liberalisation of prices in the oil
derivatives sector and an increase in gross sales of 8.7 per cent to Dollars
6.73bn.
Although the BR sale was oversubscribed, its share price significantly
underperformed the Sao Paulo stock exchange, rising in dollar terms only
about 12 per cent to early-March from launch, compared with about 40 per
cent for the market as a whole.
Brokers attribute the underperformance to the comparatively high initial
price asked for BR shares. These were sold at about a 50 per cent premium to
the company's per share book value.
Mr Ronaldo Guimaraes, technical manager at brokerage house Banco do Brasil
DTVM, which helped manage the initial public offering, says the sale is a
first, small step towards the full privatisation of BR.
Other analysts, however, believe Petrobras is using BR to improve its own
cash flow and may raise money again by selling more non-voting shares, for
example in the mooted ADR issue.
Ironically, the flotation of the company may make it harder to privatise.
'Experience has shown that government controlled companies with outside
shareholders are harder to sell off,' says a Petrobras source.
Mr Aloy says the sale is not related to privatisation: 'We wanted to open up
new lines of capital in the financial markets and to show that we are a
strong, solid, profitable company.'
Apart from Shell, BR's main competitor is the local Ipiranga group, which
last year bought Atlantic Richfield Company's petrol station chain in
Brazil, and has a market share of about 18 per cent. Esso has 13 per cent
and Texaco less than 10 per cent of the market.
Competitors agree that BR is strong and well-managed. However, they
attribute part of its success to traditional 'captive' government customers,
such as the armed forces. This market has been reduced recently with the
privatisation of the steel industry.
Mr Aloy says government customers, accounting for 25 per cent of sales, buy
from the company because it offers competitive service and has the biggest
distribution network.
According to Mr Henrique Neves, a vice-president of Shell Brasil, the
opening up of BR and Ipiranga's purchase of Atlantic means even fiercer
competition in the sector. Competition will also heat up if remaining
controls on pump prices are removed, as the industry expects.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940412

