FT942-14528

FT  20 APR 94 / Building societies 'face savings blow'


   By ALISON SMITH


Building societies are coming under further pressure in the competition for
personal savings this year, and could end 1994 with their lowest increase in
retail savings balances for more than 10 years, says a forecast by
stockbrokers UBS.
Figures compiled by UBS and the Council of Mortgage Lenders show societies
set for a lower share of the market in the main forms of retail savings for
the third year running, as savers put more money into National Savings
products and interest-bearing bank accounts.
This intensifying competition will be underlined later this week with the
publication of personal savings figures for building societies and banks in
March.
Societies are expected to have suffered a significant outflow in net
receipts - possibly amounting to Pounds 500m - for the fifth month in a row.
In February, the equivalent figure was Pounds 404m. Even though societies
have suffered several such monthly outflows in net receipts, interest
credited automatically to accounts has in most cases led to increases rather
than reductions in balances.
The withdrawal of funds in order to pay fuel bills in advance of the
imposition of value added tax, and the continuing popularity of the
pensioners' guaranteed income bond, are among the factors contributing to
savers' desertion of societies.
UBS forecasts that there will be an increase of Pounds 24bn in the amounts
held in these forms of personal savings in 1994, compared with a rise of
Pounds 22.8bn in 1993. On the basis of the forecast, societies are set to
attract only Pounds 10bn of the total - the smallest rise since 1981.
While the amounts held in banks' interest-bearing accounts actually fell
slightly - by Pounds 27m - last year, these accounts are estimated to grow
by some Pounds 2bn in 1994, giving banks an 8 per cent share of this market.
Even though that would be a significant advance on their share last year, it
is still sharply lower than their market share in recent years.
Mr John Ecklin, director of statistics at the British Bankers Association,
said that amounts in non-interest bearing current accounts, excluded from
these savings-market figures, rose by Pounds 742m in 1993.
Mr John Wriglesworth, societies analyst at UBS, said: 'The banks appear to
have been in and out of the mortgage and savings market according to how
profitable it is in any one year in the cycle. They do not appear to have
any long-term strategic commitment to either market.'
The UBS forecast shows unit trusts having another successful year with 33
per cent of the market, albeit down slightly from the steep rise of 40 per
cent in 1993.
National Savings are set to gain market share from 13 per cent to 17 per
cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940420

