FT941-5711

FT  04 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brazil gets to grips with
coffee scheme - The transfer of export retention to the private sector


   By PATRICK MCCURRY


The Brazilian government says it has reached agreement with coffee producers
and exporters to fulfil its obligations under the international coffee
retention scheme but that it still intends to press on with its
privatisation of the retention programme.
Under the new system, which came into effect this month, exporters will have
to bear the costs of buying and storing coffee that is retained.
The deal reached yesterday will allow the government to retain about 800,000
bags (60kg each), enough to fulfil its retention commitment for exports in
the October-January period, says Mr Frederico Robalinho, trade policy
secretary in the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Tourism. He says the accord
will not affect the decision to privatise the retention scheme.
This decision came after repeated failures by the government to acquire
enough coffee to comply with the agreement made last September, by the
newly-formed Association of Coffee Producing Countries, to hold back 20 per
cent of exports in an attempt to reduce world coffee stocks and push up
prices.
ACPC governments agreed to hold back an extra 20 per cent above their
exports until the average world price, as calculated by an ACPC formula,
reached 75 cents per pound, at which point retention would falls to 10 per
cent. When the 80-cent mark is reached the retention scheme will be
suspended.
The strategy has so far succeeded in pushing up prices to about 71-72 cents
a pound.
Brazil is the world's largest coffee exporter, closely followed by Colombia.
Last year, according to the Brazilian coffee exporters' association, Febec,
Brazil shipped just over 15m bags of green coffee, earning Dollars 988m.
The government has had serious problems acquiring coffee to retain but
yesterday Mr Robalinho said that a Dollars 38m credit line from the
government's coffee fund, Funcafe, would result in the retention of 600,000
bags from producers and exporters and that a further 200,000 bags would be
acquired from producers who were using coffee as collateral for their debts
to the government - controlled Banco do Brasil.
'The coffee that is being used as collateral will be freed and used for
retention purposes', he said.
Mr Robalinho added that the government might provide more funds to finance
the retention of a further 300,000 bags, which would cover exports to the
end of February.
Under the new scheme, exporters will not be allowed to ship coffee without
proof that they have stored 20 per cent of the shipment volume.
Coffee traders say February's exports were higher than usual because
exporters increased sales to beat the introduction of the new system. March
sales are likely to be around 800,000 bags, including soluble coffee, nearly
half the average volume.
The fall in Brazil's exports is expected to contribute to the rise in world
prices and some traders predict that the 75 cents level will be reached in
April or May, which would ease the situation for exporters.
Despite the extra costs for exporters, Febec is supporting the
privatisation. Mr Waldyr Ariano, its vice president, says this is because in
the long run it will mean lower stocks in the consuming nations and higher
prices for the local industry.
According to Mr Ariano the details of retention are not as important as the
signals being sent by Brazil, both to other coffee producing nations and to
importers.
'Our producing partners are following closely what it happening in Brazil
and they realise that the government is behaving cleanly and correctly'.
He adds that the key is maintaining trust among the producing countries in
order for the retention scheme to work.
Others are less optimistic. Mr Christian Wolthers, a trader, notes that the
Brazilian coffee industry has been in a state of semi-chaos since former
president Fernando Collor closed the Brazilian Coffee Institute in 1990.
He argues that with the higher prices privatisation of retention will bring
Brazilian coffee prices will become uncompetitive and, 'either the
international market absorbs the change and we will win or we will have to
stay out of the market'.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940304

