FT941-5520

FT  05 MAR 94 / Travel: A walk through a Swiss valley - John Westbrooke
treks from the source of the Rhone and enjoys some madly picturesque scenery


   By JOHN WESTBROOKE


The beginnings of the Rhone are inauspicious. Far from the broad river
sweeping past the Roman remains of Provence, it starts life as a glacier in
the Swiss Alps, and a dirty one too.
Up near the point where the glacier melts and trickles down a cliff, you can
walk inside it. Locals have carved a passage about 100 yards long with a
chamber at the end, lit by the hazy blue light filtering through the ice
above. From the outside, though, the ice is a grubby grey from the earth it
rolls over, seemingly out of place in a country where every cow looks as if
it is polished twice a day.
Down below, however, is pure Switzerland, madly picturesque. The Rhone makes
its way along the Obergoms valley, through lush green fields between high
mountains, augmented constantly by other streams, gradually building up from
babbling brook to respectable river. You can even go rafting on it, though
you will see little resembling white water.
Not a lot of tourists visit the Obergoms. Villages are scattered down the
valley a mile or so apart, mostly farming communities with a Baroque church
and a few hotels. The average building is four storeys tall, with flowers
spilling over the balconies, and built of larch, wood which starts out
honey-coloured and after 20 years turns black. Some of the buildings are
very black - 500 years old and not a nail among them. Apart from
agriculture, the valley's main business is reputed to be providing the men
of the Vatican's Swiss Guard.
Life is not always tranquil: there can be a great deal of weather in Alpine
valleys. Take Obergesteln, second town down the Obergoms, which in three
centuries saw so much fire, flood and avalanche that a quarter of its
population moved to San Francisco, where they were presumably introduced to
earthquakes as well. We spent three fine days afoot, a little overcast in
the morning but nothing uncomfortable; a week later, the region was awash in
rainstorms.
But - bearing in mind that, in the words of one hotelier, there is no bad
weather, only bad clothing - it is exhilarating walking country, and
flexible: you can take the high road, the low road or the railroad.
A variety of paths lead down the valley, well marked and well maintained,
the distances given in hours. Plenty of sub-tracks lead off to the villages.
The highest ones take enthusiastic walkers up above the treeline. Lower ones
are mostly easy climbs through the woods, with frequent chocolate-box
glimpses of steeples and snowy mountains and the constant clanking of
cow-bells. The views are always pretty, and once in a while sublime. No
walking experience is necessary and, though a modest degree of physical
fitness would be useful, I managed without.
If you don't feel up to this, you can stroll through the almost flat fields
along the valley floor, and if even that is too much, bright red trains
glide along between the villages every hour or so.
Nor do you have to retrace your steps in the evenings. I walked with
Inntravel, which arranges for your luggage to be ferried on ahead to
whichever village you plan to stop at for the night. Instead of a full-scale
rucksack, you need carry only a bag big enough to hold a packed lunch. (And
a raincoat. Just in case.) Detailed written notes on the paths are provided,
sealed in plastic. Dress in layers.
The hotels are mainly family-run establishments, small and snug enough for
the skiing season. Food is mostly nourishing rather than elaborate, but you
can usually get a fondue substantial enough to keep you awake all night.
Swiss wines, little seen abroad, turn out to be an unexpected bonus.
One of the villages, Munster, is large enough to have proper hotels, and
even its own guidebook. Local teacher Pius Werlen prints it at home and
pastes in his own photos by hand, so each one is different. The Obergoms:
where even tourism is a handicraft.
Inntravel (tel: 0439-71111) offers walks, cycling and horse rides in
Austria, France, Norway and Italy as well as Switzerland; there is even a
beekeeping weekend in the Pyrenees. A six-night walking holiday in the
Obergoms starts at Pounds 476 including flights, less if you drive there.
Activities available locally include village and wildlife tours.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940305

