FT941-5486

FT  05 MAR 94 / Hawks & Handsaws: Wimp of the species


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


What a torment of stress I suffered this week. Pain. Anguish. The ripping to
shreds of my fragile male ego. Everywhere I look, in fact, men are being
scoffed at, thrust into victimhood. Our power is evaporating, our
irrelevance ballooning. It is time to fight back.
The incident that propelled me into stress was an injury on the tennis
court. Last Sunday morning. Paddington Sports Club. A ladder match -
singles. Man versus man. Primeval. Barrel-chested. The crash of mighty
strokes. Until the unfortunate moment when my back gave out. Just sort of
locked itself. Pain unendurable. Lasted all week. Can still feel the
twinges. Yet soldiering bravely on.
What exacerbated the stress was a run-in I had on Wednesday with my
executive assistant. Like all true Thatcherites, Miss Lee is oblivious to
male stress and pain, which are on the rise globally. She accused me of
being a wimp. I had told her I was in trauma.
Miss Lee laughed imperiously. She said: 'Let's get this straight, Michael.
You walked on to the court and hit a few practice balls. Your opponent was
under 30; you, of course, are not. He won the toss. His first serve hit the
net. His second serve - not fast - looped on to your forehand and you hit it
past the baseline. You scuttled to the net to pick up the first ball and as
you started to bend you suddenly gave a croak and jigged around in agony.
'You had played just one point. Talk about a wimp. How do you expect, in
this day and age, a professional woman like me, with a completely full
agenda, to find time to listen to spineless whimpering?'
That made me cross. I support female emancipation and a degree of equality.
But talk like that provoked a turning of the worm.
I said: 'It's gone too far, you know, this taunting of men. You obviously
haven't heard, but it is men who are subjugated. We get a completely rotten
deal.'
'Rubbish,' said Miss Lee.
I said: 'Rubbish it is not. Through the blur of my pain I have been reading
a plucky book: The Myth of Male Power: Why Men Are the Disposable Sex, by
Warren Farrell. It has just appeared in Britain, and should be feted for the
vigour with which it sets the record straight.'
'Record?'
'Correct. In the space available I cannot convey more than a haunting
snapshot of Dr Farrell's thesis, but his argument is that, after millions of
years, male-female roles - man the protector, woman the protected - have
suddenly become unworkable.
'Dr Farrell says he wants us to stop expecting men to earn more money than
women and then referring to male 'power' or 'dominance' rather than
'pressure' or 'obligation'; to grant men the same life expectancy as women;
to 'give men special outlets and incentives to express their feelings and
perspectives until men commit suicide no more frequently than women'; to
'monitor media sexism that defines relationship issues disproportionately
from the female perspective'; to care as much about battered husbands as
battered wives; to give fathers as much right to their children as mothers;
to care as much about saving males as saving whales; to 'go beyond woman as
sex object and man as success object to (see) both sexes as objects of
love'.'
Miss Lee chortled. 'Frivolous tosh,' she said. 'Cloying. Stupid. Care as
much about saving males as saving whales? Now I've heard it all.'
I said: 'Understand this, cup-cake: modern stress has produced far higher
rates of heart attack and disgracefully shorter life-spans for males than
for females; more alcoholism; pronounced fear of therapy; fear of
commitment; far more male suicide. The stress is killing us.
'Here is a tit-bit from Dr Farrell: 'A woman (in the US) is 14 per cent more
likely to die from breast cancer than a man is from prostate cancer, yet
funding for breast cancer research is 660 per cent greater than funding for
prostate cancer research. The death-to-funding ratio is 47:1 in women's
favour'. That is a motto for our times, Miss Lee: 47:1 in women's favour.'
Miss Lee laughed savagely. She said: 'All you've got is tennis-back. But
most men are wimps. Dr Farrell has assisted me. Clarified things
considerably. Helped me see the light. My vote goes to whales.'
The Myth of Male Power, Fourth Estate, paperback original, Pounds 6.99.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940305

