FT941-4203

FT  12 MAR 94 / Belarus balks at paying price of economic union with Russia:
John Lloyd considers why talks with Moscow have failed and what the future
holds for the small Slav state


   By JOHN LLOYD


An attempt to merge the economies of Russia and Belarus appears to have
failed - because Russia's conditions were too strict for the small Slav
state. Belarus now faces a grim future as inflation soars and enterprises
run out of orders.
The breakdown in negotiations between the two countries is also an
indication that Russia is prepared to shoulder responsibility for its
neighbours' ailing economies only on terms which amount to a complete
takeover - terms which some in the Russian government believe will be
accepted by the former Soviet states sooner or later.
Belarus and Russia began negotiating earlier this year but both were careful
not to release any details. Mr Stanislav Bogdankevich, governor of the Bank
of Belarus, has now revealed however, that the Russian terms included full
control over monetary expansion, the abolition of an independent national
bank and its substitution by a branch of the Russian central bank, and a
unified state budget.
Though Minsk's political leaders - the least independence- minded of the new
ruling classes in the former Soviet states - had been prepared to go a long
way in diluting their independence, they are not prepared to disappear
entirely into a Russian state, according to Mr Bogdankevich.
In an initial draft of the agreement, the Russian side had appeared willing
to consider allowing Minsk to print its own supply of roubles and to
exchange the devalued Belarussian currency one-to-one with the rouble.
According to an Interfax news agency report, research centres in Belarus
have already drawn up proposals for a radical shift away from dependence on
Russia if the deal is not signed.
The agency quotes the programme as proposing a 'Baltic and Black Sea union'
including the three former Soviet Baltic republics, Ukraine, Moldova and
some east European countries under the Nato umbrella, acting as a buffer
between Russia and the west.
The programme, which appears to be drafted in a deliberate spirit of enmity
to a Russia seen as spurning Belarus's advance, calls for the immediate
creation of a separate currency and of tight border control between the two
countries.
It also proposes dismantling 'as quickly as possible' the strategic
facilities used by Russia at Vileika and Gantsevichi. This would, say the
Belarussian experts, cost Russia Rbs150,000bn and complicate its control
over the Baltic and nuclear submarine fleets.
However, the unreality of the programme is underscored by the near collapse
of the present temporary Belarus currency, the lack of any reform in the
country and the unwillingness of the Baltic or east European states to be
associated with the former Soviet republics.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940312

