FT941-16849

FT  07 JAN 94 / Unilever tries to cut advertising costs


   By DIANE SUMMERS, Marketing Correspondent


Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch food group and the highest spending advertiser in
the UK, is switching a substantial proportion of its London TV advertising
for 1994, worth in total about Pounds 30m, from Carlton to London Weekend
Television in a bid to drive down rates.
Granada Television is also under threat of losing its Unilever advertising,
worth about Pounds 11m in 1993, unless it can meet the group's terms.
Initiative Media, Unilever's media buying company, would not comment
yesterday on the moves, but LWT confirmed it had gained at least some
Unilever advertising that had formerly been placed with Carlton, the weekday
broadcaster.
In December, in another switch, two media buyers, CIA Media and Lowe Howard
Spink, moved advertising believed to be worth about Pounds 28m from LWT to
Carlton. The clients in that transaction included Tesco, Commercial Union
and Lloyds bank.
Mr Neil Blackley, an analyst with Goldman Sachs International, said
yesterday: 'It's swings and roundabouts. You're dealing with a fixed volume
media. You lose a certain volume and the price adjusts downwards and you
fill it up from somewhere else.'
Both Carlton and Granada, the north-west TV company, said yesterday they
were still negotiating for the Unilever advertising. Mr Martin Bowley,
Carlton sales director, said he was 'amazed' to read trade press reports
yesterday claiming that Initiative Media had pulled all its Unilever
advertising from Carlton and allocated it to LWT. Talks were taking place
yesterday between the parties, he said. 'As it stands we are currently in
full negotiation for 1994.'
Granada said it was in the middle of what were the 'usual healthy
negotiations' with a big client. Initiative Media, which is heavily
dependent on Unilever business, has a reputation as a tough negotiator.
However, industry observers consider it unlikely that it will want to pull
all Unilever advertising from Granada. It is also unlikely that Unilever
will want to want to concentrate all its advertising for products such as
Comfort, Persil, Radion and Birds Eye, at the weekend, or to miss out on
popular Carlton programmes.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940107

