FT941-4018

FT  14 MAR 94 / PM urged to shelve radical plans: Privatisation of Post
Office and other proposed legislation may be delayed


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


A powerful group of cabinet ministers is pressing Mr John Major to shelve
plans for further radical legislation and concentrate instead on rebuilding
a reputation for competent government in the run-up to the next general
election.
The move looks set to delay indefinitely privatisation of the Post Office.
Many other other controversial reforms covering deregulation, privatisation
and local government reorganisation may also be deferred or dropped.
Mr Major is being told by the so-called consolidators in his cabinet to
eschew Thatcherite radicalism in favour of entrenching past shake-ups of
education, health and other public services.
The ministers believe that with the government already committed to
difficult legislation next year on social security benefits, pensions and
Europe, it cannot afford to take unnecessary risks.
The view runs counter to the instincts of Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
who wants the government to maintain the momentum of change. Mr Clarke is
backed by the handful of rightwing ministers in the cabinet.
The division promises a protracted struggle over the next few months as the
cabinet frames the legislative programme for the autumn parliamentary
session.
But after a series of unexpected political rows, defeats in the House of
Lords and embarrassing u-turns during the past few months there is a strong
mood in favour of retrenchment on the Tory back benches.
The consolidators' group, which includes Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary, Lord Wakeham, the leader of the House of Lords, and Mr Richard
Ryder, the chief whip, see as their first target the proposed break-up of
the Post Office.
Several have warned that privatisation of the Royal Mail would invite strong
opposition both in the Lords and among Tory MPs because of the potentially
damaging implications for rural services and post offices.
They are supported by several other ministers including Mr Tony Newton,
leader of the House of Commons, Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, and Mr
William Waldegrave, public services minister.
The consolidators are also resisting Treasury calls for an 'omnibus'
privatisation bill. The Treasury wants to streamline the privatisation
procedure by removing the need for separate 'paving' legislation before each
sale of public assets. But opponents say it would run into certain trouble
in the Lords.
There is also growing pressure from the consolidators for the government to
delay implementation of the recommendations of its Local Government
Commission which is redrawing the boundaries of English local authorities.
The Commission is due to complete its work at the end of this year, but some
ministers want implementation to be put back until after the next general
election.
Other measures facing possible delay are the proposed new privacy
legislation, London taxi and bus deregulation, liberalisation of the
licensing laws and alignment of British Summer Time with continental Europe.
Treasury hopes that the nuclear industry might be privatised in the present
parliament are also being dismissed as unrealistic.
The government is committed by last year's Budget to several controversial
measures. These include bills to curb unemployment and invalidity benefit
and to raise the pension age for women to 65. It will also have to introduce
another European bill to allow for enlargement of the Union and a health
service bill to pave the way for the abolition of regional authorities.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940314

