FT941-4071

FT  12 MAR 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Future forged from the past -
Chris Topp works in wrought iron. He tells Clive Fewins why it is better


   By CLIVE FEWINS


Chris Topp did not stand at a forge and work hot metal until he was 27.
Seventeen years later he is one of England's best-known blacksmiths and the
force behind the move to 'rediscover' wrought iron.
Topp started The Campaign for Real Iron in the early 1980s when he realised
that the skills associated with the traditional material of the blacksmith
were disappearing.
'The last works producing wrought iron in this country closed in 1984. After
that, it was a case of running fast to pick up whatever stocks were
available,' said Topp. 'A limited amount is being produced at the Ironbridge
Gorge Museum. But 10 years ago the situation looked bleak.'
In 1980, Topp won a Pounds 9,000 contract to construct elegant early 18th
century-style gates and railings at a country house near York for a client
who appreciated the difference between the mild steel that was usually
supplied, and real wrought iron.
The problem was: where to find the wrought iron. He heard of a huge
stockpile, originally the handrail on the south pier at Sunderland, that was
about to be thrown away and dashed to the north east. He returned with 15
tons, a load that cost him Pounds 200, but which laid the foundations of his
business.
'In 1980 I moved to North Yorkshire from the restoration engineering company
I had been managing in Derbyshire to try to get away from people constantly
dropping in and asking me to mend prams and sledges,' said Topp. 'I managed
to buy the former village garage, which became my forge, plus the house that
went with it for Pounds 32,000.
'I was keen to get into some real restoration work, though initially I was
resigned to making fire irons, and mild steel gates masquerading under the
misnomer of wrought iron to sell to tourists and local garden centres.'
Fortunately, the York contract put paid to that. Through his former contacts
in Derbyshire and local conservation bodies Topp found he had enough
restoration work to support his wife and young daughter.
'My main desire was to do forge work,' said Topp. 'From an early age I had
been fascinated by iron. When I was at school in Bolton I used to go and
watch the men at the Atlas Ironworks, now reconstructed at Ironbridge.'
After gaining a degree in civil engineering at Newcastle University, Topp
worked briefly for British Waterways where he concentrated on jobs involving
18th and 19th century iron structures.
He started the Derbyshire workshop with a few old school friends, but when
that diversified in the late 1970s he decided to branch out on his own.
The original stockpile from Sunderland has long gone. In its place is a
stock of assorted vintages of wrought iron. Topp lovingly strokes a rusting
bar of metal and pronounces it some of the finest produced in the early 18th
century for the school of Jean Tijou.
He is using some of this to restore a magnificent pair of gates from Marston
Trussell Hall in Northamptonshire in a contract worth Pounds 10,000.
'This is the sort of work I love,' said Topp. 'The work at that period was
so delicate and well proportioned.' The end of the 18th century brought the
introduction of mass-produced puddled irons - inferior, in Topp's view, to
the earlier work made and refined in charcoal fires.
However for everyday purposes the two are indistinguishable.
'Both offer a resistance to rust and corrosion you will not find in steel,'
he said. 'Their fibrous nature means they are unsurpassed for ornamental
ironwork, where there is a lot of fine beaten three dimensional metalwork.
Wrought iron costs about five times as much as mild steel, which was
introduced in the 1850s. In spite of the cost, Topp has not had a slack
period in 14 years. He has supplied work to the Prime Minister's residence
at 10 Downing Street, Chatsworth House in Derbyshire, Warwick Castle, and
other famous and historic buildings.
'A Pounds 10,000 job is not a big contract nowadays,' Topp said. 'In 1992 we
turned over Pounds 85,000 and made a net profit of Pounds 21,000. Last year
we hit a very big seam of work and I hope the figures will show we doubled
that.
'One big job for six tons of wrought iron glazing bars in 19 different
sections for a large Dublin restoration job was worth almost Pounds 80,000.
Much of the work was more repetitious than I prefer, but for that size of
job it was worth it.'
Topp is midway through a Pounds 35,000 contract for decorated wrought iron
seaside railings - they include buckets and spades and windsurfers - for the
resort of Redcar.
One disappointment, however, is the market for cheaper one-off items made in
mild steel. 'There is intense competition for this sort of work  - railings
produced to a budget in city centres are a typical example. I reckon I need
to pull in Pounds 120 a day per man for that sort of work in order to be
profitable, but it has been nearer Pounds 80 recently. My two assistants are
self-employed, so it is important to them that we increase it.
'However, the order book for high quality fixed contract wrought iron work
is healthy, so in 1994 we shall probably concentrate increasingly on that
aspect of our work. This should help reduce the bank overdraft, currently
about half our upper limit of Pounds 15,000.'
One of Topp's recent innovations is to design and sell small furnaces for
blacksmiths to use as adjuncts to their forges. These allow smiths to heat
several bars at once so they can work in rotation on each bar. They thus
save time and make forge work cheaper and more competitive.
Chris Topp, Carlton Husthwaite, Thirsk, N. Yorks YO7 2BJ. 0845-501415.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940312

