FT943-713

FT  28 SEP 94 / Brown discards 'quick-fix' route


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, yesterday unveiled a series of
proposals to flesh out Labour's commitment to long-term investment through a
partnership between the public and private sectors.
Speaking at Labour's London conference on global economic change, Mr Brown
said the overriding objective of a future Labour government would be
'sustainable growth, jobs and higher living standards'. The party would not
take risks with inflation and would reject the 'old quick-fix solutions of
tax, spend and borrow'.
Instead it would seek to solve the economy's supply-side problems by
introducing an 'active, modern industrial policy', in which government would
act as a catalyst for long-term investment.
Dismissing 'old-style corporatism', Mr Brown emphasised that Labour's brand
of economic interventionism would eschew the dirigiste instincts of the
past. Instead its aim would be to work 'in partnership with people to make
the market economy truly dynamic'.
The shadow chancellor identified four main areas in which Labour wanted to
reverse the culture of short-termism which had been the principal factor in
Britain's relative economic decline.
To promote investment in industry, the party was examining ways in which the
tax system and pension rules discouraged retained earnings. To encourage
companies and shareholders to invest for the future, Labour proposed new tax
incentives for voluntary long-term investment agreements.
The party's approach to education would be based on a training levy/rebate
system which encouraged employers to train their workforces and penalised
those which poached trained staff from other companies.
Labour would also improve access to high-quality education through the
creation of a university for industry and by linking training provision with
National Insurance contributions.
Mr Brown said a revival of investment in infrastructure would follow removal
of the Treasury rules blocking the use of private finance. Labour would also
promote a debate on the possible extension of public-private partnerships to
training, public-housing provision, defence diversification, inner-city and
regional policy, and the development of higher and further education.
Finally, Labour would move quickly to reduce unemployment, with a guarantee
of high-quality education or training for young people, temporary National
Insurance rebates for employers taking on the long-term unemployed, and new
retraining schemes for workers made redundant.
More broadly, the shadow chancellor repeated Labour's commitment to a system
of managed exchange rates, but stressed that stable currencies depended on
much closer international co-ordination of fiscal and monetary policies.
The lesson of sterling's ejection from the European exchange rate mechanism
was that an exchange rate target could not be a substitute for a credible
economic programme.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940928

