FT942-14604

FT  20 APR 94 / Kidder fake profits scheme spanned three-year period


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


The phantom trading scheme at Kidder Peabody which led the US investment
bank to report false profits of Dollars 350m (Pounds 236m) had escaped the
attention of the bank and its auditors since as far back as 1991.
Mr Jack Welch, chairman of General Electric, Kidder's parent, said in an
interview yesterday, that the phantom profits created by the scheme
stretched back for some time. 'We would estimate that approximately Dollars
150m of this occurred last year,' he said.
Mr Michael Carpenter, Kidder's chairman, said that the bank had yet to
determine exactly when all the false profits had been reported, but said
that 'it's spread between three years'. Amounts before 1993 had not been
large, he added.
The false profits, which Kidder has blamed on its head government bond
trader, Mr Joseph Jett, emerged only at the end of last week, after an
escalation in the phantom trades prompted a closer examination. Mr Carpenter
put the total number of fake trades entered by Mr Jett at 'tens of
thousands', with a notional value 'in the billions of dollars'.
Mr Jett joined the bank in 1991 and rapidly rose to become the head of its
government bond trading desk. The profits he reported from trading brought
him a bonus of Dollars 9m last year, although not all was paid in cash.
Mr Welch said: 'Kidder requires a portion to be put away in an equity
account to be paid from future earnings. So some of that is retained in the
firm'.
Mr Welch said Kidder's problems pointed to a failure by it and other Wall
Street firms to give sufficient power to the people responsible for
controlling traders.
He also said the problem had not prompted him to reconsider whether or not
to sell the investment bank. Commenting on what he called the 'star' culture
on Wall Street and the high bonuses typical in the industry, Mr Welch said:
'My concern is whether or not that money turns out to give a prestige and
power and influence to people that's inordinate.' He added: 'The imbalances
in the system are such that a strong successful personality may have more
influence than they should. This is not the first instance that it ever
happened on Wall Street.'
Kidder would continue to pay bonuses in line with those paid by other
houses, Mr Welch said.
He added that a review, now under way, was likely to lead to more power for
managers involved in internal control, and he questioned whether enough
attention was paid to these people at present. 'Do we listen with a careful
ear . . . to everything they say, or are they brushed aside?' he asked.
Mr Welch denied the problems at Kidder would prompt GE to attempt to dispose
of the firm, as it had tried to do two years ago when discussing a sale to
financial services group Primerica.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940420

