FT941-5660

FT  05 MAR 94 / Bonn seeks EU ban on UK beef exports


   By REUTER


   BONN


Mr Horst Seehofer, the German health minister, is urging European Union
agriculture ministers to ban British livestock and beef exports because of
what he said were the dangers of so-called 'mad cow disease', a Health
Ministry spokeswoman said yesterday, Reuter reports from Bonn.
If a special meeting of EU ministers fails to agree an immediate ban,
Germany will unilaterally impose restrictions because of the risk that
bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE, could spread to people.
The spokeswoman said Bonn proposed to ban imports of live animals as well as
entrails and meat. She said a working meeting of EU officials would hold
talks on March 8 and that a ministerial meeting would follow some time after
March 21 to discuss a ban.
In a television interview on Thursday, Mr Seehofer said Germany had to take
maximum precautions to protect people's health. This meant a ban on animals
and meat imports from Britain into Germany. 'The talks will be very
difficult,' he said. 'The British and (other EU countries) believe the
current measures are sufficient, but I don't believe that.'
Mr Seehofer said the use of cattle entrails in the production of baby food
was of concern. 'Here too - irrespective of whether the EU agrees or not -
we will ban the use of entrails (in the production of babyfood).'
In December the Berlin-based Federal Health Agency advised the government to
ban British beef as tests had shown that BSE could pass from cattle to
felines, suggesting it was possible the disease could spread to people.
BSE causes dementia and rapid death in cattle in the same way as the
incurable Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) attacks the human brain. Some
British health experts have warned that the country faces an explosion of
CJD because of the abundance of cattle infected with BSE, but a link between
the two diseases has not been proved.
Mr Seehofer said there was as yet no cause for hysteria. 'If in a few years
a ban turns out to be superfluous because we find out that BSE cannot spread
to people, so much the better.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940305

