FT941-4102

FT  12 MAR 94 / Army joins 'homeland' battle: S Africa troops act to restore
order in Bophuthatswana


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   MMABATHO, BOPHUTHATSWANA


The South African army last night moved in to the black 'homeland' of
Bophuthatswana, chasing out rightwing whites who had taken control of the
capital Mmabatho, in a drive to restore order after looting and fierce
fighting left at least 60 dead.
Power changed hands several times between the Bophuthatswana Defence Force,
the South African Defence Force and thousands of paramilitary rightwing
whites who had taken control of the capital Mmabatho and its twin town,
Mafikeng. But by early this morning the South African Defence Force appeared
to have the homeland largely under control.
Among those killed in yesterday's fighting were two rightwing whites
executed by a Bophuthatswana soldier as they begged for mercy.
South African government officials said the defence force had been deployed
in strength to take control after local police and soldiers joined a popular
revolt against President Lucas Mangope who said he wanted Bophuthatswana to
remain as a separate state and refused to participate in South Africa's
first all race election in April.
Last night South African officials said Mr Mangope might be allowed to
remain titular head of state, but the homeland would in effect come under
martial rule from Pretoria.
At first only 150 troops were deployed but government officials said later
1,500 troops were being sent in with a large back-up force to remain nearby.
A foreign ministry official said 57 bodies were reported at Victoria
Hospital in Mmabatho and 10 bodies elsewhere after two days of looting and
bitter fighting.
Yesterday's events represented a humiliating defeat for the right wing,
which had sent thousands of supporters to shore up Mr Mangope's failing
regime, and a victory for the ANC, which has achieved its goal of ensuring
Bophuthatswana will be reincorporated into South Africa and that its 2m
citizens can participate in next month's elections.
Mr Mangope's status remained unresolved last night, with the chairman of the
Independent Electoral Commission, which is supervising the conduct of the
poll, flying to Mmabatho to insist on guarantees from him that
Bophuthatswana will participate in the poll.
Earlier, Mr Mangope issued a statement saying he had registered a political
party, the Northwest Christian Democrat party, to contest the elections but
government officials said this statement did not go far enough to satisfy
Pretoria and the ANC on election participation.
Late yesterday afternoon, South African President FW de Klerk met Mr Nelson
Mandela, leader of the ANC, to decide the fate of President Mangope after
the police and army revolted against his rule. Mr Mandela has urged joint
administration of the homeland, through the Transitional Executive Council,
the body which oversees government in the run up to elections.
As dusk fell three black bodies lay in the main street of Mafikeng,
apparently shot by whites, while South African armoured personnel carriers
escorted whites beyond the border into South Africa. Villagers cheered as
the South Africa troops chased the rightwing whites out.
Earlier, outside the headquarters of the Bophuthatswana police, three whites
were killed after a group in trucks being chased by Bophuthatswana Defence
Force soldiers opened fire on black bystanders, provoking a gun battle.
Three men were wounded. As they fell from their vehicle, one was shot
immediately, and two others lay on the ground, begging for mercy before a
Bophuthatswana soldier shot them dead.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940312

