FT942-14765

FT  19 APR 94 / Technology: Pool of IT resources keeps CAA in the race


   By JOIA SHILLINGFORD


Far-reaching changes in the computer world are having an impact on the way
information technology departments are organised. When large, centralised
mainframes were the dominant form of computing, so were large, centralised
IT departments. But these were criticised for being expensive and remote
from the business.
Then came distributed computing. This made a 'federal' approach to IT
possible, with computers and IT staff devolved to individual business units.
A small, central IT department was usually retained to decide on the
company's computing strategy and which standards it should support.
Many companies hoped that putting IT staff in closer contact with
non-technical managers would make them more business oriented. But all too
often, devolved IT departments have expanded, creating their own fiefs and
spiralling costs. As a result, they have become just as remote and
inflexible as the large, centralised IT departments which they replaced.
This inflexibility and the growth of PC use is making some companies rethink
the way they organise IT. Stuart Vaughan, a senior consultant at Pagoda
Associates, a London-based management consultancy, believes turning the IT
department into a resource pool will solve some of the weaknesses inherent
in organising IT staff.
The idea has been tried before in the UK, but nowhere as radically as at the
Civil Aviation Authority. The CAA has replaced its 110-strong central IT
department with a resource pool of 50 staff and an IT department of 25. Any
CAA business unit can draw staff from the pool so long as it puts them on
its payroll for at least three months. Ad hoc PC projects (lasting no more
than a few days) are handled by a team of six in the IT department.
Vaughan, who is involved in the CAA project, says: 'A major benefit of the
resource pool is that it can be sized in an optimum way, avoiding
unnecessary duplication. It is also possible to demonstrate value for money
because business units cannot hire an IT person unless they present a
convincing business case.'
At the CAA, line managers can hire from the pool or buy services from
outside if the pool does not have the right skills. This makes IT staff very
service-oriented. Richard Brett, the CAA's director of finance and
management services, says: 'In the old days, staff whose skills were
obsolete were simply put to work on internal projects for the IT department,
while new staff with the latest skills were hired. But IT is no longer a
self-generating organisation.'
Now, he says, 'if people in the pool don't have an assignment, they are very
visible. We try to retrain, but if they haven't been requested for two
months, we put them on the redeployment list'.
The pool will not rise above 50. If more staff are needed, the CAA will
simply increase its use of outsourcing. In fact, the pool is likely to
shrink. It has been in place for a year (on a transfer-charging basis till
this month) and no one hired by a business unit has returned.
Brett finds it encouraging that once IT people get into the business, they
begin to develop real business skills. 'We're starting to overcome the bug
bear of project definition, where the line manager knows what he wants the
system to do but the IT expert is on a different wavelength.'
He believes IT should not be viewed as a black art but as a normal business
process. So the business planning group has responsibility for IT strategy,
the internal audit department checks that business units are sticking to
group technology standards, and line managers cost-justify and manage IT
projects.
This approach has helped the CAA to reduce its central IT overheads from
Pounds 43m three years ago to Pounds 18m. A lot of money is also spent on IT
in individual business units, where Brett says managers now see IT as a real
cost.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940419

