FT941-3570

FT  16 MAR 94 / Further Dollars 1.5bn loan urged for Russia


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


The Group of Seven leading industrial countries, fearful that the Russian
economy may collapse, are pressing the International Monetary Fund to agree
to lend the second Dollars 1.5bn tranche of funds aimed at assisting reform.
Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, is expected in Moscow tomorrow.
During his five-day visit he will have to decide whether to recommend to the
fund's board to pay the second tranche of the systemic transformation
facility. If he recommends delay, factors in his decision will be fears that
the budget will not be adhered to and that inflation - down to a monthly 9
per cent in February - will again soar, as expected.
A continued fall in production and the huge indebtedness in Russian industry
have meant that government income is running at half of the budgeted figures
for the first two months of this year.
Meanwhile, powerful lobbies, especially the military, are demanding higher
allocations than presently allowed. General Pavel Grachev, defence minister,
says that his troops will go unfed unless the allocation to defence of
Rbs37,000bn (Pounds 14.4bn) for this year is more than doubled.
One senior western financial expert in Moscow said yesterday: 'The base to
support the infrastructure of the country is shrinking and at some point
soon you will not have enough resources to support the minimum services.'
Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, prime minister, has sought to impress on the IMF
that he and his senior colleagues are at least as pro-market as radicals
such as Mr Yegor Gaidar and Mr Boris Fyodorov, who left the cabinet this
year. An IMF team is negotiating with Russian ministers in Moscow.
Mr Chernomyrdin has drawn up a list of companies to be declared bankrupt,
has enthusiastically endorsed the sell-off of state and collective farms to
individuals, and says he will repel all advances from the military,
industrial, energy and agricultural lobbies for more credits.
However, he has also tried to make clear to the IMF the severity of the
crisis he faces. The draft budget envisages expenditure of Rbs183,000bn and
income of about Rbs120,000bn - leaving a budget deficit of about 10 per cent
of gross national product, a figure regarded as tight in present
circumstances. The draft has not yet gone to the lower house of parliament
for ratification.
G7 ministers back free trade and labour flexibility, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940316

