FT942-15694

FT  14 APR 94 / Political donations charter outlined


   By ROLAND RUDD


Proposals for governing company donations to political parties, including
the establishment of a political fund controlled by small shareholders, were
yesterday outlined by the Labour party.
Labour's charter for political funding was issued as the Commons home
affairs committee published its own report on political funding. The report
effectively split the committee along party political lines.
The Conservative majority on the committee published a report recommending
few changes except for a new code of conduct and the possible use of a civil
servant for each political party represented in parliament.
The Tory MPs were accused by Labour of 'hiding behind a weak code of
conduct' to prevent embarrassing their party, which has received millions of
pounds from companies.
Mr Chris Mullin, supported by the Labour MPs on the home affairs committee,
published a minority report which advocates that all donations of more than
Pounds 5,000 in one financial year should be published with the annual
accounts of political parties. 'The issue of funding of political parties is
an area of darkness into which the Conservatives on the committee did not
want to travel,' he said.
The political row intensified as Downing Street conceded that it did not
charge the Conservative Party for the use of its facilities.
Sir Ivan Lawrence, the Conservative chairman of the home affairs committee,
said he could see no reason to tighten the rules on the use of Downing
Street since the use of it by political parties was 'open and transparent'.
However, Mr Robin Cook, Labour's shadow trade and industry secretary, said:
'I am serving notice on the Conservative party that we shall be closing down
the loopholes that have permitted company directors to hand over vast sums
of corporate money, with virtually no accountability.'
Committing the party to introducing statutory regulation of corporate
political donations, he advocated state funding of political parties; strict
limits on spending by each party; a ban on foreign donations; and published
accounts listing donations.
By these proposals, companies wishing to give money to political parties
would be required to establish a political fund which would have to be
supported by shareholders at an annual general meeting.
Contributions to the fund could only be made out of funds set aside for the
dividend.
Editorial Comment, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940414

