FT942-16073

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Jefferson Smurfit in Dollars 2bn
move to cut debt


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


Jefferson Smurfit, one of the US's biggest recycled newsprint and packaging
producers, plans an ambitious Dollars 2bn recapitalisation, including a
public equity offering and refinancing a substantial portion of its debt.
According to a prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
in Washington, the restructuring is designed to improve the St Louis,
Missouri-based company's operating and financial flexibility by reducing the
level and the cost of borrowings, extending debt maturities and
strengthening its equity base.
Smurfit, 50 per cent owned by Jefferson Smurfit Group of Ireland and 40 per
cent by two equity funds run by Morgan Stanley, has struggled under a heavy
weight of junk bond-financed debt, exacerbated by weak paper and packaging
markets.
Long-term debt stood at Dollars 2.6bn at the end of last year, and there was
a shareholders' deficit of almost Dollars 1bn. The company, with 1993 sales
of Dollars 2.9bn, has suffered losses totalling almost Dollars 400m over the
past three years.
The restructuring includes a Dollars 300m global public equity offering and
new credit facilities totalling Dollars 1.65bn, making the financing one of
the largest for a non-investment grade company in recent years.
The Irish parent has agreed to inject Dollars 100m of new equity. In
addition, Container Corporation of America, a Smurfit subsidiary, will issue
Dollars 400m of senior notes.
The bulk of the funds will be used to repay bank facilities and to redeem
Dollars 844m of junk bonds.
When the proposals are implemented, the Irish parent's stake will drop to
about 44 per cent, while the Morgan Stanley funds will hold a 31 per cent
interest. The remaining 25 per cent will be held by outside investors,
including the public.
Under the plan, long-term debt will be only modestly reduced to Dollars
2.4bn, and the company will continue to have a large debt-servicing burden
over the next five years. The prospectus warns 'there can be no assurance
that the company will generate sufficient cash flow to meet its
obligations'.
Smurfit carries a single-B non-investment grade (or junk) bond rating,
although bankers hope an improvement in its financial condition will allow
it to reach a double-B rating before long. The strengthening US economy has
led to a marked improvement in paper prices over the past six months.
Besides the financial restructuring, Smurfit last year began an internal
shake-up aimed at reducing costs. The programme, expected to last two to
three years, resulted in a Dollars 96m pre-tax charge last September
reflecting, among other things, a consolidation of manufacturing facilities.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940412

