FT942-12795

FT  28 APR 94 / Thai police charged over Saudi gem theft


   By WILLIAM BARNES


   BANGKOK


Thailand's former national police chief, General Sawat Amornwiwat, and six
other senior policemen have been charged with negligence and malfeasance in
connection with the extraordinary theft of millions of dollars worth of gems
from a Saudi prince in 1989.
The police's dilatory and incompetent investigation into the theft, and
series of unexplained murders of Saudi diplomats and a businessman in
Bangkok, annoyed the Saudis so much they came close to severing diplomatic
relations.
They stopped issuing work permits to Thai nationals which cost Thailand up
to Dollars 1bn a year in lost remittances; 250,000 Thais were working in
Saudi Arabia in 1989, only some 30,000 work there now.
'I have been waiting for four years and nothing has happened. But I believe
General Pratin (Santiprapop, the current police chief) is an honest man and
he wants to make everything clear to the world,' said Mr Mohammed Said
Khoja, Saudi Arabia's charge d'affaires, yesterday:
A police lieutenant general, who headed the original investigation into the
theft, and seven others, were charged with embezzlement last year.
The scandal dates back to 1989 when a Thai cleaner stole 90kg of jewellery -
including a family heirloom: a diamond the size of a pigeon's egg - from the
palace of Prince Faisal Abdul Aziz al Saud in Riyadh.
The thief, Kriangkrai Techamong, was arrested with exemplary speed after his
return and many of the jewels recovered. However, Saudi pleasure quickly
faded when it was discovered that most of the gems returned were fakes.
Relations between the two countries plummeted when gunmen shot dead four
Saudi diplomats in broad daylight between 1989 and 1990 in the streets of
Bangkok.
The Thai police's lacklustre investigations threw up a bizarre parade of
murder suspects, including religious zealots, drug dealers, business rivals,
Pakistani gangsters and international terrorists.
Saudi unhappiness reached its acme when it was revealed that a prominent
Saudi businessman, Mohammed al-Ruwaily, who disappeared around the time of
the murders, had probably been abducted and killed by a group of Thai
policemen.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940428

