FT942-12387

FT  29 APR 94 / International Company News: UAL halves first-quarter losses


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


United Airlines, the world's biggest airline, almost halved its losses in
the first quarter but warned that it still could not compete effectively
with low-cost carriers in the US domestic market.
Net losses in the quarter to March were Dollars 71m - excluding the effect
of an accounting change - a 49 per cent fall from the comparable period's
Dollars 138m net loss before extraordinary items. Losses per share,
excluding unusual items, were down from Dollars 5.92 to Dollars 3.31.
Revenues rose from Dollars 3.05bn to Dollars 3.19bn, while operating losses
fell from Dollars 121m to Dollars 36m.
Mr Stephen Wolf, chairman and chief executive, said the results were still
far from satisfactory in spite of the significant improvement. He blamed
lower passenger yields, brought about by the proliferation of reduced fares
that had accompanied the expansion of low-cost carriers.
'With our high cost structures, we are unable to compete effectively in
these markets,' Mr Wolf said.
United is awaiting shareholder approval for a radical plan to give employees
a controlling stake in the airline in return for wage cuts and productivity
improvements worth Dollars 4.9bn in today's money over the next 12 years.
Unlike the restructuring unveiled by Delta yesterday, United's plan also
envisages setting up a low-cost 'airline within an airline' to compete
head-on with low-cost carriers like Southwest Airlines on short-haul routes.
Mr Wolf said the plan would 'substantially and permanently' lower United's
labour costs. If it had been in place during the first quarter, the
airline's labour costs would have been Dollars 105m lower.
In fact, United's cost per available seat mile - the standard measure of
competitiveness in the industry - rose from 8.83 cents to 9.04 cents in the
first quarter. That compares with a figure of 7.2 cents for Southwest and
the target figure of 7.5 cents announced by Delta yesterday.
Trans World Airlines, the US carrier that emerged from bankruptcy protection
in November, reduced net losses from Dollars 476.5m to Dollars 122.4m in the
first quarter. The previous year's figure, however, included a one-time
charge of Dollars 300m relating to pension obligations. Operating losses
fell from Dollars 93.4m to Dollars 79.6m.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940429

