FT942-14569

FT  20 APR 94 / Chile to take healthcare medicine: Reforms to provide a
service the country feels it deserves


   By DAVID PILLING


When an economist, not a physician, was named as Chile's health minister, it
seemed that the 'profound health reforms' promised by the new administration
might be more than just words.
Last week the new minister, Mr Carlos Massad, took the first tentative steps
in making good that pledge by setting efficiency targets, introducing a new
system of budget allocation and making decentralisation a priority.
Like many Latin American health ministers, Mr Massad faces the challenge of
rebuilding a service that was grossly underfunded throughout the 1980s.
Furthermore, he must deal with the problems of regulating competing private
and public services and of satisfying pent-up demand for more sophisticated
treatment.
'Because Chile started earlier with deregulation, market imperfections in
the health sector have developed earlier,' says Mr Jorge Katz of the UN's
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. 'Chile heralds some
of the problems to come in Latin America generally.'
Those problems are plain to see. Chile's creaking health sector is
associated by the public with bad service, strikes, outmoded technology and
long waiting lists.
Dr Julio Montt Vidal, director of Santiago's Calvo Mackenna paediatric
hospital, does not believe things are so bad. He points out that Chile,
which spends less than 6 per cent of gross domestic product on health, has
achieved a life expectancy index of 72 and an infant mortality rate of 17
per thousand. In the US - which spends more than 10 times as much per person
 -results are only marginally better at 76 and 9 respectively.
Dr Montt argues that present difficulties relate to rising expectations.
'Our crisis is one of success. We've already solved most of our basic
problems.'
But satisfying those expectations has not proved easy. Resources have gone
largely to restoring salaries and repairing crumbling hospitals. 'It has had
hardly any noticeable effect because there was so much to do,' says Dr
Francisco Peragallo, medical director at Santiago's Salvador Hospital.
Mr Massad has promised to generate new funds by cracking down on non-payment
of personal contributions to the public health system. By the end of 1994,
he expects 60 per cent of outstanding payments to be cleared up.
The public sector is only part of his problem. In Chile, as in much of Latin
America, the 1980s saw the growth of private health provision as the public
system deteriorated. Nearly a quarter of Chileans now have private health
insurance and ultra-modern clinics have sprung up to compete with often
dilapidated state hospitals. But critics say private health insurers
(Isapres) are being unfairly subsidised by the state.
First, many Isapre affiliates (who usually have to pay a percentage of
hospital fees) opt for state hospitals when they need expensive treatment
and cannot afford their share of private fees. In effect, they are
defrauding the state system to which they do not contribute.
Mr Massad has promised to tighten up on such cases through better
record-keeping. 'An Isapre affiliate who receives public attention cannot be
identified as such. . . which results in a cross-subsidy in which the
poorest subsidise the most well-to-do.'
But closing loopholes does not address the fundamental problem that millions
of Chileans, not rich enough for adequate private coverage yet not content
with declining state provision, are falling between two stools.
Second, Isapre premiums are prohibitively expensive for most old people or
those with chronic diseases. 'Between 25 and 40, people are good business.
But after 45 or 50 years of age the treatment of disease inevitably becomes
more expensive,' says Dr Montt.
'The old and sick abandon the private system and re-in-
corporate themselves into the public sector even though their earnings
during their most productive years have gone into private hands. That is
unjust,' he says. He believes Isapres should be obliged to introduce
additional insurance coverage for severe illness and old age.
Another concern is costs, boosted by higher wages and stricter laws on
pharmaceutical patents which reduce local pirating of expensive drugs. Mr
Katz says prices have also escalated because of a rise in unnecessary
treatment. 'A large proportion of increased expenditure has gone into higher
profits, not better healthcare,' he says.
Dr Juan Giaconi, professor of public health at the Catholic University, says
costs can be reduced and efficiency raised by greater decentralisation,
allowing hospitals to diagnose problems and seek their own solutions.
Mr Massad has indeed created a management support division of the Health
Ministry with the express purpose of facilitating decentralisation. 'To
decentralise one has to help institutions to improve their ability to manage
themselves,' he says.
The announcements last week are merely a first step in reforming not only
institutions but 'some of our ways of thinking as well', Mr Massad says.
Over the next months, he will begin to tackle the more complex problems of
making health provision more responsive to patient demands, as well as
regulating against soaring costs and cross-subsidies.
Chile is a fast-growing economy with pretensions to leave the
'underdeveloped' world and its population wants a health service to match.
Mr Massad will need all his economic acumen if he is to meet such high
expectations.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940420

