FT942-14754

FT  19 APR 94 / Serious local difficulty: Lewis Baston on prospects for UK
parties in elections


   By LEWIS BASTON


Opinion polls suggest the UK local elections on May 5 will be a disaster for
the Conservatives. The stakes are high for Mr John Major, the prime
minister, amid the current speculation about a leadership crisis. Almost
incidentally, they will decide control of hundreds of councils, from Penwith
in west Cornwall to Shetland, and elect all the councillors of London.
Because of the low Conservative base and the varying regional trends, this
year's local elections are more than usually difficult to analyse. How will
they go and what will they mean?
The 32 London boroughs and the 12 regional and island councils in Scotland
will be up for election, as will one-third of the councillors in the 36
metropolitan boroughs and 118 of the district councils in England and Wales.
The bulk of the votes cast will therefore be in the big urban areas.
Council election results have always depended on what the 40 per cent of the
electorate that bothers to vote thinks about the national government. The
parties' shares of the vote tends to move in line with the opinion polls. As
in general elections, campaigning is increasingly dominated by national
issues and personalities. Mr Major's personal involvement, and Labour's
emphasis on the government's tax record, show that the centralising trend
continues.
However, since the mid-1970s - especially in areas where the Liberal
Democrats have been active - the importance of local differences has been
increasing. There has also been a tendency since the late 1980s for Labour
to do worse in the local elections than in the national opinion polls. Last
year, Labour's local showing lagged by about 6 per cent and the Liberal
Democrats did correspondingly better.
In 1991 and 1993 there were signs of anti-Conservative tactical voting,
particularly in favour of Liberal Democrats in the south and south-west of
England. Liberal Democrat gains of seats and councils were more impressive
than their percentage vote. With tactical voting and the unpopularity of the
government, 1994 is likely to be one of the worst years ever for
Conservative local election candidates.
One glimmer of hope for Mr Major is that the seats to be fought were last
contested in 1990 - a similarly abysmal year for a Conservative government.
Then, as now, Labour led in the polls by more than 20 per cent; the
leadership of the prime minister, the then Mrs Margaret Thatcher, was under
pressure; and new taxes - in 1990 the poll tax - were unpopular. The poor
Conservative showing then suggests that even disastrous unpopularity will
not cost many more seats this time, and a few gains might be possible.
Central Office may then be able to claim a victory and deflect attention
from a poor vote, as it did in 1990 by concentrating on Tory triumphs in the
'flagship' boroughs of Wandsworth and Westminster.
Every set of local elections since 1990 has produced some surprising
results. The big story last year was the surge in Liberal Democrat strength
which demolished the Tory shires, leaving only Buckinghamshire under
Conservative control. This year the Liberal Democrats do not stand to win as
many councils, though they are still likely to gain seats from both main
parties. The Conservative vote has fallen so badly that the Liberal
Democrats are the main opposition to Labour in Manchester, Sheffield and
Southampton, as well as Liverpool and Southwark. They can also hope to make
gains from Labour in several urban areas.
As always in elections, there will be variations in different parts of the
country:
In Scotland, the Scottish National party is hoping to break into the Labour
heartland in the central belt, although it is unlikely to win control in any
regional council.
The Conservatives' hopes are concentrated in the west Midlands, where they
did very well in the 1992 local elections. The party hopes to gain
Wolverhampton and Dudley, and end Labour control of Birmingham, despite a
recent by-election gain for Labour. Liverpool politics continues on its
idiosyncratic course, with a conflict between Labour, the Liberal Democrats
and candidates backed by the leftwing Militant group.
Labour will have to defend many of its southern strongholds, such as
Brighton.
As in 1990, the London elections will get the most media attention, because
more councils may change hands in the capital than in other regions. Labour
did poorly in London in 1990 compared with other areas, largely because of
the reputation for poor services and high taxes that London Labour councils
had acquired. The party can hope for more significant gains here than
elsewhere, being 300 short of its 1971 peak number of borough councillors.
The official target list of Enfield, Ealing and Croydon seems modest - a
reasonable swing should see Brent and possibly Redbridge fall, too.
On the other hand, Labour is under Liberal Democrat attack in Lambeth,
Southwark and Waltham Forest. If the Liberal Democrats are as strong as in
1993, they should win Kingston, and the Conservatives should lose Harrow,
Bexley and maybe Bromley.
The Liberal Democrats may, however, lose Tower Hamlets to no overall control
or to Labour, although politics there is confused. Both Labour and the
Liberal Democrats are split, and there is a risk of the far-right British
National party taking over the devolved neighbourhood council in the Isle of
Dogs, where it won a by-election last year.
While the Conservatives lost in 1990, clever public relations turned it into
a reprieve for Mrs Thatcher. This is cold comfort for Mr Major. The European
elections in June will overshadow the local elections, and have a bigger
impact on national politics - they could prove a tougher task for the public
relations wizards of Central Office.
The author is a researcher at Nuffield College, Oxford
 ------------------------------------------
   National vote in local elections (%)
 ------------------------------------------
Year       Con   Lab   Lib Dem
 ------------------------------------------
1988           40    40        18
1989           37    40        21
1990           32    42        18
1991           35    36        21
1992           45    30        19
1993           31    41        24
 ------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940419

