FT942-15335

FT  15 APR 94 / UK Company News: Passions run high over sugar cane bid -
Nikki Tait on Tate & Lyle's attempt to buy two Australian mills


   By NIKKI TAIT


An outward air of normality surrounds the Tully and South Johnstone sugar
mills, set in neighbouring villages on northern Queensland's lush, coastal
plain.
Their vast crushing plants are undergoing the seasonal overhaul. In
surrounding fields, a healthy cane crop promises bumper business when
harvesting begins on June 14.
However, stickers plastered across the mill buildings tell a different
story. 'Crush the Tate & Lyle bid', they demand.
Inside, managers are lobbying local shareholders who hold the key to the
British sweetener group's offers, worth ADollars 121m (Pounds 58m) in total,
by phone.
One local resident, Ms Jessica Hitching, has even mobilised a 'women's
defence committee'. 'We're told to buy Australian,' she complains, 'but the
mills won't be Australian anymore . . . they'll be English'.
The bid battle for the Queensland mills is the most public move Tate has
made since acquiring its Australian subsidiary, Bundaberg Sugar, in 1991 -
and it is proving neither easy nor speedy to complete.
Only today, six months after the opening salvos were fired, will the tussle
reach a crucial stage. Shareholders in the South Johnstone mill are due to
vote on a proposal to lift a restriction which bars anyone from holding more
than 3.2 per cent of the mill's shares. Only if they agree, and by a 75 per
cent majority, can the Tate offer proceed.
In this tightly-knit community, where many of the shareholders are direct
descendants of the Italian and Maltese immigrants who established the first
farms, passions run high and no one will admit defeat. 'I'm smiling,' says
Mr Fred Lizzio, chairman of the South Johnstone mill. 'We're confident',
retorts Mr Rod Young, Bundaberg's company secretary.
The one point on which both sides agree is that the deal would make sense
for Tate. Via Bundaberg, it already owns mills at Babinda and Mourilyan,
directly to the north, and synergies could flow.
Sugar prices have also improved, and both Tully and South Johnstone have
been investing in their plants. Profits from both mills rose strongly last
year and are forecast to do better still. Moreover, Tully and South
Johnstone have better potential for expanding their catchment areas, and
increasing throughput, than Bundaberg's existing mills. In Queensland, cane
can only be grown on acreage assigned for this purpose, but Tully, in
particular, has earmarked various tranches of nearby land from which it
thinks additional tonnage could be sourced in the future.
The problem for Tate is that the mills' shares are owned largely by local
cane growers, whose livelihoods are directly affected by the way in which
the mills are run. While the bidder claims that its cash offer represents a
'unique' opportunity to realise a good price for the mills' unlisted stock,
at least some of the growers have broader concerns.
'What the mill does affects my business - and at present, it's run as a
farmers' mill,' says one South Johnstone shareholder.
Asked to elaborate, growers who oppose the bids present a list of worries.
The first is maintenance. Growers cut and deliver cane to their respective
mills under a highly-organised system, which aims to ensure that everyone
gets fair treatment. But if mechanical failures interrupt the crushing
process, cane which has been burnt quickly becomes perishable.
Some farmers point to last year's breakdowns at the Babinda mill, and worry
that Tate - with more interest in mill profits than cane growers' income -
might prune maintenance expenditure.
Tate, not surprisingly, denies this. 'Babinda was an old mill when we bought
it,' says Mr Young, adding that money has been spent on it subsequently, and
denying any maintenance cuts.
Next, there is the question of maintaining the cane railway - a network of
tracks which allow farmers to bring the crop to the mill. Might Tate be less
inclined to replace track to outlying areas? Then there is the question of
what price the 'cane-dirt' - extracted in the crushing process and returned
to farmers for use as fertiliser - might be sold by Tate. And so on.
Such uncertainties, moreover, come at a delicate time for Australia's sugar
industry. Historically, this has been heavily regulated, with the state
government buying up Queensland farmers' production at an 'award' price, and
limiting the land on which cane can be grown. Now, in the current 'free
trade' atmosphere, and with Australia committed to deregulation throughout
the economy, this structure is likely to change  - although no one is sure
exactly how.
As Mr Lizzio puts it: 'Deregulation is rather frightening if you've only got
one buyer'.
But the mill boards have a problem, too. Not all shareholders are either
growers, or growers who expect to be in the business for the long-haul.
While the mills claim that the bid prices are inadequate, these do represent
a substantial advance on the levels at which shares had been changing hands
prior to Tate's arrival. South Johnstone, for example, traded at about
ADollars 3-ADollars 4, while Tate's final offer has been pitched at ADollars
14.
The mills' answer is to merge and then list on the stock exchange - thereby
accommodating those shareholders who would like to cash in all or part of
their holdings. At present, however, no firm plan is on the table, although
Mr Rino Cargnello, who chairs the Tully board, says proposals should be
presented 'within the next month or two'.
The drawback is that this scheme, too, would require a 75 per cent majority
of both mills' shareholders. Both boards, meanwhile, say that they would
look for some sort of anti-takeover protection for the merged group,
probably by way of state government legislation.
In short, the potential obstacles which surround the flotation idea are
considerable and it is by no means guaranteed that shareholders would have a
ready market for their shares in the near future.
Perhaps the most indisputable point made by the mills is that a six-month
war of attrition is long enough.
Already, the battle has led to court actions, and the bid costs are
approaching ADollars 250,000 for each mill - money which the growers see
vanishing before their eyes.
Tate, however, says it will wait until today's vote before deciding what to
do next. 'Our assessment will be governed by today's result,' says Mr Young.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940415

