FT943-13083

FT  21 JUL 94 / World Trade News: Gatt shuts door on environmentalists


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


A proposal by the US to make Gatt a more open institution was turned down by
its trading partners yesterday, in a move that will give US environmental
groups further ammunition in their campaign against the Uruguay Round trade
accords.
Mr Booth Gardner, US ambassador to Gatt, said environmental organisations
should be invited to an open meeting of Gatt's governing council to discuss
a panel report condemning a US embargo on tuna imports. The embargo applies
to countries deemed to kill too many dolphins in tuna fishing nets or which
import from those countries.
The tuna-dolphin case has become a cause celebre among US environmentalists,
who see it as proof that the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is
antipathetic to environmental concerns. Much of their indignation has
centred on the secrecy of Gatt dispute settlement procedures, in which a
three-person panel hears evidence from governments in private before passing
judgment.
The US proposal met with almost universal opposition. The European Union
said it would set a dangerous precedent for other interest groups such as
farm unions, while Brazil dismissed the idea as 'inappropriate, impractical
and unreasonable'. India, Australia, the Nordic states, Asean, Canada,
Argentina, Mexico and New Zealand also expressed disagreement.
The Gatt panel report, the second to condemn the US tuna embargo, says the
US breached fair trade rules in imposing a trade ban designed to force other
nations to change their own domestic laws and practices, however worthy the
motive.
Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, said in May the US would
'challenge the dispute settlement panel's failure to provide a fair hearing
and due process'.
However, the EU yesterday won wide support for formal endorsement of the
panel ruling, on a complaint brought by Brussels after Mexico declined to
press ahead with the earlier case. In a statement, Mexico said it would now
consider requesting adoption of the first report at the next meeting of the
council in October. Under present rules panel reports must be adopted by
consensus.
Figures compiled by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission show that
dolphin deaths associated with tuna fishing in the eastern tropical Pacific
have fallen from 133,000 in 1986 to 3,600 in 1993, compared with a dolphin
population of 9.5m. The fall reflects conservation efforts by fishing
nations and predates the 1990 US embargo.
Earlier, the council approved Vietnam's request for observer status - seen
as a first step in the membership process - and endorsed Gatt entry terms
for Slovenia.
Traders and greens caught in a net, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940721

