FT942-12827

FT  28 APR 94 / Moscow tries to regulate chaotic share markets: Leyla
Boulton looks at efforts to boost confidence


   By LEYLA BOULTON


Unique for having the largest number of stock exchanges in the world and the
smallest number of shares traded on them, Russia is finally trying to impose
some order upon the chaos.
Held up by squabbling among officials and the vested interests of some
market participants, the development of a functioning Russian stock market
has taken on a new urgency with the appearance of thousands of newly
privatised and investment-starved companies desperate to raise capital.
Although an ambitious privatisation programme has created a record number of
small investors over the past year, the country has yet to develop a
secondary market for share trading.
Last weekend, however, President Boris Yeltsin's Securities Commission
gathered dealers, brokers and stock exchanges to request their help in
drafting standards and organising self-regulating bodies. Mr Ruslan Orekhov,
who chairs the presidential commission, expects the consultations to produce
decrees setting those standards by June.
More than half of Russian industry has been privatised in a mass sell-off
which ends on July 1. Mr Anatoly Chubais, deputy prime minister responsible
for privatisation, is keen to protect his legacy and help companies survive
in a market economy. 'It is a race against time to stop them from going
bankrupt and discrediting the whole idea of market reforms,' says one
western banker.
With many plants on the verge of closure and mass lay-offs, new share issues
are the only hope for helping the better managed companies restructure and
re-tool.
The lack of trading is typical of the 65 self-proclaimed exchanges around
Russia. Stocks in newly privatised companies are traded only, if at all, at
2pm every day after clerks match paper bids for them, and are mostly in
locally based companies.
The bulk of exchange trading is in shares in new commercial banks, currency
options, and issues by a few new companies whose only disclosure of
information is contained in television advertisements promising rich returns
to investors anxious to protect their savings from savage inflation.
But even much of this trading is artificial, says Mr Jonathan Hay, an
adviser to the privatisation ministry, who cites the example of AVVA, an
industrial consortium which is trying to raise Dollars 3bn for Avtovaz, the
Russian carmaker.
Authorisation from the finance ministry to launch a share offering with an
unprecedented four-year take-up period means investors may be left in the
dark until 1998 about whether the project is viable.
Most of the trade in the privatised companies is within the emerging
over-the-counter market. The privatisation ministry hopes this will evolve
into a self-regulating market modelled on Nasdaq in New York. But here, too,
vested interests are at play, with directors of some privatised companies
still preferring a closed market to enable them to buy up shares in their
companies in order to acquire a controlling stake.
Nevertheless, the main brake on growth has been the state's inability to
co-ordinate aspects which cannot be left to market forces.
These include setting standards for company disclosure, fair advertising and
a national settlements system. Although companies are supposed to hire
independent registrars, many transactions go through only if brokers fly
directly to aluminium smelters in Siberia or tractor plants in southern
Russia to secure changes in company-held registers.
The danger now is that while the central bank and various ministries argue
over regulation, scandals generated by companies which have already rushed
to tap the market will undermine confidence.
Although Russians have large reserves of cash to invest, many potential
investors are extraordinarily credulous, perceiving what they see on
television as fact rather than advertising.
One of the most traded securities in Russia is in an obscure financial
company called MMM, which runs television advertisements every night showing
old ladies buying its certificates of deposit, changing their minds, and
getting the paper redeemed with a big profit three days later.
But earlier this month, the day after a bank of the same name folded,
Izvestia newspaper reported that hundreds of MMM shareholders had been
unable to redeem their certificates at MMM offices.
In its attempts to get hold of MMM's management, Izvestia found that all the
MMM telephone numbers held by the central bank or the finance ministry were
no longer valid.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940428

