FT941-5540

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: How lifestyles are likely to affect
your premium


   By BETHAN HUTTON


There was a time when insurance brokers knew most of their customers
personally, bad habits and all, and could size up their risk level in a
moment.
That has been lost with the arrival of the computer age where the link
between broker or insurer and client is a slender telephone line and risk
assessments are based on bare details from a form.
Do not be surprised in future, though, if your insurance salesman starts
suddenly to get personal, asking if you are married or living with someone,
whether you have children, if you smoke, where you work, what exactly your
job involves, and whether you drive to work or leave your car at the
station. You might even be asked about its colour.
This is not idle curiosity - he could be trying to form a clearer picture of
precisely who the company is insuring and what factors are linked to high or
low claim rates.
Peter Friend, managing director of broker SelectDirect, says the correlation
between lifestyles and claim records is being examined very closely by many
companies. Information technology gives insurers the power to analyse their
own claims experience in more sophisticated ways, and carry out more
research into what questions they should be asking on their proposal forms.
Norwich Union is one company which has been investigating how different
lifestyle factors might relate to future claim rates. The results of this
research have not yet worked through into new policies or new questions on
the proposal form, but Norwich is studying the data carefully and product
developments could follow in the future.
Some things may seem obvious: surely someone who does 30,000 miles a year is
a bigger risk than someone who does 3,000? But if the 3,000 is made up of
lots of short commuting journeys into central London, and the 30,000 is
notched up cruising the empty highways of rural Scotland, the picture
changes.
Things are not always what they seem, or what long-standing conventional
wisdom would indicate. Take journalists, who traditionally have had to bear
heavy loadings for car insurance.
When this is analysed, it becomes clear that many insurers view newspaper
and television journalists (and, by association, anyone in media-related
professions) as hard drinkers who chase ambulances for stories or act as
unofficial chauffeurs to famous interviewees, who then sue for vast damages
when they are involved in an accident.
The mismatch between this image and the actual habits of the majority of
modern, desk-bound, rail-commuting journalists is so huge that you have to
wonder if underwriters base their ratings on the exploits of fictional
journalists from films and novels rather than direct experience.
No doubt there are other professions, or classes of driver, which have less
opportunity to protest in print but could also benefit from premiums linked
more closely to real lifestyles. Technology-aided rating refinements may yet
mean that insurers no longer have to take the broad-brush approach and tar a
whole profession with a small portion's bad record.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940305

