FT942-14356

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (30): Airports of the world - Last lap
may be the worst / JFK, New York


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


Located in the borough of Queens, 15 miles south-east of midtown Manhattan,
John F. Kennedy Airport is the main hub for international flights to and
from New York.
Sprawled over almost 5,000 acres, JFK is like the city it serves: chaotic
and alsoovercrowded.
The terminals of the big US airlines (American, TWA, United, USAir and
Delta) are efficient but lack frills, and the quality of the shops,
restaurants, and bars is no better than average.
Standards are a bit higher at the British Airways terminal, but the main
international terminal used by all other airlines is a disaster, and it
really should be avoided whenever possible.
Airport staff are generally helpful when you can find them, although being
New Yorkers they are often a touch surly.
The greatest problem with JFK, however, is the lack of an efficient
transport service to and from the city. New York's subway does not reach as
far as JFK, but you can take a bus from the terminals to the nearest subway
station (Howard Beach/JFK Airport on the A, C and H lines, at Dollars 1.25
per one way trip).
It is more convenient, though no quicker, to take the bus all the way into
Manhattan.
Several companies run regular airport services (Carey Transportation is
regarded as the most reliable), and the fare costs between Dollars 12.50 and
Dollars 20.
The journey can take anywhere between 40 minutes to an hour and a half,
depending on the traffic and the number of stops the bus makes.
Taxi cabs are the quickest way to get into the city. Outside the rush hour
the journey can take as little as 30 minutes, but bank on at least 45
minutes to an hour.
Always use licensed Yellow cabs, and expect to pay between Dollars 35 and
Dollars 45 (including tips and tolls). For anyone crazy enough to use his
own car in New York, long-term parking at JFK is cheap, but the car parks
are some distance from the terminals.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940420

