FT942-16307

FT  11 APR 94 / World Bond Markets (This Week): German traders hope for
high-profile cut - Capital & Credit


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


The Bundesbank's 16 council members are scheduled on Thursday to hold their
first meeting since the Easter break, and traders of German government bonds
are hoping they will underline the recent but gradual decline in German repo
rates with a high-profile cut in official interest rates.
The cut of three basis points at last week's repo tender has brought the
cumulative fall in the repo rate to 27 basis points over the last six weeks
since variable-rate repos were introduced. The repo rate now stands at 5.73
per cent, compared with a discount rate of 5.25 per cent and a Lombard rate
of 6.75 per cent.
'The Bundesbank's policy is aimed at getting us ready for another official
rate cut, but it does not want the market to feel that it's a one-way bet
this week,' says Dr Richard Reid, chief economist at Union Bank of
Switzerland in Frankfurt. 'All markets want confirmation of lower rates in
Germany, but the Bundesbank is not in the business of placating capital
markets.'
Speculation is strongest for a half-point cut in the Lombard rate, which has
remained unchanged since last October. Optimists justify their stance by
saying that a cut in the Lombard rate will help to ease the pressures which
have built up recently in the German money market, because banks will find
it less costly to borrow emergency funds from the Bundesbank.
The change in reserve requirements for banks and the long Easter weekend
have contributed to the volatile conditions in the money market. The
shortage of liquidity has forced call money rates as high as 6.75 per cent
in recent weeks, and last week the Bundesbank badly misjudged the situation
in the market when it drained a net DM1.8bn on Wednesday but then had to
allocate DM7bn via a seven-day repo the morning after.
There are also hopes the Bundesbank will cut the discount rate by a
half-point, although a decision to keep this rate unchanged should not lead
to any great disappointment since the market would then look to April 28
with even greater confidence.
'The odds are 60-40 for a cut of 50 basis points in the discount and the
Lombard rates,' says Dr Helmut Kaiser, senior economist at Deutsche Bank in
Frankfurt. He adds that in the event of a cut, the Bundesbank could bring
the repo rate down to 5.50 per cent but then switch to a fixed-rate tender.
This would signal a shift in its recent policy of nudging down unofficial
rates by using variable rate tenders.
Traders expect the German yield curve to steepen as speculation mounts in
the run-up to Thursday. However, the market is likely to be kept guessing
until the moment the Bundesbank makes public its decision, because the repo
tender will not be held on Wednesday but one day later so that the
Bundesbank can offset the boost to liquidity as it transfers its 1993
profits, estimated at DM20bn, to the government. As a result, traders will
not have the usual 24 hours to consolidate their expectations either way.
In spite of the market's optimism, seasoned Bundesbank watchers believe that
the central bank will hold out until April 28, by which time it should have
more evidence of declining inflation in Germany and improving money supply
data.
'If we have a rate cut on Thursday it would be Kenneth Clarke style rather
than the more typical behaviour of the Bundesbank,' says Mr Julian Callow,
European economist at Kleinwort Benson in London. He adds that although the
Bundesbank has distanced itself from M3 in recent months, due to the wild
fluctuations in the numbers, the data are still too large to justify a cut.
In addition, several council members have been schooled in the M3 orthodoxy,
he says.
Ms Alison Cottrell, international economist at Midland Global Markets in
London, says that unless the D-Mark breaks new highs for the year this week,
optimists are likely to be disappointed.
She believes the Bundesbank will not even serve up a half-measure by cutting
the Lombard rate on its own, something which it has done just twice in the
past 10 years and during times of immense international pressure.
Such a move would reduce the status of the Lombard rate as an emergency
funding rate, she says. 'The Bundesbank does not want the Lombard rate to
become used often, it should be only for emergencies,' Ms Cottrell says.
In her view, the Bundesbank would prefer to take the pressure off call money
rates by allocating funds through an extra tender, at 6.15 per cent for
example. In addition, the Bundesbank's transfer of its 1993 profits would
make it difficult simultaneously to cut official rates.
Mr Callow notes that the Bundesbank has ample room to keep cutting the repo
rate by another quarter-point before it would need to cut the discount rate.
Analysts estimate that the Bundesbank would encounter technical difficulties
if the yield spread between the two rates went below 25 basis points.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940411

