FT944-14428

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: The serial killer as a symbol of success - The cult
of the anti-hero has come a long way since Chaucer's 'smyler with the knyf'


   By JOAN SMITH


What do the following authors have in common: Paul Theroux, William Trevor,
Brett Easton Ellis, Michael Dibdin, Peter Ackroyd, PD James, Thomas Harris,
Patricia D. Cornwell? The answer is that each of them has written one or
more novels featuring a serial killer.
It is a crowded but potentially lucrative field. Since the huge success of
The Silence of the Lambs, publishers and studio executives are on the
look-out for the next Thomas Harris. The American author Patricia Cornwell,
who has made serial killers her speciality, has set up her own film company
and is looking for an actress to play her pathologist heroine Dr Kay
Scarpetta.
Cornwell's novel Cruel and Unusual won last year's Gold Dagger, the top
award for crime fiction in Britain. Her first novel, Post-Mortem, won just
about every crime writing award in Britain and the US. Another Gold Dagger
winner, the English author Michael Dibdin, is writing a serial killer novel,
Dark Spectre, which is due to be published in Britain next spring.
The American writer Brett Easton Ellis received a critical drubbing in 1991
for American Psycho, in which a disaffected Wall Street whizz-kid fantasised
about a gruesome series of murders in New York. Unabashed, Ellis's new
novel, The Informers, rises to a crescendo of violence with a series of
vampiric killings in Los Angeles.
The American feminist historian Jane Caputi has called the 20th century 'the
age of sex crime'. It might seem that these authors are reflecting a natural
preoccupation with a brutal crime which was virtually unknown until the
closing decades of the Victorian era. Brett Easton Ellis would argue, I
suspect, that the crimes committed or contemplated by his characters
symbolise the moral bankruptcy of contemporary American society.
Patricia Cornwell identifies herself and her character, Dr Scarpetta, with
the forces of law and order, characterising serial killers as 'black holes
who (have) sucked light from the planet Earth'. Her new novel, The Body
Farm, is dedicated to the right-wing US senator Orrin Hatch 'for his
tireless fight against crime'.
The body farm is a real place, a research institute where corpses are
exposed to immersion in water or extreme temperatures to establish rates of
decay. Thomas Harris's novels are partly set at Quantico, the FBI academy in
West Virginia which almost no-one had heard of before it appeared in Red
Dragon and The Silence of the Lambs.
Harris's novels are scary, melodramatic, brilliantly-written, and in at
least one important respect deviate drastically from reality. His convicted
killer Hannibal Lecter has become a cult figure whose devious mind easily
outdistances anyone who tangles with him. Anthony Hopkins played him in
Jonathan Demme's film as a still, menacing presence who could see right into
the soul of Clarice Starling, the rookie FBI agent played by Jodie Foster.
Hopkins as Lecter has nothing in common with the grim police mugshots of
real-life serial killers: Albert DeSalvo, John Wayne Gacy, Peter Sutcliffe,
Colin Ireland, Sirhan Sirhan, Bobby Joe Long, Henry Lee Lucas. What tends to
characterise serial killers is a haunting and intolerable sense of their own
inadequacy - often, in the case of men who kill women, a fear of
vulnerability which they project onto the female body.
Killing strangers is, for this group, a survival mechanism. If they were as
glamorous and charismatic as Hannibal Lecter, they would not be serial
killers. By contrast, the serial killer in contemporary fiction is an
anti-hero for our times, incarnating powerful but seldom acknowledged
communal fantasies. At the simplest level, he fulfils a longing for
contemporary legends, for supernatural beings in an age in which magic and
religion have been debunked by science.
Patricia Cornwell's most recent novels have featured a serial killer called
Temple Brooks Gault. In Cruel and Unusual, Gault hacks into the FBI computer
and switches his own fingerprints with those of a murderer who has just gone
to the electric chair. A brilliant fictional device, it sets up Gault, like
Lecter, as an epic anti-hero, a master of disguise who escapes detection in
spite of the fact that 'his face smiled from the Ten Most Wanted lists
posted across the land'.
Gault and Lecter are dramatic representations of stranger-danger, the idea
of the unknown as simultaneously beguiling and threatening.
This notion can be traced all the way back to 'the smyler with the knyf' in
Chaucer's Knight's Tale; in the serial killer novel, the reader is allowed
vicarious contact with this thrilling, terrifying stranger in the knowledge
that he or she will come out of it alive. In this sense the novels offer a
frisson, cheap thrills, but there is more to them than that. Where violence
is concerned, Cornwell's books outdo everything except perhaps American
Psycho, offering graphic descriptions of crime scenes, wounds and
dissections. They offer a challenge to readers, a how-much-more-can-you-take
contest in which the answer, judging by Cornwell's huge sales, is anything
she chooses to present to them.
It might be assumed that nothing could portray the harsh reality of death
more vividly than these incarnadine novels, yet the cumulative effect is
precisely the opposite. The reader becomes habituated to the whirring of
cranial saws, to stomachs plopping onto dissection tables, to the tragedy
that lies behind each cadaver. This is a species of narrative in which the
corpse functions chiefly as clue: the plot, and the solution, are written on
the body.
In a telling exchange in Cruel and Unusual, Dr Scarpetta's female assistant
admits her fear that there is no afterlife. Scarpetta reassures her,
explaining that she draws her wisdom on the subject from dealing with
corpses: 'Something's gone. You look at their faces and you can tell. Their
energy has departed. The spirit didn't die. Just the body did'.
This unfamiliar vagueness from a character who is usually as sharp as a
scalpel is suggestive, a hint that in order to carry out her ghastly job Dr
Scarpetta (and perhaps her creator) has to indulge in an act of denial. It
also summarises the moral impact of the serial killer novel, which is to rob
death of its sting; no longer the end, it becomes merely the essential
opening gambit in an exhilarating fictional process.
The Body Farm is published by Little Brown (Pounds 14.99, 324 pages); Cruel
and Unusual by Warner Books, (Pounds 4.99, 437 pages). Dark Spectre will be
published by Faber & Faber in April. 1995 The Informers is published by
Picador, (Pounds 9.99, 226 pages).

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941022

