FT941-16946

FT  07 JAN 94 / Fax diplomacy breaks the impasse: Israel and PLO to resume
full negotiations in Taba next week


   By MARK NICHOLSON


   CAIRO


Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation yesterday ended more than a
week of stalled talks and fax diplomacy by agreeing to resume full
negotiations on Monday on an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho.
Israel set the stage for the resumption of stalled talks by announcing it
would release 101 Palestinian prisoners today as a goodwill gesture.
A joint PLO and Israeli announcement yesterday to meet again next week in
Taba, the Egyptian resort, breaks an impasse in the negotiations which
followed a row between PLO and Israeli officials over whether or not they
had reached a textual agreement of any kind during talks held last week in
Cairo.
The Cairo talks had been making progress before the row broke out. Only
after more than a week of public accusations and private fax exchanges have
both sides been able to agree that 'understandings' had been reached which
could provide the framework for the negotiations to resume.
Delegations from the two sides will now meet informally in Taba on Sunday
and will resume negotiations on the following day.
Mr Nabil Shaath, the chief Palestinian negotiator, said the delegations
would break into sub-groups, some of which would immediately begin drafting
parts of a final protocol on the Israeli withdrawal.
Mr Shaath said he believed final agreement on the withdrawal, which is
already weeks behind the December 13 deadline set in the PLO-Israeli accord
signed last year in Washington, could be achieved within two to three weeks.
'I'm optimistic that this is going to lead to the final stretch,' he said.
He added that he did not see the breakdown in talks as the result of 'bad
faith', but rather 'premature announcements' on the part of Israeli
officials.
'The crisis of the last week was not really about the substance of the
negotiations, but claims that there had been an agreement that was
violated.'
Central obstacles to a final agreement remain the control of border posts
into Gaza and Jericho, the delineation of Jericho itself, and security
arrangements at Israeli settlements.
However, Mr Shaath said in an interview that he believed differences had
already been significantly narrowed on the size of Jericho and security at
the settlements.
Israel 'had already indicated willingness' to release more imprisoned
Palestinians than the 600 they had already freed.
On the thorniest issue of border controls, Mr Shaath said there were
'important, creative options available' and that a solution would revolve
around the segregation of arrivals into the Palestinian enclaves by
nationality and types of travellers.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940107

