FT944-14606

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (21): Simplification
may not lift sales - Single Pricing / Investors are brighter than managers
think, says Damian Reece. The reason why they decide to buy units is fund
performance


   By DAMIAN REECE


Imagine the scene. The unit trust investor has chosen a fund out of the
1,500 on offer, and prepares to buy his units. These, he discovers, are
formed by the trust manager at the creation price, but sold at the offer
price to the public who can subsequently sell them at the bid price, which
might or might not be the cancellation price.
Confused? Certainly, the unit-trust industry believes investors are put off
by these seemingly complex pricing rules. Plans to introduce a system which
uses just one price for the benefit of customers, whether they are buying or
selling, are being developed by unit trust managers and the Securities and
Investment Board (SIB). A single price, the industry hopes, will make unit
trusts more accessible and attractive, with a resulting increase in sales.
But not everyone is convinced. It is quite possible that single pricing will
make little or no difference to the way investors perceive unit trusts. It
could even lead to some investors losing money.
Roger Cornick, marketing director of the Perpetual group, says: 'The drive
for single pricing is somewhat misplaced. The current dual-pricing system we
use now works perfectly well.' Although Cornick is broadly supportive of the
theory behind single pricing, he believes it poses problems in reality.
First of all, the hope that a single price will automatically make unit
trusts a more attractive proposition is somewhat flawed. In general, the
price investors pay for their units is not relevant when they decide to
invest. People buy unit trusts for the potential performance a fund manager
can deliver.
Unit-trust buying habits closely track the ups and downs of the stock
market. Having a bid and offer price (a sell and a buy price in layman's
terms) has never stopped people buying unit trusts when they think the
market is going to perform well.
Nor are unit trusts price-sensitive. Notions of a unit being expensive or
cheap do not apply as they do with company shares, for example. Whether you
buy one unit for Pounds 1 or two for 50p each, you are investing the same
amount in each case. A fund manager can create as many units as he wishes,
so there are no demand or supply constraints affecting the price.
David Graham, head of marketing at Scottish Widows group, says: 'Single
pricing has been blown up out of all proportion. The majority of investors
are not interested in the difference between dual and single pricing.' In
fact, there are some quite real disadvantages for investors from single
pricing. It is SIB's determination not to allow these to creep into the
system which has caused the single-pricing debate to drag on for years.
The great advantage of the current system is that it is scrupulously fair
and, save for some irritating jargon which could easily be changed, quite
straight forward. Units are created at creation price and cancelled at the
cancellation price. The difference between the two is known as the spread,
which can sometimes be as much as 12 or 13 per cent. Because this spread is
so unattractive, fund managers take a commercial decision to narrow the
spread to 5 or 6 per cent, and they publish the result in the form of two
prices: one is the price investors buy at (called the 'offer'); the other is
the sell price ('bid'). If you were to buy units and then immediately sell
them back to the manager, you would lose 5 or 6 per cent straight away,
depending on how wide the bid-offer spread was.
The spread exists because most of the investments made by a unit trust fund
manager are in securities which have a bid and offer price themselves, such
as company shares. It also covers the fund manager's initial costs of sales
and marketing.
These two prices work on exactly the same principle that holidaymakers
witness when buying foreign currency. But according to popular belief in the
unit trust industry, most investors don't understand this concept with all
its alien terminology.
Single pricing will appear to get rid of the buy and sell prices and the
spread between them, and replace them with just one price. How that price is
calculated is the issue being so hotly debated. There are numerous answers,
with such unlikely names as 'swinging single pricing', or even
'semi-swinging single pricing'.
The most simple single-pricing method involves calculating a price mid-way
between the bid and offer price and quoting this to all investors, plus a
separate disclosure of the company's initial charge. The problem with this
is that people buying into the unit trust will pay too little as the
mid-market price would be below the real offer price, and people selling
units would get too much. Continuing unit-holders would therefore see the
value of their holding diluted.
An answer to this could be to allow the single price to swing toward the bid
price if there were more sellers than buyers, and toward the offer price if
there were more buyers than sellers. An alternative, being considered by
SIB, returns to the simple fixed single price struck half-way between bid
and offer. But in addition there would be a separate charge levied on
outgoing investors to compensate for any dilution.
One last complication is the arrival of open-ended investment companies
(OEICs). These will be available from next year and are expected to
supersede unit trusts as the main form of collective investment scheme. The
Treasury wants to introduce them with a single price attached. No one is
sure whether the system eventually chosen for OEICs will be mandatory for
unit trusts, or if the latter would be allowed to follow an independent
course - a prospect which really does allow for some mind-boggling
complications and mix-ups.
Ultimately, single pricing of whatever colour will make little difference to
the real reason why people invest in unit trusts - fund performance.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

941021

