FT944-11154

FT  08 NOV 94 / Republicans eye Senate win


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton yesterday spent the final 24 hours of a bruising
mid-term election campaign issuing dire warnings about the consequences of
the Republicans gaining control of Congress.
'Why,' he said in Minneapolis, 'would we want to give Congress to people who
want to take us back to what almost wrecked us in the 1980s?' Republican
campaigns were based on 'malice and cynicism - our least charitable
impulses, our lowest common denominator,' he said.
However, most of the opinion polls and much of the political comment ahead
of today's polls suggest that the Republicans stand on the cusp of wresting
back control of the Senate, which they last commanded in 1986. Even the
House of Representatives could fall to Republican control for the first time
in 40 years. Democrats also expect to lose several of the 22 governorships
they are defending out of 36 decided today.
The two Republican leaders, Senator Bob Dole and Congressman Newt Gingrich,
both forecast in the last 24 hours that the party would finish in the
majority in both chambers. Mr Gingrich put the likely Republican gain in the
House, where a 40-seat net gain would make him the next Speaker, at anything
between 30 and 75 seats, adding 'you really have to squeeze to get below
35.'
A New York Times analysis yesterday identified 124 seats as very competitive
in the 435-member House. Of these, 89 were being defended by Democrats and
only 34 by Republicans, with the lone independent Congressman, Mr Bernie
Sanders of Vermont, under threat from a Republican.
Mr Clinton spent his final hours of campaigning in three states where
Democratic Senate candidates are given a chance of winning today. He started
in Minnesota, where Ms Ann Wynia is running even with Republican Rod Grams
for the seat being vacated by Republican Senator David Durenburger.
He moved on to Michigan, where Congressman Bob Carr, the Democrat, appears
behind Mr Spence Abraham in the race to succeed the retiring Senator Don
Riegle, the Democrat. Last stop was in Delaware, where Mr Charles Oberly,
the Democratc state attorney general, is trying to unseat Senator William
Roth.
Mr Clinton's campaign attacks on the Republicans were preceded by a less
confrontational television interview on Sunday. Though he predicted his
party would retain control of Congress, he said that win or lose he was
ready to work with Republicans if they were sincere about bi-partisan
co-operation.
Some scattered late opinion polls polls gave individual Democrats reason to
hope. In New York, Governor Mario Cuomo was leading Republican Mr George
Pataki by 50-37 per cent in one survey, but by only 44-40 per cent in
another.
In Virginia, the weekend Richmond Times-Despatch poll gave Senator Charles
Robb, the Democrat, 39 per cent to 31 per cent for Republican challenger Mr
Oliver North and 12 per cent for Mr Marshall Coleman, the independent.
Other surveys have given the Senator an infinitesimal lead and Mr North,
dismissing any suggestion he might lose, predicted he would triumph by 3
points or more on the basis of his private polls.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941108

