FT942-14893

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (17): Biggest is not
always best - Test Drive Review of the 1994 offerings for Fleet Purchasers /
Stuart Marshall finds little to choose between the best new medium size
models and says they are challenging big executive cars for heavy business
use


   By STUART MARSHALL


Look at the models now available and a message comes through loud and clear
 -the business driver looking for comfortable, reliable and mile-eating
personal transport no longer needs a big executive car.
Having driven all of the latest crop of medium-sized cars on offer to fleet
buyers or user-choosers, I reckon they are the equal of vehicles the next
size up in everything but bulk.
Prominent among these comprehensively equipped and moderately priced cars
are the Audi 80, BMW 3-Series, Citroen Xantia, Ford Mondeo, Honda Accord,
Mazda 626 and Xedos 6, Mercedes-Benz C-180, Mitsubishi Galant, Nissan
Primera, Peugeot 405, Renault Laguna, Rover 600, Saab 900, Toyota Carina E,
Vauxhall Cavalier, Volkswagen Passat and Volvo 850 SE 2.0.
And which are the pick of this very extensive list? That's hard to say
because, by any sensible standard, they are all very good cars indeed.
The BMW 3-Series and Mercedes-Benz C-180 are the only ones conforming with
what was once the classic concept of in-line engine and rear-wheel drive.
All but one of the others have front-wheel drive and transversely mounted
four-cylinder engines. The sole exception is the five-cylinder Volvo.
In the Audi 80, Ford Mondeo, Renault Laguna, Saab 900, Vauxhall Cavalier and
VW Passat, there is a V6 option for those who feel happy with a medium-sized
car only if it has a multi-cylinder engine of at least 2.5-litres capacity.
Comparisons really come down to a matter of personal whim.
For example, any of the cars will amble along at speeds far in excess of the
British motorway speed limit of 70mph (112 kmh), which the Department of
Transport admits is broken by 56 per cent of drivers.
At 100mph (161 kmh) they still have power in hand - although increasingly
tough police action against speeding makes this an academic matter.
All are power-steered as standard. Most have ABS brakes, driver and, in some
cases, front passenger airbags and doors reinforced against side intrusion.
Automatic transmission is universally offered as an option. Air-conditioning
is part of the package with some upmarket versions of these cars, such as
the Renault Laguna, and can be had as an extra on any of them.
Only the Saab 900 and Volvo 850 are exclusively petrol-engined. For my
taste, the car with the best ride, and which at its price is the best
turbo-diesel, is the Citroen Xantia. I also rate its spaciousness for rear
passengers highly.
The Rover 600 has a more distinguished interior than its cheaper mechanical
clone, the Honda Accord. Mondeo is Ford's best car for years  - the least
expensive 1.6-litre is more refined than the 2.0-litre and I find the estate
car body more attractive than the saloon or hatchback.
Though built on a Vauxhall (Opel) Calibra platform, the new 900 is a
genuine, dyed-in-the-wool Saab. The Renault Laguna, newly arrived in
Britain, feels like a scaled-down Safrane.
Some of the C-Class Mercedes-Benz interiors are not to my taste but in every
other way the new car is an improvement on that benchmark among compact
business cars - the former 190E. Its ultra-smooth, four valves per cylinder
diesel versions are stayers, not sprinters.
For sheer get-up-and-go, the BMW 325TDs is unrivalled among diesels but it
sells for Pounds 6,000 more than the most upmarket Xantia VSX. Among larger
business cars, the latest, more firmly sprung Jaguars seem to have gained in
agility while being as refined as ever.
Equally appealing are the 3.0-litre and 4.0-litre V8-engined BMW 530 and
540. So, for that matter, are the sepulchrally silent Mazda Xedos 9 and the
sportier Toyota Lexus GS300.
The Ford Granada/Scorpio and Rover 800 are beginning to show their age but
the top models in particular are still agreeable to drive. The new Vauxhall
(Opel) Omega replacements for the Vauxhall Carlton and Senator go well
enough to win business away from Granada/Scorpio.
Whether these excellent new cars will be able to seduce status-conscious
user-choosers out of their BMW 5-Series and Mercedes E-Class remains to be
seen.
At the bottom of the market the small-is-beautiful, or
smaller-is-acceptable, rule can also be applied.
Ford's latest Fiestas are vastly improved and now have optional ABS brakes
and power-steering.
The even more compact Peugeot 106 range, with much admired refinement and
handling, is soon to be expanded by the 1.6-litre engined, power-steered
luxury Gentry and sporty XSi versions.
I rate the Escort/Astra sized Peugeot 306 and mechanically similar Citroen
ZX highly. And Fiat's new Punto is good enough to set a cat among the
pigeons in the sub-Ford Escort size class.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940418

