FT941-4133

FT  12 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Building a closer customer relationship -
How Girobank is changing the face of the Alliance & Leicester


   By ALISON SMITH


Given the slightly cosy and domestic image of building societies, it seems
appropriate that one society chief executive should try to explain the
relationship between Alliance & Leicester, the UK's fourth largest society,
and its Girobank subsidiary, in familial terms.
'It's like having a teenage child living at home and bringing in a large
slice of the family income, but having no say in the decisions,' he says.
The slice of income brought in by Girobank has been impressive. In 1993, it
amounted to Pounds 75m of A&L's Pounds 205m pre-tax profits, while the
previous year it contributed just over half of the pre-tax profits of Pounds
122.5m.
Indeed, the contribution goes beyond the obvious pre-tax profits, since
Girobank also pays dividends into the main group accounts.
In 1992, it accounted for most of the Pounds 37.5m income from shares in
subsidiaries which was attributed to the society. In 1991, it contributed
almost Pounds 30m in a similar form. These were substantial amounts,
particularly in 1991 when the society was suffering heavy losses on its
commercial lending.
The purchase of Girobank from the Post Office in 1990 for Pounds 112m thus
looks like a bargain in more ways than one.
'We bought Girobank because we felt we needed a current account,' says Mr
Peter White, now group chief executive. 'It was a question then of getting a
long-term strategy for where we wanted to be in retail financial services.
Having bought Girobank, we were much more relationship-driven.'
In bringing to the fore this greater emphasis on relationship with the
customer rather than on product, the link with Girobank was one of the
driving forces behind the group's strategic review.
The strategy, based on advice from Gemini consultants, was agreed by the A&L
board in April last year, and the process of implementation has continued
since - though there is still some way to go.
The first change most customers are likely to notice will be in May, when
Girobank's 1.4m personal customers are moved into A&L, though they will
still be able to use post office facilities and telephone banking services.
Soon after that, a new current account - the Alliance account - will be
launched, as a further stage in the integration process.
The move will roughly halve Girobank's balance sheet, as retail savings
worth about Pounds 1bn are transferred to A&L. This has the added benefit of
giving A&L extra liquidity which will stand it in good stead for the
recovery of the mortgage market.
It will also provide greatly enhanced opportunities for cross-selling
financial products to different groups of customers, as the overlap between
A&L and Girobank customers is relatively small.
Mr White sees this as one of the key tasks for the coming months: 'It will
take us another year to get complete cross-selling,' he says.
Girobank, itself, will be left with its fixed assets, a small amount of
commercial lending and its profitable money transmission operation.
Though Mr White insists that no decision has been taken, there must be a
question of how far the successful cash transmission business - high in
volume but low in margin - will belong in the future within an organisation
intended to focus on its relationship with personal customers.
Mr John Wriglesworth, societies' analyst at UBS, says that the remaining
parts of Girobank are now in a state when they could be packaged up: the
money transmission business could well fetch more than the whole
organisation cost A&L in 1990, he suggests.
The role of two other, minor, subsidiaries is easier to see in a
relationship-driven A&L. Both A&L personal finance, the unsecured loan
subsidiary, and A&L estate agency have a rationale within that concept, and
both are likely to be maintained as separate operations.
In the drive towards customer relationships and cross-selling, the greatest
question which A&L has yet to decide is its strategy for moving into
insurance and equity products. At present the society acts as a tied agent
for Scottish Amicable, a life insurance company.
'We'll know what we want to do within the year,' Mr White says. Unless A&L
is out of kilter with the trend elsewhere in the sector, the assumption must
be that it will probably set up its own life company in order to have
greater control of the products it sells.
Mr White argues that the amount of management time and effort devoted to the
review over the past couple of years has not really cost the society
anything as, in his words, 'there's been no mortgage market'.
The cost may have been, however, in terms of a delay in any ambitions in
converting the group into a plc. Two years ago the society was already being
tipped as likely to follow Abbey National which converted to plc status in
1989.
While those prospects were delayed because of the commercial lending losses,
Mr White's stance now is that there is nothing the society wants to do that
it cannot do while retaining its mutual status, given that the Building
Societies Commission, the statutory regulator, 'seems willing to be flexible
in its approach'.
His view may well change as competition increases further in both mortgage
and savings markets.
In those circumstances, A&L would not have the two or three years of good,
sustainable results behind it that any society would want as a basis for
conversion, and it may well be that the investment in the strategy will not
be reflected fully until the 1995 results.
At present it looks as though it will be worth the wait.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940312

