FT941-12867

FT  28 JAN 94 / Last chance to ensure S Africa right joins all-race
elections


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   PRETORIA


South Africa's future hung in the balance last night as negotiators from the
right-wing Freedom Alliance met the government and African National Congress
for talks. All three sides said these represented the last chance to ensure
the right wing joined in April's all-race elections.
On the eve of the meetings, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi indicated his
preference for boycotting the poll, though senior leaders in his Inkatha
Freedom Party argue for participation. The party's central committee
deferred the decision until this weekend's Inkatha party conference at the
KwaZulu capital, Ulundi, to be attended by some 8,000 delegates.
Chief Buthelezi told the central committee he did not expect talks to yield
the constitutional amendments Inkatha is demanding (changes which would give
greater powers to regional government); it would be morally wrong to contest
the elections under a flawed constitution. To do so would mean 'betraying
the sacred charge history has bestowed on me as a democrat and prime
minister of the Zulu kingdom'.
Powerful Inkatha leaders argued Inkatha would be destroyed if it boycotted
the poll; it could more effectively fight the constitution from within the
new parliament than from outside. Inkatha, which has no army (even the
KwaZulu government it controls has only a police force), would not be able
to put up effective armed resistance to the central government, with its
powerful armed forces, they argued.
Other Inkatha officials said the party should take part in elections, but
fail to take its seats in parliament to protest against the constitution.
The central committee decided to make no recommendation to the party
conference, which begins tomorrow. But Inkatha sources said this might
favour the position of Chief Buthelezi, because the conference will be
packed with rural delegates who traditionally obey their leader's
recommendations. Those Inkatha leaders who favour participation have less
backing within the conference.
Chief Buthelezi warned of violence if the current constitution is accepted:
'We will never have peace, stability and prosperity if we repeat the failure
of Russia and east Europe to recognise that centrist constitutions imposed
over a plural society ..can only give rise to disruption, violence and
finally civil war.'
Separate talks were being held last night on a homeland for right-wing
Afrikaners, recognition of the status of the Zulu king in the new
constitution, and general constitutional amendments to strengthen regional
government.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940128

