FT942-14907

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (9): Car versus cash -
trick or treat?


Under new tax rules nearly 60 per cent of UK executives would be better off
swapping their company cars for extra pay and a mileage allowance, according
to a survey by Stoy Benefit Consulting.
Almost one third would benefit by more than Pounds 750 a year, the company
concluded.
Stoy Benefit's survey, which was undertaken after the new tax regime was
announced last year, looked at 5,400 companies operating a total of 189,000
cars.
It claimed to be the largest ever undertaken in the business cars sector and
was particularly useful for fleet managers. This was because it based its
calculations about employee benefits on the premise that costs to the
company of a cash scheme should be the same as if company cars continued to
be provided.
However, the survey found that the other 43 per cent of executives would
benefit from keeping their cars - nearly one quarter of them to the tune of
Pounds 700 a year or more.
The conclusion, according to Stoy Benefit's managing director, Mr Brian
Friedman, had to be that, while the company car was no longer as tax
advantageous as it used to be, 'there are still many for whom it remains
so'. The government's policy towards taxing company cars 'may, therefore, be
said to have been effective in producing the much more balanced position
revealed by the survey', he added.
However, whether an individual is better off taking cash instead of a car
depends very much on personal circumstances and requires analysis of a
number of variables.
These could include the mix of business mileage to private mileage, the cost
of finance, interest foregone and the mileage rate for use of a private car
on business.
Several tax consultancies and accounting groups, such as Coopers and
Lybrand, KPMG Peat Marwick and BDO Binder Hamlyn, have developed complex
computer models to make these evaluations.
Given the correlation now existing between price and taxation levels,
companies should clearly encourage the type of employee reassesment which
might encourage staff to hold on to company cars, albeit cheaper ones.
This is because the lower the list price, the lower the company's own costs,
including the pro rata reduction of the 10.2 per cent National Insurance
Contributions the employer is obliged to pay on the employee's private
benefit of the car.
Another good reason for doing so, suggests remuneration and consultancy and
actuarial group Wyatt, is that many companies have little idea of the
daunting costs of running a private car.
When they make cash offers in compensation for a car they could be storing
up industrial relations problems for the future, once employees find out the
costs of providing their own cars even with company mileage allowances.
Most offers 'fall far short' of actual costs, according to Wyatt's annual
study of company cars and flexible benefits packages.
Also 'few employees have a clear idea how to calculate the true value of a
company car in their personal circumstances', the study, based on a survey
of 260 companies operating fleets ranging from a few dozen cars to several
thousand, concludes. It found that 69 per cent of organisations surveyed
were responding to taxation changes by reviewing their company car policies
with 28 per cent of the total offering a cash alternative to the car - more
than double the 1992 rate.
Popular methods for working out the cash benefit included ensuring that it
did not cost the company any more than the car or providing the notional
cost of contract hiring a car.
However, even in companies offering the cash alternative, the take-up rate
was found to be very low - no more than 10 per cent.
The Wyatt study concludes: 'Even given a more or less neutral cash
alternative offer, in the absence of a positive communication and selling
programme, few employees are likely to choose the cash alternative.
'And most employees (85 per cent of those surveyed) still want to retain
their company car fleet and, therefore, are not actively seeking to persuade
employers to give up their cars.'
There are other ways of minimising the tax burden.
One, in the short term at least, is for employees to keep their company cars
if becomes four years old in the current tax year.
As an example, the car might have had a Pounds 10,000 list price in 1990.
Under the new list price scheme, it would qualify for a one-third reduction
for tax assesment purposes.
Simply to replace that car with the same model, at a list price of around
Pounds 13,000, would virtually double the tax bill.
However, there is more to the car versus cash equation than money itself.
Many company car drivers tempted by the cash option are likely to be
dissuaded by the 'hassle' factor of running their own cars.
For most company car drivers, service or repair is simply a matter of
phoning for the car to be picked up and to be delivered back to their home
or company.
Most private motorists face the dreary business of delivering the car to a
garage, finding transport to work, making their own way back to the garage
and, possibly, a long wait for a potentially unexpectedly heavy bill.
There are no insurance premiums to worry about - no longer a minor issue as
a result of increased premiums thanks to soaring crime and accident rates.
Considerations like this perhaps help explain the cash take-up is so low
currently.
The finding is not Wyatt's alone. Monks Partnership, in its own annual
survey of companies' car policies, also found fewer than one in 10 drivers
taking it up.
The small take-up is in spite of a near-doubling in the percentage of
surveyed companies making the offer.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940418

