FT944-2963

FT  15 DEC 94 / Industrial tribunal reform aimed at reducing delays


   By RICHARD WOLFFE


Industrial tribunals will have the power to weed out weak cases under reform
proposals put forward by the government yesterday aimed at reducing tribunal
delays and raising standards.
The change is part of a package of proposals in a green paper which,
however, draws back from radical reform of the industrial tribunal system
despite calls from both employers and unions for a wholesale review. Both
have complained of delays and excessive legal interference.
The green paper concentrates on efficiency measures such as imposing time
limits on proceedings and deciding on written evidence where both parties
agree.
Controversial proposals to charge applicants fees to enter claims as a means
of discouraging weak claims have been rejected by the government.
The green paper says there should be special pre-hearings and cases could
also be dismissed during the course of proceedings.
It recommends all cases, other than those on unfair dismissal and
discrimination, should be heard by tribunal chairmen alone. Tribunals at
present have two lay members, in addition to the legally trained chairman,
representing the interests of employers and employees.
Industrial tribunals' caseloads rose by 150 per cent in the five years to
1993-94 to reach 73,000 cases. The administrative budget has increased by 75
per cent since 1988 to Pounds 26.6m this year.
The CBI said the document was timely and that there was room for improvement
in the existing service to all users. The Engineering Employers Federation
welcomed further proposals to promote voluntary binding settlements as an
alternative to a full tribunal hearing.
The Labour Party condemned the proposals as 'a sacker's charter' and Mr John
Monks, TUC general secretary, described the green paper as a 'missed
opportunity' to increase security at work and strengthen legal guarantees of
justice.
Streamlining reforms aim for tribunal efficiency, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941215

