FT942-15641

FT  14 APR 94 / Arts: Treacherous moral terrain - Cinema


   By RICHARD MCCLURE and NIGEL ANDREWS


Tom and Viv (15) Brian Gilbert
Widow's Peak (PG) John Irvin
Stalingrad (15) Joesph Vilsmaier
Fearless (15) Peter Weir
It is a shame that in Tom and Viv, which recounts TS Eliot's tortured
marriage to first wife Vivienne Haigh-Wood, the poetry does not extend to
the marketing campaign. 'For Better - For Worse. Forever,' simpers the
poster above a shot of Tom (Willem Dafoe) and Viv (Miranda Richardson)
canoodling in a punt. But this, we soon learn, is the kiss of betrayal. As
Eliot becomes famous, finds God and renounces the devil, he renounces his
wife too, discarding her like a first draft. It is a bit rich: Viv has
mopped his brow, rewritten his work and provided the title for 'The Waste
Land'. Less helpfully, however, she has trashed hotel rooms, embarrassed him
in public and drawn a knife on Virginia Woolf.
In Richardson's wild-eyed hand wringing performance, Viv's illness - a
hormonal imbalance which causes manic mood swings - is distressingly vivid,
though occasionally overblown. Dafoe exceeds expectations. His clipped,
repressed tones (Vincent Price meets Edward Fox) betray the bewilderment and
distaste of a man who can only communicate through his pen.
Adapted from Michael Hastings' stage play, these are complex, harrowing
emotions, handled for the most part without sentiment by director Brian
Gilbert. The finger is only pointed firmly at Eliot when Dafoe dons his
Crippen specs and, instead of his usual tactic of packing Viv off to the
sales, carts her off to the asylum. The final scenes fall foul of
bathchairs-on-the-lawn syndrome and some ropey symbolism, but does not
belittle the pain of what Viv calls 'a quarter of a century of
frightfulness'.
There is an immediate feeling of familiarity in the first scene of Widows'
Peak, as a vintage car zooms down a country lane, unsettling cap-wearing
cyclists. This hoary old device, also gainfully employed in Tom and Viv, is
a standard scene-setter for British period dramas. Having witnessed the
sepia-tinted landscape change gradually to colour, we fear the worst.
This comedy mystery is set in a 1920s Irish village, where widows are as
'plentiful as freckles on a redhead'. The indomitable Mrs Doyle Counihan
(Joan Plowright) has, inexplicably, taken impoverished spinster Miss O'Hare
(Mia Farrow) under her wing. Aha, the armchair psychiatrist exclaims. What
better way to get over her Manhattan marital misery than starring in a saga
of retribution and small-town female solidarity where a woman is not
complete until himself is six feet under? And, what is more, in a role
originally intended for Mia Farrow's mother, Maureen O'Sullivan. But,
thankfully, this is no Irish Steel Magnolias. The village is a hotbed of
tittle-tattle which erupts into no little malice. Farrow's passive persona
in Woody Allen films is pepped up by a spiteful tongue and a nice line in
anti-English vitriol. Soon, she is embroiled in a seething vendetta with
Edwina Broome (Natasha Richardson), who sets her coquettish sights on Mrs
Counihan's idle son, Godfrey (Adrian Dunbar, trying manfully to be boyish).
As insults are hurled and poison pen letters dispatched, John Irvin's
otherwise unremarkable direction makes good use of Farrow's curious mix of
innocence and obsession. Plowright holds proceedings together with
full-throated ease and there is a mischievous performance from Jim Broadbent
as Farrow's suitor.
The moral terrain is just as treacherous in Stalingrad, German director
Joseph Vilsmaier's account of the Nazis' siege which foundered amid the
frozen wilderness of the Russian winter. It is a brave film that seeks to
enlist sympathy for a batallion of stormtroopers as they set about the
locals in the name of the Fatherland.
While not an apologist, Vilsmaier is quick to draw the distinction between
the generally honourable foot soldiers ('I'm not a Nazi, Otto') and the
jack-booted sadists who command them. Betrayed by inept generals and
unfaithful wives, these men are decent sorts, albeit recruited from the
ranks of cinema's military stereotypes.
Flushed with success in Africa, the men are sent north to face slaughter at
the hands of the Red Army. Dreaming of the future as their train trundles
past innocuous fields towards an impending doom, there are already uneasy
parallels with the transportation of Jews to the death camps. Both fates,
the film suggests, are equally horrific.
Unflinching in its graphic condemnation of war, the film only loses its way
as the men lose theirs on the long march home. It is not helped by some
cheesy death scenes ('Mom, I'm sorry to leave you') and a mournful score -
all lone trumpets and soaring strings - which confuses perpetrator and
victim.
And when the closing creditsglumly inform us that only 6,000 Germans
returned from the campaign, it is difficult to suppress the blimpish
response: 'Well, you started it.'
Peter Weir's fascinating new film Fearless is about an air crash and its
effect on the lives and minds of two survivors, writes Nigel Andrews. The
movie's under-performance last year at the US box office is probably due to
its not being Airport '93.
First sin: the story begins after the crash, with the living emerging into
the smoking debris, crying out for lost loved ones. There are no scenes of
panic in the cabin, of flying food-trays or of Charlton Heston/Karen Black
wrestling with the controls. Second sin: the story then goes all
Antonioni-esque. The architect hero Max Klein ((Jeff Bridges) wanders the
landscape of his past life (wife Isabella Rossellini, children, colleagues),
sensing the new powers and 'freedoms' that his brush with death has brought.
Is he quite alive? Is he unknowingly dead? And the Hispanic girl he
befriends (Rosie Perez) who lost her baby in the crash - can he save her
from despair and misplaced guilt? Add a whole lot of Christ symbolism, from
Max's stigmata-like body wound to his very name (Max Klein - Big Little -
Father Son), and it is no wonder that popcorn-eating America fled screaming
towards Sylvester Stallone in Cliffhanger.
My advice: take a set of working brain cells and see. Occasionally the
high-symbolist seriousness becomes ponderous. But mostly, Weir's
allegorising is lightfooted and Rafael Yglesias's script, from his own
novel, is full of dark ingenuity and sly metaphysical jokes.
Peter Weir can be an maddening director. He has spent his career looping in
and out of his vocational forte - that eerie, playful pop-mysticism - like
an aeroplane receiving faulty messages from the tower. Now Picnic At Hanging
Rock and The Last Wave; now Green Card, Dead Poets Society . .
But Fearless is the real, daring thing. The screen and soundtrack shimmer
with animating uncertainty for two hours. Changing camera speeds are used to
conjure moments of scarce-perceptible slow motion; a pedestrian crossing
sign's red hand has a sudden other-worldly menace; the toys in a shopping
mall seem more 'real' than the ghostly Bridges and Perez; the babble of
voices at the crash site are interwoven with eerie cries and chitterings as
if from another planet. The style is fit to dazzle us and Bridges and Perez
keep a human pulse beating, like an ostinato, even when the style itself
threatens to overpower the drama.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940414

