FT941-3480

FT  16 MAR 94 / Management: Seven strategies to change your company - There
is more than one way to tackle organisational upheaval. Adrian Furnham
considers the options


   By ADRIAN FURNHAM


The trouble with the idea and practice of organisational change is that it
is both boring and anxiety provoking. The number of magazine and newspaper
articles, courses, memos and self-help books dealing with change is
overwhelming.
'Adapt or die; change or decay' is not a simple rallying cry for the senior
manager, it is a reality. But the question is how to bring about successful
change to maximise effectiveness and minimise pain.
Managers choose different strategies with varying consequences.
The fellowship strategy: This approach relies heavily on interpersonal
relations, using seminars, dinners and events to announce and discuss what
needs to be changed and how. People at all levels are listened to,
supposedly treated equally and conflicting opinions are expressed. This
'warm and fuzzy' approach emphasises personal commitment over ideas - the
change process may have serious problems getting going as a consequence.
Because this strategy is averse to conflict it can miss crucial issues and
even waste time. Many fellowship-types leave the organisation and can only
be replaced by those who have a need to belong.
The political strategy: Here the power structure is targeted by attempting
to influence the official and unofficial leaders. The strategy seeks to
identify and persuade those in the organisation who are most respected and
who have large constituencies. Political strategists flatter, bargain and
compromise to achieve their ends. But this de-stabilises the organisation
because of ongoing shifts in people's political stances. Maintaining
credibility can be difficult because the strategy is so obviously devious.
Getting people to show their true colours in this way is never simple.
The economic strategy: The cynical economist believes that money is the best
persuader. The person who controls the purse strings can buy or change
anything. Everybody has a price. This is the rational 'homo-economicus'
approach that assumes people act more or less logically but that their logic
is based on economic motives. But 'buying people off' can be costly and the
effects short-term. The strategy also ignores emotional issues and all
questions besides bottom-line profit.
The academic strategy: This approach assumes that if you present people with
enough information and the correct facts they will accept the need to
change. The academic strategist commissions studies and reports from
employees, experts and consultants. Although such strategists are happy to
share their findings it is difficult to mobilise energy and resources after
the analysis phase. Analysis paralysis often results because the study phase
lasts too long and the results and recommendations are frequently out of
date when they are published.
The engineering strategy: This is the technocratic approach that assumes
that if the physical nature of a job is changed, enough people will be
forced to change. The strong emphasis on the structural aspects of problems
leads to a sensitivity to the environment which is particularly helpful in
unstable situations. The concern over channels of communication can prompt
structural change, but fails to commit most people. Most people do not like
being treated as machines and hence do not feel committed. Such change can
also break up happy and efficient teams. The strategy is limited because
only high-level managers can really understand it, it is impersonal and it
ignores the question: What is in this for me?
The military strategy: This approach is reliant on brute force and sometimes
ignorance. It is at times used by the military and the police, students,
pressure groups and political parties. The emphasis is on learning to use
the weapons for the fight. Physical strength and agility are required and
following the plan is rewarded. But the change-enforcer cannot relax, in
case the imposed change disappears. Furthermore, force is met by force and
the result is ever-escalating violence.
The confrontational strategy: This high-risk strategy reckons that if you
can arouse and then mobilise anger in people to confront the problem, they
will change. Much depends on the strategists' ability to argue the points,
as well as being able to stir up anger without promoting violence. This
approach encourages people to confront problems they would prefer not to
address but tends to focus too much on the problem and not on the solution.
Anger and conflict tend to polarise people and can cause a backlash.
Few of these strategies occur in isolation. But they do have different basic
assumptions about who to influence, how to proceed and what to focus on.
Each tends to be effective at addressing certain change problems but very
bad at dealing with others. The political strategy has problems with
credibility; the economic approach with maintaining change, and the academic
with implementing findings. But for the professional who must demonstrate
his worth to the organisation by implementing change, any of the above might
help him.
The trouble is that strategies tend to be chosen by chief executives for
personal reasons rather than as a result of any well-considered set of
options. An inappropriate strategy may cause more trouble than the initial
reason for change.
The author is head of the business psychology unit at University College
London.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940316

