FT942-14431

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: GTE steals march on rival
telephone services


   By MARTIN DICKSON


   NEW YORK


GTE, the second largest cellular telephone operator in the US, said
yesterday it planned to launch a cut-price pocket telephone service later
this year.
The move should steal the march on rival personal communications services
(PCS), which are not due to be introduced in the US for at least two years.
The company, the biggest US local telephone company, confirmed that it
planned to launch its Telego service nationally.
It has been testing Telego for the past two years in Tampa, Florida, with
3,000 customers, in the largest test of consumer-oriented wireless services
in the US.
Telego will try to broaden the cellular customer base beyond the business
community by offering lower prices and a lightweight, versatile mobile
phone.
The GTE unit can be used inside the home as a limited-range cordless phone,
transmitting signals through a normal wire telephone line. Outside the home,
it automatically switches mode and becomes a cellular phone. However, it is
not designed for customers who want to 'roam', that is use their phones when
travelling long distances.
Customers in Tampa are being charged a fee of Dollars 25 a month, plus 25
cents for each minute of calls. This is much cheaper than cellular rates in
many cities.
GTE yesterday declined to say how much the service would cost when it was
launched nationally.
The service could pose a challenge to PCS, which also use small lightweight
phones, and should offer a much cheaper service than cellular.
However, the Federal Communications Commission, the government watchdog
overseeing the communications industries, has yet to fix a date for an
auction of PCS licences, and PCS services are unlikely to get off the ground
before 1996-1997.
Separately, GTE yesterday unveiled first-quarter net income of Dollars 504m,
or 52 cents a share, against Dollars 460m, or 48 cents, in the same period
last year.
Revenues and sales were Dollars 4.75bn, down from Dollars 4.83bn last year.
Last year's figure included Dollars 86m of revenues from properties which
have since been sold. Telephone access lines grew 4.3 per cent and
long-distance calling was up 6.6 per cent. The mobile-cellular business had
a 41 per cent jump in revenues.
Sprint, the long-distance and local telecommunications group, reported
first-quarter net income of Dollars 337m, or 65 cents, compared with a net
loss of Dollars 413m, or Dollars 1.21, in the same period of last year.
The 1994 figures were affected by a one-time gain of 6 cents a share and the
1993 figures by Dollars 1.66 a share of non-recurring special charges.
Excluding special items, income from continuing operations rose 33 per cent
to Dollars 205m, while revenues were up 12 per cent at Dollars 3.03bn, as
the company saw an 11 per cent rise in long-distance revenues and minutes of
use. Long-distance operating income rose 19 per cent to Dollars 143m.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940420

