FT943-755

FT  28 SEP 94 / Taiwan beats Beijing over Asian Games


   By LAURA TYSON


   TAIPEI


Taiwan yesterday won a marginal victory over Beijing in a fracas over
whether a Taiwanese official would be permitted to attend the Asian Games,
starting in Hiroshima on Sunday.
Beijing yesterday withdrew its threat to boycott the games, signalling an
end to the two-month row.
It had earlier warned of 'grave consequences' if Tokyo were to grant Mr Hsu
Li-teh, Taiwan's deputy premier, a visa to Japan.
The matter was apparently settled at a meeting between Japan's foreign
minister Yohei Kono and his Chinese counterpart, Mr Qian Qichen, in New York
on Monday.
Japan was put into an awkward position in late July when the Olympic Council
of Asia, organiser of the games, invited Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to
attend the opening ceremonies, apparently by dint of Taiwanese lobbying
efforts. Japan pressed the OCA into rescinding its invitation. Mr Hsu is to
take his place.
Observers said that while Taiwan's strategy was effective in eliciting
attention and sympathy among Japanese politicians and the general public, it
could backfire. Japan would henceforth be ultra-conservative in dealing with
Taiwan and other countries with substantial legislative and popular support
for Taiwan.
'Hsu Li-teh will go to Japan, but his activities will be severely restricted
to those relating to the Asian Games,' said Mr Lu Ya-li, a politics
professor at National Taiwan University. 'Japanese bureaucrats do not
appreciate having their hands forced by foreign governments'.
In recent weeks Taipei appears to have embarked on a marked departure from
its long-standing discreet approach to gaining international recognition,
observers said.
The new, more aggressive posture demonstrated in the Asian Games incident
has emanated directly from the Presidential Palace rather than from the
foreign ministry, and appears to be driven almost exclusively by domestic
politics, they added. Fearing the rising strength of the pro-independence
opposition, the ruling Kuomintang is desperate for a foreign relations
breakthrough ahead of key elections in early December.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940928

