FT941-5465

FT  07 MAR 94 / Germany's big guns pull back: Compromises that won a wage
deal and averted a strike in industry


   By QUENTIN PEEL


The first hint of a breakthrough in the hard-fought pay round for Germany's
3.6m engineering workers came in the early hours of Saturday morning, in the
unlikely surroundings of Hanover's city press club.
Five leaders of IG Metall, the mighty engineering workers' union, and six
from Gesamtmetall, the employers' federation, had been sitting around the
table since 6pm, looking for ways of heading off the first strike in west
German industry since 1984.
At the heart of the deal was a proposed trade-off between guarantees of job
security, and more flexible working hours. At 1am the negotiators broke to
report back for the second time to their national executive committees,
waiting patiently in nearby conference rooms.
'The whole package is back on the table,' one official whispered. 'It looks
as if they are getting somewhere.'
It took almost seven hours more, but at breakfast time the two sides were
able to announce, with visible relief, that a deal was done.
'We have been able to prove that national collective bargaining has a
future,' said Mr Hans-Joachim Gottschol, the tough-talking employers'
leader, whose determination to get real cost cuts for his members took the
pay round to the brink of collapse. 'We, as well as IG Metall, want to carry
on working with such national agreements.'
On the face of it, both sides had to give up a lot of their demands.
The employers wanted a 10 per cent cost cut. They served notice of
termination of the current agreement on holiday pay and conditions. They
wanted individual enterprises to have more freedom to do plant-level deals
on longer working hours.
The union wanted guarantees of job security, and preservation of real
incomes. The pay claim was for 5.5-6 per cent, and it wanted a new deal to
cut working hours as an alternative to redundancies in recession-hit
enterprises.
Neither side got what it wanted.
The pay deal this year amounts to an effective pay freeze: the 2 per cent
increase from June 1 - five months late - amounts to about 1.16 per cent
over the full year. But other fringe benefits have been reduced by 10 per
cent for the year, and then tied to the pre-June pay scales for 1995 and
1996. A 10 percentage point increase in Christmas pay has been postponed.
Holiday pay has been reinstated, but at the old rates.
Mr Gottschol says that means no overall increase in company wage bills. With
increased productivity, that does mean cost cuts - although scarcely of 10
per cent.
The union won a deal on shorter working hours for crisis-hit plants. But
only one option provides for guarantees of no redundancy.
According to that model, an entire company can opt for shorter working hours
 -say 30 hours a week instead of the current 36 hours - as an alternative to
job cuts, if it is facing a slump in demand. The workers will lose a full
six hours' pay, but they will not lose their jobs.
The alternative model agreed is for companies where only specific sections
are operating under capacity. Then shorter hours can be introduced where
needed, but the employees will not suffer a corresponding pay cut: they will
get partial compensation for loss of earnings, but there will be no formal
guarantee of no job cuts.
Where German employers are facing a temporary slump in demand because of the
recession, the models may prove attractive as an alternative to expensive
redundancy packages. But they do not answer the problems of those companies
losing export markets because of their high unit wage costs.
Mr Walter Riester, the deputy leader of IG Metall who negotiated the
package, said the deal amounted to a new option for flexibility in the
national wage contract for recession-hit companies.
It does not amount to the sort of flexibility many employers were seeking,
to shift the real focus of wage deals from the national to the plant level.
Indeed, it amounts in effect to a reprieve for national collective
bargaining at a moment when the system was under enormous pressure.
Mr Gottschol and Mr Klaus Zwickel, his IG Metall counterpart, were obviously
content. But the real test of the system will depend on whether the latest
package answers the real structural problems of the industry, and not just
the need for a temporary pay freeze.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940307

