FT944-2309

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: Slovnaft offering returns next
year


   By VINCENT BOLAND


   BRATISLAVA


Slovnaft, the Slovak petrochemical group that was forced to postpone a
planned Dollars 100m international share issue because of domestic political
instability and uncertainty on world stock markets, is to try again early
next year.
The offering, which will be the first such deal by a Slovak company, was
postponed in late November, but a senior official at Kidder Peabody, the US
investment bank leading the offering, said recently that it was scheduled to
be relaunched in the first quarter of 1995. 'We hope there will be a more
receptive market,' he said.
The offering is due to follow a rights issue of up to 3.3m shares to
existing Slovnaft shareholders. The state owns 80 per cent of the oil
refining and chemicals group, and the National Property Fund of Slovakia,
which administers state shareholdings, is believed to have indicated that it
will not take up its allotment.
This will allow those shares to be offered to foreign institutional
investors. The state's shareholding would then fall to about 65 per cent.
Other Slovnaft shareholders include Slovakia's large investment
privatisation funds.
There is still uncertainty as to the future of privatisation in Slovakia.
The new government headed by Mr Vladimir Meciar and appointed this week has
postponed a SKr60bn (Dollars 1.9bn) voucher privatisation programme in order
to remove electricity and gas distribution company shares from the sell-off.
Investment fund managers say this will reduce the size of the voucher
programme and dampen investor enthusiasm. The delay is expected to be for up
to three months. Since Slovnaft's decision to postpone the share issue its
supervisory board has been removed and replaced by allies of Mr Meciar.
Slovnaft's profits are expected to jump to SKr3bn this year compared with
SKr1.6bn in 1993.
Slovak survey, separate section

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941216

