FT944-5929

FT  01 DEC 94 / Letters to the Editor: Milk processors and farmers must
recognise mutual dependence


   From Mr NEIL DAVIDSON


Sir, Deborah Hargreaves's article, 'Competition likely to churn up and slim
down the dairy industry' (November 19), seems to suggest that high raw milk
prices will result in more added value products. This prognosis, we believe,
is wide of the mark.
With the exception of fresh liquid milk, all our dairy markets are exposed
to foreign competition. Our existing value-added dairy product manufacturers
have been among those hardest hit by the prices imposed by Milk Marque, with
increases typically in the 15 to 20 per cent range at a time when our
European competitors' prices have been falling. There is no overcapacity in
this sector, but there is a real danger of losing our existing value-added
markets to imports rather than seeing them develop. Who, in their right
mind, is going to invest in new capacity in the UK in this climate?
The article is dismissive of the cheddar cheese market, but is this
justifiable? Thirteen per cent of output goes into cheddar, which is a real
consumer market worth Pounds 600m per annum. Already, more than a third is
imported. Are we really saying that this large market should be abandoned to
imports altogether? Under the current pricing regime this will happen
because our manufacturers cannot compete on a 4 per cent gross margin.
There is a strong argument for seasonal cheddar production, taking advantage
of lower raw milk input costs from cheap grass feed rather than expensive
concentrates necessary for year-round production. This strategy is the basis
of the Irish industry, but throws up spurious capacity utilisations. Under
Milk Marque these cheaper input costs do not get passed on to the
manufacturer and then the consumer.
Further rationalisation of the industry is inevitable, but is a process that
has been ongoing for the past 10 years, driven mainly by the change in
distribution channel from doorstep to supermarket in liquid milk.
The fundamental Milk Marque issue remains - an uncontrolled monopoly in an
under-supplied market in which production is finite because of quotas.
Uniquely in Europe, the price UK farmers now receive is totally disconnected
from what markets will bear. High milk prices pose a threat to every dairy
market; investment is being strangled rather than stimulated.
Farmers need a healthy processing sector which can only be achieve if dairy
companies make profits to reinvest. Processors and farmers need to recognise
their mutual dependence and work together in partnership. Farmers' leaders
need to show real vision sooner rather than later.
Neil Davidson, president,
Dairy Industry Federation,
19 Cornwall Terrace,
London NW1 4QP

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941201

