FT943-13076

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: PM eschews glitz to maintain a balance


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Reshuffles are like Budgets. The more clever they look on the day the more
chance they will unravel once the novelty wears off. So perhaps Mr John
Major should be applauded for eschewing anything that might be termed glitz.
His midterm shake-up did include one significant gamble - the elevation of
the untested Mr Jeremy Hanley to the party chairmanship. Mr Major was tough
enough to sack Mr John Patten from the education department and to let go
three other cabinet ministers.
He took also the longstanding advice of friends and replaced Mr Graham
Bright as his parliamentary private secretary with the non-descript but safe
Mr John Ward.
But overall it was a play-it-safe reshuffle rather than a dramatic
restructuring of the team that will face the Labour party in the second half
of the present parliament.
It left the clear impression that Mr Major has given himself room for
another, albeit smaller, shake-up before the general election due by
mid-1997. Mr Malcolm Rifkind, who stays for now at defence, looks like a
foreign-secretary-in-waiting.
An extensive series of dismissals and promotions at the level of minister of
state and below is designed also to prepare a number of up-and-coming
ministers for eventual promotion to the cabinet.
On one level the prime minister's hands were tied. Mr Kenneth Clarke was
never likely to move from the Treasury. Mr Douglas Hurd, a pillar of
stability in the cabinet, was needed at the Foreign Office for at least
another year to prepare the ground for the European Union's
intergovernmental conference.
Moving Mr Michael Howard from the Home Office or Mr Michael Heseltine from
the Department of Trade and Industry would have created too many waves.
But even within those constraints Mr Major once again preferred careful
calculation over political showmanship. The various moves were all designed
to preserve a careful political balance.
Overall, Tory MPs detected a slight shift to the right - but not by anything
like enough to persuade them the recent rightwards shift in his rhetoric
signalled that Mr Major had truly become 'one of us'.
Thus Mr Michael Portillo's promotion to employment. The right was assured
that their standard-bearer would retain an influence on economic policy. Mr
Portillo will work closely with Mr Peter Lilley, his Thatcherite ally at
social security, to introduce the tough new Jobseekers' allowance for the
unemployed. He will be ideally placed also to indulge his distaste for
Brussels by opposing further social legislation.
On the other hand employment is the most junior of the economic posts: the
centre-left will be told Mr Portillo can be reined in when necessary by Mr
Clarke and Mr Heseltine.
Mr Jonathan Aitken's move into the chief secretary's slot bore the same
hallmark. Meanwhile Mr Stephen Dorrell, the darling of the One-Nation left,
won his much-deserved elevation to the cabinet. But his new position is
sufficiently uncontroversial not to enrage the right.
Other moves have a wider political objective. Mrs Gillian Shephard's
promotion to education is designed to restore some common sense to the
government's approach. After six years of upheaval the promise now is of
consolidation and bridge-building with teachers and local authorities. Mrs
Shephard would not claim to be a great innovator but her experience as a
teacher and education officer has left her far more in touch with the
concerns of parents than her predecessor.
Elsewhere Mr Major rewarded competence. Mr William Waldegrave's move to
agriculture was widely regarded as a good decision. As was the choice of Sir
George Young as financial secretary to the Treasury, the post generally seen
as a waiting room for the cabinet. Mr Brian Mawhinney's promotion to
transport was appropriate for his hard work and loyalty.
Mr Hanley's appointment was the main puzzle. In one respect it reflects the
influence of Mr Chris Patten, now governor of Hong Kong and party chairman
at the last election. Mr Hanley was his protege. The new chairman is
energetic and enthusiastic. But his presentational skills and cheerful
disposition are not matched by hard experience.
The new top-heavy structure at the top of Central Office bears the mark of
indecision. It carries within it the seeds of future confusion and conflict.
Mr Hanley will be backed up by Mr David Hunt, whose sideways move to take
charge of public services and the Citizen's Charter is more than it seems.
Mr Hunt will take the chairmanship of a number of cabinet committees and act
as a ministerial troubleshooter on Mr Major's behalf. He will be expected to
give a new political edge to policy-making by reconnecting Whitehall and
Central Office.
The message from 10 Downing Street last night was that the reshuffle must be
seen as a package: that taken together the changes might not be flashy but
would stand the test of time. Not everyone at Westminster was quite so sure.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

