FT941-4052

FT  12 MAR 94 / Food and Drink: Playing truant in Venice - Giles MacDonogh
receives magisterial tuition at the Gritti Palace hotel / Cookery Courses


   By GILES MACDONOGH


In my experience cookery schools fall into two categories: the magisterial
and the experimental. In the magisterial school you listen and take notes;
in the experimental you prepare dishes under the supervision of a chef.
To some extent the form the course takes appears to be dictated by the
dominant pedagogical ideas of the country in question; so it is that France
and Italy are magisterial because that is how their schools work, while in
northern Europe there is a tendency to let pupils discover things for
themselves.
The best courses combine the two systems. Personally I prefer more weight to
be given to the experimental side.
I also like the teaching to be based on instilling principles rather than
individual recipes. If a course succeeds only in teaching a clutch of
recipes it is a little like trying to learn a language from a phrase-book.
What a cook requires is a structural foundation which can be adapted to a
wider spectrum of uses.
The cookery school at the Gritti Palace hotel, in Venice, has been going for
the best part of two decades now. The courses take up five weeks of the
year, and each of these examines a particular theme: the Veneto region;
fresh herbs; Mediterranean cooking; autumnal cooking; and cooking for
special occasions.
The classes take place in the Gritti Palace, a former ducal residence which
has been the city's most luxurious hotel for a century or so.
The courses, taught by the Gritti's Friuli-born chef, Celestino Giacomello,
are in the purest magisterial school. A maximum of 20 pupils gather in front
of the chef and his assistant while he cooks. About half the pupils were
Italians, for the rest a simultaneous translation was given in American
English.
On my course last year all the pupils were serious, grown-up people with a
confirmed passion for food.
They included a German 'hobby cook'; a Hungarian woman married to an
American and living in Padua; a Japanese would-be pastry-chef; the wife of a
New York food broker; an elderly Russian aristocrat who lived nearby on the
Grand Canal; the above-mentioned Italians; and a clutch of Swedes, including
an eminent doctor-cum-biochemist whose insight into the biochemical and
nutritional aspects of what we were eating was a course in itself.
Our theme was herbs, or as our interpreter would say: 'urbs'.
In the course of the week we learned recipes involving chervil, wild celery,
citron (which is really a fruit), red and green chives, tarragon, oregano,
dill coriander (which Giacomello thought an aphrodisiac) rhubarb (the juice
of which was blended with parmigiano reggiano cheese to make a crust for
gnocchi) root and leaves of horseradish, majoram (Giacomello: the queen of
herbs), nettles (which the chef used to make a rich veloute, a world away
from the soup beloved of Irish peasants), mint, artichoke stems, hyssop,
melissa and fresh angelica leaves.
Every day for five days the chef prepared a three-course meal with a side
dish. This was served up as our lunch.
In the afternoon further courses examined the growing of herbs; table arts
and Venetian glass; flower arranging; and a tour of 'unknown' Venice.
I played truant after lunch, preferring to pound the marble pavements on my
own. It seemed to me that the afternoon classes would be better arranged at
6pm, when the lovely light had begun to fade.
I was disappointed that we did not have a chance to practise any of these
recipes. The one opportunity for audience participation came with the
forming of the potato gnocchi, for those who had been seduced by the,
frankly, American concept of the Mediterranean diet.
Giacomello's cooking used too much cream, butter and sugar. This worried me
less: only the poorest parts of Italy eat the Mediterranean diet, and only
the poorest people in them.
The rich citizens of Puglia cram as much butter, cream and sugar into their
gullets as they can.
I was sadder that the cooking was not sufficiently Venetian, but one of the
courses at least, does provide an introduction to the local food.
There was one important positive factor which should not be understated: the
chance to stay in an enchanting hotel in the most beautiful city in Europe.
The week long course at the Gritti Palace Hotel costs L600,000 (Pounds 240)
per person. Participants may stay in the hotel for five nights for L1.025m
per person for a double room, and L1.5m for a single. Tel: 010 39 41 79 46
11.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940312

