FT942-14943

FT  18 APR 94 / The Markets: Harnessing brainpower to the demands of the
market - Economics Notebook


   By PETER NORMAN


It is becoming a cliche that the most successful economies of tomorrow will
be those which can best harness their brainpower to generate economic
growth.
With the global economy being transformed by revolutionary changes in
information and communications technologies and rapid progress in
biotechnology, advanced automation and the development of new materials, it
comes as no surprise that governments are taking a greater interest in
research and development.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, in its most
recent annual review of its members' industrial policies, reported that many
advanced industrialised nations have 'placed renewed emphasis on the
research and new product end of intangible investment' with the aim of
expanding high-skilled job opportunities and economic growth.
In his February budget, Mr Paul Martin, the Canadian finance minister,
announced a shake-up in research and development spending as a first step to
creating a new national science and technology strategy. Australia, for many
years a laggard in terms of research spending, has managed to generate rapid
growth of business sector R&D through a special tax concession that was
introduced in 1985 and confirmed in August 1992. In the US, according to the
OECD, industrial policy is being focused to a large extent on the structure
and quality of research and development and how it can be harnessed for
civilian uses.
However, while it may seem obvious that technical progress should result in
economic growth, it is not so clear from an economist's point of view. World
Bank studies of east Asia have stressed the importance of other factors such
as good basic education, flexible labour markets and government policies to
encourage savings and infrastructure investment as ingredients in the rapid
and sustained growth of countries in the region.
Technological progress was important but this took the form of the
absorption and improvement of foreign knowledge rather than home grown
research and development. Perhaps for this reason, the east Asian 'tiger'
economies of Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan appear fairly low down the
international league table for scientists and engineers engaged in R&D, as
shown in the accompanying illustration.
At the other extreme is Israel, which, in spite of being outside the OECD
group of advanced industrial countries, has nearly twice as many people
working on research and development per 10,000 of the labour force as the US
or Japan. According to Israeli government figures, the country spends 3 per
cent of its gross domestic product on research and development, which is
more than the US or any of the other Group of Seven leading industrial
countries.
To be sure, Israel is a special case. The country had to invest heavily in
military R&D in the 1960s and 1970s to ensure its survival. On those
foundations, it has developed a science-intensive industry that is
especially geared to competing in export markets.
Government involvement has been considerable since 1985, when a law was
passed to encourage industrial R&D. A government department - the Office of
the Chief Scientist - disburses grants ranging from 20 to 66 per cent of
approved R&D expenditures. Its annual budget doubled to Dollars 230m between
1990 and 1993, and spending is due to increase by a further 30 per cent this
year.
The arrival since 1989 of 550,000 immigrants from the former Soviet Union
has triggered a further official boost to research and development. More
than a quarter of the new arrivals between 1990 and 1992 were scientists and
technologists. To give these people useful employment, the government is
supporting a network of technological 'incubators' in which fledgling R&D
companies are 'adopted' and given logistical and administrative support by
established institutions such as universities or research centres.
The state typically provides each project with about Dollars 100,000 a year
for two years to cover the start up period when risks are very high. The
incubators have more than 200 projects in hand. These employ more than 1,000
scientists and engineers of whom almost 80 per cent are new immigrants.
It is doubtful whether the Israeli system, with its special history, should
be seen as a model for other countries. But it has achieved results. The
Chief Scientist's income from royalties from commercially successful
innovations is rising steadily: from Dollars 14m in 1990 to Dollars 32m last
year. According to government figures, Dollars 4.5bn of a total of Dollars
8.8bn of manufactured exports in 1992 were products that had their origin in
the country's R&D effort.
However, a successful research-based international trade performance depends
on more than the amount of R&D spending. Research has to be geared to the
demands of the market, a point that is underscored by Canada's proposed
refocusing of R&D spending and its planned withdrawal from such prestige
projects as a particle accelerator and international space station.
The ability to turn research-based products into manufactured goods is
vital. The ability to mobilise capital from domestic and international
sources to develop products is equally important. Marketing cannot be
ignored.
The Israeli experience, however, seems to back up the OECD's argument that
'expenditure on physical investment and on research and development in the
business enterprise sector plays a crucial role in determining the relative
competitiveness of countries in the medium and the long term'.
In that case, the chart - showing how business sector R&D in the
industrialised world has slowed - should give policy makers pause for
thought. If, as the OECD maintains, there is now a renewed interest in R&D
among its member countries, it is not before time.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940418

