FT941-4252

FT  11 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chile's troubled copper giant
faces long haul back to health - David Pilling reports on the catalogue of
problems facing Juan Villarzu, Codelco's new president


   By DAVID PILLING


There cannot be many Chileans who envy Mr his new job. As president of
Codelco Mr Villarzu will from today be expected to grapple with one of the
nation's most contentious issues, the modernisation of the world's largest
copper company.
As if this were not enough, Mr Villarzu is joining a state-owned company
still reverberating from the after-shocks of a futures scandal that caused
losses of at least Dollars 206m - 0.5 per cent of Chile's GDP. Those
rumblings, which have already claimed the jobs of eight executives, threaten
to continue for months, or even years, to come.
There are already suggestions that public condemnation of Codelco's
management team, considered arrogant and unaccountable, might hamper Mr
Villarzu's room for manoeuvre. 'To solve its problems, what Codelco needs is
an aggressive management not a conservative, cautious one,' says a former
company executive. 'But if you are being attacked by everyone all the time
no one will be able to move.'
On the other hand, the futures scandal has provided ample ammunition for
those seeking drastic reform - even privatisation - of what they regard as a
state dinosaur. In a report entitled 'Codelco: The Errors of a Giant', the
right-wing Liberty Institute argues that lack of control over futures
trading was symptomatic of Codelco's unwieldy structure.
Even before the futures fiasco, the incoming administration of
president-elect Eduardo Frei had committed itself to decentralisation and
the creation of a holding company. Last month, Mr Villarzu scrapped the
vice-presidency responsible for mediation between the Santiago headquarters
and its six divisions. He ordered the establishment of divisional
'administrative councils' to 'strengthen decision-making at that level'.
The role of Codelco's politically appointed board - apparently so far
removed from day-to-day decisions that it was unaware of the company's
speculative activities - is also to be examined. Pending too is the issue of
Codelco's contribution to the armed forces, which creams off 10 per cent of
returns from copper sales.
Modernisation is necessary, Mr Villarzu says, because 'costs have been going
up systematically for many years'. During 17 years of military government
Codelco did not develop a single new deposit, the life-blood of any mining
company.
Although Codelco, which produces 12 per cent of the world's copper, provides
Chile with a fifth of its foreign exchange earnings, its importance to the
domestic economy has diminished. Falling ore grades, rising costs and an
appreciating peso have chipped away at the company's treasury contribution.
Although annual production has remained at about 1.2m tonnes, transfers to
the state shrank from Dollars 1.96bn in 1989 to Dollars 891m in 1992. In
1994, that figure could dwindle to just Dollars 30m, according to Mr Jose
Pablo Arellano, budget minister.
To stop the rot, Codelco desperately needs to add a high-grade, low-cost
mine to its ageing quartet. Mr Villarzu has, however, rejected suggestions
that a law permitting joint-ventures with the private sector should be
extended to the development of so-called replacement deposits. 'We don't see
the necessity of insisting on this. . . We believe Codelco can exploit such
reserves on its own,' he says.
But it is unclear where the money for this will come from. Any hope that the
finance ministry, which sets Codelco's investment budget, will provide the
estimated Dollars 400m for Radomiro Tomic (a deposit with annual production
potential of 150,000 tonnes) have been severely dented. The government,
which is committed to social spending, may find it politically untenable to
divert precious resources to a state company that has just gambled away
millions of dollars of taxpayers' money.
Neither does the joint-venture alternative now look so unequivocally
attractive. The great fanfare over the commitment of Cyprus Amax/Lac
Minerals to pay Dollars 555m for a 51 per cent stake of the El Abra deposit
has died down following serious delays to contract signing.
Mr Villarzu may have to seek alternative solutions. Much discussed has been
the possibility of selling Codelco's non-core activities, such as the
Rancagua workshop or the 530MW thermo-electric power station at Tocapilla,
believed to be worth Dollars 600m.
Another idea - not included in recent capital markets legislation - is to
allow Codelco to borrow cash for new projects from Chile's private pension
funds, which have assets of Dollars 16bn.
Bringing new deposits on stream is only one task. Mr Villarzu is also
committed to lowering production costs at existing mines, which average 69
cents a pound, compared with an estimated 55-60 cents at the country's
private mines.
This year's target is to trim production costs by 3 cents. Groundwork has
been prepared by the previous management which managed to halt, if not
reverse, the seemingly inexorable rise in costs. This was achieved by
gradual staff cuts (to 22,000 from 27,000 in 1988), contracting out
peripheral activities, a crackdown on absenteeism and freezing wages and
productivity bonuses.
All this has further soured relations with union leaders, who blame
management negligence for the futures fiasco. And they are likely to regard
the break-up of Codelco as a surreptitious step towards privatisation.
But Codelco is no ordinary company and 'privatisation' is a word few dare
utter openly. Mr Villarzu is implacable. 'I am not in favour of privatising
Codelco,' he says. 'I am not in favour of privatising any state copper
company.'
For him the ultimate goal is clear: to 'transform Codelco into one of the
world's most profitable mining companies'. But, to achieve this, there will
have to be some drastic changes.
Mr Villarzu may yet have a surprise or two up his sleeve.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940311

