FT941-16934

FT  07 JAN 94 / Sports Council rejects criticisms


   By JAMES BLITZ


Officials at the Sports Council, the government body set up to develop
sporting activity, yesterday defended themselves against allegations of
extravagance and poor administration amid signs that these criticisms will
be highlighted by a Whitehall body next week.
The National Audit Office, the government's accounting watchdog, will issue
a report next week examining whether the council has provided value for
money in recent years.
The details of the report remain secret, but members of the Commons public
accounts select committee and the NAO are concerned that the council has
been lax in its administration of some assets.
MPs have raised concern that nearly a third of the council's overall income
last year was spent on administrative costs and staff salaries, even though
it has only 450 staff.
At the heart of the watchdog's concern is the council's policy of farming
out the management of assets - including several sports centres - to a
charitable trust, called the Sports Council Trust Company.
Last month an NAO statement pointed out that, if the trust company sold any
of these assets, the council might not be able to ensure that it received
the proceeds from the trust in order to pass them back to the exchequer. It
urged the government to take remedial action.
Mr Alan Williams, a Labour member of the public accounts committee, is also
concerned by details of the organisation's accounts. The 1993 accounts show
the council and its subsidiaries spent Pounds 16.4m on administration and
staff costs against an annual Whitehall grant of Pounds 47.6m. Mr Williams
said that figure seemed 'very high'.
The council said that the administration costs reflected the activity of an
organisation which supports local authorities and voluntary bodies
throughout the country. The council added that it had included a special
clause in its contracts with the trust company to ensure that it could claw
back funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940107

