FT941-12819

FT  28 JAN 94 / SIB to spend more in crackdown on City


   By ALISON SMITH, NORMA COHEN and JAMES BLITZ


The Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog, plans to
spend an extra Pounds 1.3m next year as it intensifies supervision of other
financial regulators and enforcement of rules.
SIB's management plan, published yesterday, warns that the higher costs will
mean that 'significant increases in fees' are likely to be proposed for some
bodies.
The rise from an expected expenditure of Pounds 17.46m in the 12 months to
the end of March 1994 to Pounds 18.76m in the following year represents an
increase of 7.5 per cent.
The expected establishment of the Personal Investment Authority, the new
retail financial regulator, in July and the subsequent drop in the number of
organisations that the board regulates directly and from which it receives
fees accounts for some of the increased costs.
The board, however, will expect to receive a levy from the PIA as it does
from the other regulators it oversees.
A paper setting out new proposals on its fees is due to be published by the
board around the middle of next month.
This first publication of its annual management plan reflects a shift
towards greater emphasis on enforcement and supervision. The enforcement
division will roughly double from its present size of 20 staff, although it
will have a slightly different function as a result of a wider
reorganisation.
The plan also details new techniques for supervising other regulators, such
as unaccompanied visits by SIB officials to firms regulated by other bodies.
The board also intends to develop qualitative measures to assess other
regulators' performance, drawing in part on the standards set for the PIA.
The new authority is due to submit its application to be recognised by SIB
early next month.
The board's management plan also spells out four key areas that it intends
to concentrate on in 1994-95.
These are: reviewing transfers and opt-outs from occupational pension
schemes to personal pensions; clarifying the definition of market abuse and
improving the means to detect and punish it; approving the proposed Crest
system for paperless equity settlement; and monitoring the results of
commission and product-disclosure for life insurance products.
The report highlights progress on reviewing the sale of personal pensions to
people leaving occupational schemes.
The steering group which the board set up in December will, in February,
make recommendations on how to ensure high standards in future. The board
plans to publish draft proposals in March or April.
Proposals for remedying what harm has been done to people buying such
pensions after wrong advice are due to be published in July.
A Commons committee agreed yesterday on the terms of reference for its
inquiry into the regulation of financial services, James Blitz writes.
The Treasury and civil service committee said that it would examine the
operation and the adequacy of the Financial Services Act 1986, the cost of
the current regulatory structure and the impact of EU directives, among
other issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940128

