FT942-16229

FT  12 APR 94 / Poll boosts Menem's ambition: Ruling party's vote share
slips as centre-left alliance sweeps capital


   By JOHN BARHAM


   BUENOS AIRES


Argentina's governing Peronist party won its fifth consecutive electoral
victory on Sunday, but saw its share of the vote slip from the 40 per cent
it won in 1991 and 1993 mid-term congressional elections.
The Peronists took 38 per cent of the votes in a poll to elect an assembly
that will rewrite the country's constitution.
President Carlos Menem's ambition to be re-elected to a second term in 1995
dominated the campaign. The current constitution bans presidents from
succeeding themselves and can only be amended by the specially-elected
assembly.
Former president Raul Alfonsn's Radical party was the great loser, taking
only 20 per cent of the votes in its worst result since the return of
democracy in 1983. In last year's elections it polled 30 per cent.
The great winner was the upstart Frente Grande centre-left alliance that
swept the federal district of Buenos Aires with 38 per cent of the votes,
against 25 per cent for the Peronists, by campaigning on an anti-corruption
and anti-government platform.
Mr Manuel Mora y Araujo, a leading pollster, said: 'The government did
pretty well considering it has been in power almost five years. The result
shows that economic stability is not affected. But (the government) is
showing signs of fatigue.'
Nonetheless, Mr Menem is assured of enough votes in the 305-seat assembly to
lift the re-election ban, because the Radicals pledged support for a
constitutional reform package negotiated by Mr Menem and Mr Alfonsn last
year.
Voters punished both mainstream parties, which have dominated the scene for
50 years. The Radicals lost by failing to appear as a credible opposition
force. A reputation for corruption, infighting and local political disputes
damaged the Peronists.
A record one-third of voters stayed away from the polls or spoilt their
ballots, showing only modest support for constitutional reform and Mr
Menem's re-election.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940412

