FT941-5498

FT  05 MAR 94 / Books: A poet illuminated


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


TED HUGHES: WINTER POLLEN edited by William Scammell Faber & Faber Pounds
17.50, 465 pages
It is hard to think of a poet whose poetry finds its counterpart more
exactly in the drawings of an artist than does Ted Hughes's work in that of
the engraver Leonard Baskin. The only parallel case that comes to mind is
the inter-action between the work of Blake the poet and Blake the
draughtsman.
It was, we learn from Winter Pollen (a collection of Hughes's prose pieces
written over the past 30 years), an invitation from Baskin to make a book
with him about crows that inspired the first of the Crow poems. The squat
visceral emblematic bird drawn by Baskin glared beadily from the jacket of
Hughes's Crow in 1970, and has remained a numinous presence in Hughes's mind
ever since.
One of the pieces printed here, 'The Hanged Man and the Dragonfly' is the
introduction Hughes wrote in 1984 to Baskin's Collected Prints. He speaks
there of 'the rich inwardness of Baskin's art' and he relates it to the
Hasidic tradition of Jewish mysticism that Baskin, son of an American rabbi,
inherited. In a piece on Isaac Bashevis Singer he sees the key to his work
as being the collapse of the Hasidic way of life under the pressure in the
20th century.
This is but one strand of a wider perspective on mystical tradition that is
gained from this book. Hughes has an insatiable interest in all forms of
illumination. Books like TC Lethbridge's Ghost and Divining Rod (1963),
Mircea Eliade's Shamanism (1964), Turville Petre's Myth and Religion of the
North (1964), John Greenaway's Literature Among the Primitives (1964), open
windows for Hughes into worlds beyond the rational about which he is
brilliantly articulate. The choice of fellow-poets whose work he discusses
admiringly is just as revealing. They include Wilfred Owen, Keith Douglas,
Dylan Thomas, the Serbian poet Vasko Popa and the Hungarian poet Janos
Pilinsky.
There are also several articles about the work of his wife, Sylvia Plath. In
trying to understand the controversy that still surrounds her death it is
useful to have reprinted here Hughes's 'Publishing Sylvia Plath'. More
enlightening however in understanding her work are his informed comments on
her method of writing and poetic technique, especially the article in which
he traces the genesis of her poem 'Sheep in Fog'.
Poets of the illustrious English past form yet another large swathe of this
wide-ranging book. In a section on metre where Hughes locates instances of
Manley Hopkins's 'sprung rhythm' in English verse at least as early as
Chaucer, Hughes demonstrates how all the editors from Tottel to Tillyard
have scanned the poetry of the Elizabethan Sir Thomas Wyatt incorrectly.
Hughes's effort to discover a unifying theme throughout Shakespeare's work
were given in a book published in 1992 (it received the thumbs down from
most of its baffled reviewers).
Hughes propounds a thesis of such magnitude, spanning Venus and Adonis and
The Rape of Lucrece at one end and King Lear and The Tempest at the other,
that initially it seems much too audacious, summary and tortuous to
contemplate. But taken here in small doses extracted by William Scammell, it
offers perceptions about Shakespeare's reaction to the English Reformation
that are wholly new and surely valid.
Some of these longer explorations are, it must be said, difficult to follow.
As a literary critic Hughes does not have the incisive expository power
demonstrated in his prose work by TS Eliot. On the other hand when Hughes
turns the focus inward to his own work he writes with sensitivity and utter
clarity about the mysteries of the poetic process.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940305

