FT943-12638

FT  23 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: Brokers take the easy path - The
progress of rolling settlement


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU and BETHAN HUTTON


We are almost a week into rolling settlement, the new stock exchange system
for paying for shares - yet many brokers have not prepared for some of the
changes that are taking place. They have concentrated on encouraging clients
to move into nominee accounts, where the stock is registered in the name of
the broker's nominee company instead of the client himself. This makes
administration much easier for the broker, and some clients also prefer
having less paperwork to cope with.
Other issues - such as penalties for late payment and facilities for
allowing margin trading (lending money to clients to buy shares) - are
apparently being treated on a 'play-it-by-ear' basis. Indeed, one of the
20-odd brokers to whom we spoke suggested delaying this article for a month
 -by which time, he said, his firm hoped to have formulated its policy.
Nominee accounts
Ten-day settlement - also known as T+10 - is only the first step towards a
faster settlement process. The stock exchange intends to bring in five-day
rolling settlement next year. At the moment, a gap of 10 working days still
allows enough time for certificates to pass back and forth between broker
and client when the latter decides to deal. It is, however, difficult to see
how this will be possible under the shorter-time frame of T+5. Nominee
accounts are then likely to be the only way the majority of private clients
will be able to deal.
Nominee accounts are used already for all personal equity plan holdings.
Most brokers operate both pooled and designated nominee accounts. Pooled
nominees group together shareholders, and the only name that appears on the
register is that of the nominee company. In a designated nominee, the
broker's name and the client's designation - usually a number - appear
together on the company register and this should ensure that the investor
retains shareholder benefits.
Some brokers - including Broadbridge, Butterfield Securities, Dunbar, Boyle
& Kingsley, Fidelity Brokerage, Fyshe Horton Finney, Killik, Sharemarket and
Shaw & Co - operate designated nominees only (other than for Peps, which are
in pooled nominees).
Surprisingly, ShareLink, the execution-only dealing service, has not yet put
in place a nominee account for its dealing customers, although it says plans
are under way. It operates a pooled nominee for Pep and new issues
customers.
Penalties for late payment
Understandably, brokers are stressing the need for prompt payment. If, after
10 days, a client's cheque does not clear, the broker is left holding the
shares. Some brokers say they will charge the client interest - the figure
mentioned most often is 3 to 4 percentage points above the present base rate
of 5.25 per cent.
Others may also charge a fee. Shaw & Co. says it reserves the right to
charge a late-delivery penalty of Pounds 5 a day on top of an interest rate
of 4 percentage points above the base rate. It warns that if stock remains
undelivered for 10 days, all costs and charges incurred will be debited to
the client's account.
Others have no penalties for late payment at the moment. James Capel said:
'We wait to see how the market deals with late payment and what recompense
we shall be seeking.'
Brewin Dolphin Bell Lawrie is waiting until September before bringing in
late-payment penalties; this will allow clients to get used to rolling
settlement. But it could charge up to 5 percentage points over the base rate
after that.
In general, execution-only brokers will charge higher penalties than
advisory brokers. Fidelity says it will charge 10 percentage points above
base rates while ShareLink could charge interest at 15 per cent APR and make
an administrative charge of up to Pounds 40, as well as selling the shares
involved and using the money raised to settle the amount owed.
The Tring-based Share Centre will not buy stock unless the client already
has enough money in his account to pay for it.
Is extended settlement possible?
Yes, although it is up to market-makers - dealers who set the price for
stocks - to accommodate brokers. Clients most likely to want extended
settlement are speculators.
Earlier this month Smith New Court, the securities house, said it would
accommodate brokers requesting special settlement after T+10. (Settlement is
the process by which shares are delivered to a buyer in exchange for
delivery of payment).
In other words, a client who wants to settle on T+11 might be able to do so
if he tells his broker when he places the order.
Brewin Dolphin Bell Lawrie says: 'Clients can request to deal for special
settlement. Any price differential will be a matter for the market-maker -
we will not charge extra for such a bargain.' Williams de Broe says it
expects to be able to improve on terms offered by others.
Sharemarket, the Manchester-based execution-only broker, is making extended
settlement a feature of its service. It will allow clients (at its
discretion) to roll over each 10-day settlement transaction for another 10
days, subject to certain terms. But other brokers such as Dunbar, Boyle &
Kingsley and Albert E. Sharp say they will not allow extended settlement.
Margin trading
Most brokers say they are thinking about this, but few have come up with
concrete plans. Williams de Broe, Shaw & Co., Butterfield and the Share
Centre are among those offering margin trading to selected clients.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940723

