FT941-16875

FT  07 JAN 94 / At risk from party politics: German growth requires a subtle
policy mix


   By KLAUS FRIEDRICH


The German economy has had a very bad press during the past few months. It
seems exaggeration is the name of the game. In good times, people speak of
economic miracles. In bad times such as these, 'worst ever' commentary
abounds. Anyone who has observed west Germany's very high living standards,
in particular the high consumption of luxury goods and the relative
generosity of public services, will have difficulty in accepting
Gotterdammerung scenarios.
Germany is, after all, in the midst of a historic development project,
namely the integration of east Germany. Net transfers from west to east  -
amounting to 5 per cent of German gross domestic product - have been the
equivalent of what would be, in normal times, the annual increase in western
incomes. These transfers are helping to build a new infrastructure in east
Germany. They are also being used to support consumption during the period
that east German manufacturing undergoes a lengthy, but necessary,
adjustment process.
For west Germans, the prospect of sacrificing increases in their real
incomes for several years is no cause for joy. They now realise they cannot
have their reunification cake and eat it too. But the transfer is an
investment for the future, a huge national savings programme that will pay
off when the east produces as much as it consumes. On that day, a good part
of Germany's present structural problems will be solved.
Germany's challenges have been made more complex by the need to reorientate
its economy towards the east. Other problems, such as high structural
unemployment, seem common to most west European countries.
At present, west Germany has 2.5m registered unemployed. In east Germany,
the number is 1.2m. This excludes workers in jobs subsidised with public
funds. In 1994 production and demand will increase moderately, but not
enough to reverse companies' programmes of labour shedding. Unemployment is
thus likely to rise further in west Germany. In east Germany, on the other
hand, unemployment appears to be stabilising, albeit at a high level.
In view of the present structure of the German labour market, a growth rate
well over 3 per cent would be necessary to stabilise overall employment.
Thus the ending of the downturn will not end the political problems caused
by rising unemployment. This apparent inconsistency is reflected in a
booming stock market at a time when much of the electorate is still feeling
the impact of recession.
The good economic news is that west Germany has been growing at an
underlying annual rate of 2 per cent since the spring of 1993. Productivity
in many enterprises is rising, while the increase in unit costs has been
slowing.
The inflation outlook has improved steadily. Producer and import prices have
been falling and are now feeding into the cost-of-living index, which in
recent months has been increasing at an annual rate of about 2.5 per cent.
The 1994 wage round is likely to lead to far lower settlements for 1994 than
last year.
In view of the subdued economic growth and low capacity utilisation, it is
not surprising that price pressures from the demand side are practically
non-existent. The inflation rate is, however, being increased by rises in
indirect taxation, administered prices and general levies.
The new surtax on petrol, which came into effect on January 1, will add as
much as 0.5 percentage points to the cost-of-living index this month.
Nevertheless, there is a good chance that inflation will ease further in the
course of 1994, giving an average increase over last year of less than 3 per
cent.
Germany's inflation performance is the most important determinant of the
Bundesbank's interest rate policy. The faster inflation slows, the better
the case for interest rate reductions. Later in 1994, when the year-on-year
increase in the cost-of-living index falls to below 3 per cent, the
Bundesbank's interest rates are likely to have fallen by a further 2
percentage points from their current level.
On the capital markets, the level of German interest rates is already
remarkably low by past standards. As a result of the high credibility of the
Bundesbank's anti-inflation policy, foreigners have made large-scale
purchases of German bonds.
The Bundesbank has taken great care to avoid any action which would disturb
the long end of the market. In particular, it has rejected any hurried cuts
in short-term interest rates, preferring to rely on its policy of
Trippelschritte (cutting rates in 'dribbles').
There is little doubt that this policy will be continued in 1994, with a key
role likely to be played by the exchange rate. Two opposing factors are at
work here. On one hand, German exporters have lost international
competitiveness as a result of the sharp real appreciation of the D-Mark
over the past year - a factor which would point to a weakening D-Mark. On
the other hand, in view of the need to attract inflows of foreign capital to
sustain the fall in long-term interest rates, the Bundesbank places
considerable importance on maintaining a firm D-Mark.
This delicate balance of objectives would best be achieved by stable
currency relationships within the European Monetary System. Although most
countries have now shifted to wide bands after the August currency upsets,
the currencies of some of Germany's most important EMS partners have now
moved back into the former narrow bands.
As long as this relative stability in Europe is maintained, the prospect of
a moderately stronger dollar is unlikely to disturb opportunities for a
further drop in German short-term interest rates.
In view of the proliferation of national and regional elections in Germany
this year, 1994 brings political risks. The general election in October
seems at present unlikely to result in a clear victory for a party of the
traditional left or right. Rather, we may see the formation of a coalition
government, comprising either the two main parties - the Christian Democrats
and Social Democrats - or a larger group of parties with divergent
positions.
In either case, the government which takes office at the end of the year
will have difficulties formulating and implementing a clear economic policy
 -a factor likely to have a progressively important impact on the 1994
outlook.
The author is chief economist of Dresdner Bank

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940107

