FT941-5685

FT  04 MAR 94 / US under pressure on Bosnia as UN requests 10,000 more
troops


   By JUDY DEMPSEY, PHILIP STEPHENS and LAURA SILBER


   LONDON, ZAGREB


The US is coming under increasing pressure to send ground forces to Bosnia,
following a request by the United Nations for an extra 10,000 troops to
shore up the republic's ceasefire.
General Jean Cot, head of the UN's peacekeeping forces in the former
Yugoslavia, said it was a 'strange and not very courageous idea' that the US
would consider sending troops only after a peace settlement was secured.
Gen Cot said it was essential for the US, followed by Britain and France, to
send troops 'immediately', implying that the ceasefire in Sarajevo, the
Bosnian capital, and in other parts of the country was running on borrowed
time. France, followed by Britain, have between them 6,500 troops in Bosnia.
Britain yesterday held out the possibility it might send more troops. But
amid signs of a cabinet split and fears of a potential backlash in the
Conservative ranks, it rejected a request from General Sir Michael Rose, the
UN commander in Bosnia, for immediate reinforcement of Britain's 2,500
troops.
Responding to the latest UN plea for an extra 10,650 soldiers to join the
13,000 already in Bosnia, Mr John Major, the prime minister, said further
British help would be proportionate to and contingent on increased
participation in the peace effort.
Mr Yasushi Akashi, the UN special envoy for the former Yugoslavia, warned
that without the extra troops fragile ceasefires could otherwise collapse.
Gen Rose reinforced the warning by saying his troops were now operating 'on
a wing and a prayer'.
In the Croatian capital Zagreb, Mr Akashi said: 'We are profoundly disturbed
by the lukewarm and negative response to date (for more troops). Its a real
test case for member states to show whether their protestations for peace in
Bosnia are really backed up by concrete actions.'
US diplomats argued this week that the preliminary agreement in Washington
between Bosnia's Croats, Moslems and the Croatian government would in fact
require fewer ground troops. 'Since this agreement would be more benign, it
would need fewer troops, so the US might not have to sign on,' a US diplomat
said.
But UN officials yesterday said refusal or reluctance by western governments
could be exploited by Bosnian Croat, Moslem and Serb military commanders on
the ground.
Gen Rose has told Mr Malcolm Rifkind, UK defence secretary, that he needs
more British troops with experience of Northern Ireland. But a number of
senior UK ministers - said to include Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, and
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade secretary, have hitherto opposed greater
British involvement on the ground.
The need to consolidate the ceasefires comes amid further talks between
Bosnian Croats and Moslems and Croat officials. They are due to meet in
Vienna today to try to draw up maps and structures to implement a federation
for one part of Bosnia which will have a loose arrangement with Croatia.

The Financial Times


International Page 18

940304

