FT944-10926

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (22): Villagers switch to a better class of
smoke - Jump in sales of cigarettes at 3p a packet


   By KUNAL BOSE


Jirat is a sleepy village some 50km from Calcutta. Siddique Ali, a farmer in
his 20s, likes a cigarette at the end of his day's work in the fields.
During the day, however, he smokes bidis, which contain lower grade tobacco.
He is one of many smokers all over India, the world's third largest tobacco
producer, who have partly switched to cigarettes from bidis. According to
ITC, which has 60 per cent of the Indian cigarette market, the number of
'dual smokers' is growing fast and there are also many giving up bidis
totally in favour of cigarettes.
Although nearly 125m Indian adult males smoke tobacco in one form or
another, only about 30m are cigarette smokers. Besides bidi and cigarette
smoking, tobacco smoking through a hookah is largely prevalent in India.
The immediate reason for the jump in cigarette sales in the semi-urban and
rural areas is that a packet of 10 micro cigarettes costs a mere Rs1.50
(3p). This follows the reduction in the excise duty on cigarettes of less
than 60mm length from Rs120 to Rs60 per 1,000 sticks in the current year's
federal budget.
A bidi stick at 10 paise is still five paise cheaper than a cigarette. But
industry officials think that villagers are turning increasingly cigarettes
because they regard them as 'more modern'. And at Rs1.50 for a pack of 10,
cigarettes are no longer too expensive.
By substantially lowering the duty on micro cigarettes, the federal
government has signalled that it would like cigarettes to replace bidis.
That is because the cheap micro cigarettes yield 12 times more revenue than
bidis which attract a duty of only Rs5 per 1,000 sticks. Since bidis are
mostly made in small, local workshops, the revenue collection is poor.
The cigarette manufacturers are obviously pleased to have found a market
segment which is growing fast. 'In the past six months, monthly production
of micro cigarettes has risen from 100m to nearly 500m sticks. The general
expectation is that production will rise to 1bn sticks a month within a year
and a half,' say industry officials.
The Indian cigarette market has shrunk from 85bn sticks a year to 80bn in
the last five years. However, in the current year there will be some growth
as the micro cigarettes are moving fast and that is almost entirely at the
expense of bidis.
But the market for bidis in India is huge. Though there are few statistics,
it is estimated that at least 12 times as many bidis are currently sold as
cigarettes.
'This offers a great opportunity to promoting the sales of micro cigarettes.
What we also find encouraging is that many first-time smokers in the rural
and semi-urban centres are starting with micro cigarettes and not bidis,'
said ITC .
The four major brands in the micro segment are Hero, Vijai, Commando and
Blue Bird, owned by ITC, VST, Godfrey Philips and Golden Tobacco,
respectively. They have around 80 per cent share of the micro cigarette
market.
Since the industry is mainly targeting the rural smokers who have a
different profile from the urban smokers, the cigarette manufacturers are
changing their marketing strategies.
All the manufacturers admit that the profit margin in micro cigarettes is
very thin. 'First, we have kept the price of the product low. Second, the
cost of distributing cigarettes in the rural areas is quite high.
Fortunately, the volume of sales is growing at an encouraging rate.'
Though cigarettes use only 20 per cent of the tobacco consumed in the
country, they account for nearly 90 per cent of the excise revenue generated
by all tobacco products. In fact, after petroleum, cigarettes are the second
largest contributor to the exchequer.
In the current year, cigarettes are expected to generate revenue of more
than Rs30.5bn for the government, compared with Rs27.43bn in 1993-94. Except
for the micro cigarettes, which are now attracting a much lower excise duty,
the levy on all other cigarettes has been raised by 12 per cent in the
1994-95 budget.
However, in the earlier two budgets, the government spared cigarettes, which
were already highly taxed, from any duty increase.
The annual average increase of 24 per cent in cigarette prices has also
forced the smokers to move away from the higher priced to lower priced
cigarettes.
The manufacturers argue that since they use better tobacco than that used in
bidis, a higher procurement of the commodity by them would raise the income
of the growers. The farmers would then have the incentive to produce better
tobacco. If the government agrees, then perhaps the duty on regular
cigarettes will be lowered in the next budget.
Very few Indian women smoke, unlike in China where about 6 per cent of the
adult women smoke cigarettes. The market for the premium king size
cigarettes in India is less than 1.5bn sticks a year. In this segment,
moreover, the sale of illegally imported cigarettes is double that of the
local brands such as India Kings and Classic.
Even though the top end of the market is small, RJ Reynolds and Philip
Morris are exploring the possibility of producing cigarettes in India.
Godfrey Philips already produces Rothmans locally.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

941108

