FT944-2348

FT  16 DEC 94 / SG Warburg and Morgan Stanley: Warburg is left in the lurch
 -The problems that dogged the proposed merger


   By JOHN GAPPER and RICHARD WATERS


The collapse of the merger talks between Morgan Stanley and SG Warburg is an
unfortunate Christmas present for both sides. It questions not only whether
they should have foreseen the obstacles, but whether Warburg can recover its
poise as an independent investment bank.
In the aftermath of yesterday's statements, some Warburg employees
questioned whether senior executives, including Lord Cairns, its chief
executive, should resign. Yet whether they stay or go, Warburg will find it
harder than before to maintain the argument for its independence.
The collapse of the talks was sudden, and happened after Mercury Asset
Management's board and some of its senior fund managers started to digest
the implications of the deal. Fund managers were concerned to protect their
independence, while directors wanted to ensure shareholders were not
disadvantaged.
MAM's board, led by Mr Hugh Stevenson, its chairman, brought in Lazard
Brothers, the merchant bank, to advise on the deal after it was made public.
The most obvious question was how MAM's minority shareholders - who own the
25 per cent of its equity not held by Warburg - would be treated.
The problem was that the merger offer appeared to value Warburg's equity
below its market price, implying that MAM was not being fairly valued. Mr
Philip Gibbs, analyst at BZW, estimates that at Dollars 60 per Morgan
Stanley share, the implied valuation of Warburg was Pounds 1.53bn, or 695p
per share.
This was well below yesterday's opening price of 798p. Mr Gibbs says that
applying a price earnings ratio to MAM similar to other US fund management
acquisitions, and giving a premium for Warburg's investment banking
business, a takeover bid ought to value the group at 950p per share.
Such calculations made MAM call for what it yesterday termed 'an appropriate
offer' for minority shareholders, so giving them a chance to exit at what
seemed a fairer price.
Although Morgan Stanley did not want to pay too much, its executives were
prepared to accept some premium.
One senior Morgan Stanley executive says that gaining control of MAM was
'the principal attraction' of the merger because the US firm wanted to gain
a stabilising influence on its earnings. The merger gave it a chance to
acquire MAM at a lower price than it would pay for a US fund management
business.
Morgan Stanley executives believe the gap between the premium MAM wanted to
pay to minority shareholders, and its own suggestion, was bridgeable. 'We
were perfectly prepared to recognise that retiring it (the minority stake)
would have resulted in a premium,' says one.
But another problem was dogging the proposed merger of MAM and Morgan
Stanley's fund management arm. MAM fund managers who were told of the merger
last week wanted to keep independence from Morgan Stanley's operations. This
became the main point at issue at a meeting in London on Tuesday.
'It turned out we had a different view. We believed that the businesses
could be brought together over time - it wasn't a case of jamming them
together next week,' says one senior Morgan Stanley executive. The US firm
thought that unless the operations were brought together - for example in
technology and marketing - the point of the merger was lost.
The negotiations ran into other problems, and while Warburg executives do
not believe these were likely to be insuperable, they could have been big
enough to block a deal - even without the asset management complications.
One difficulty was that the two investment banks were having problems
deciding how businesses would be run. Although senior executives had an
outline view before the deal was made public, there was still some tough
bargaining to be done among more junior managers over who would have
control.
Both banks are adamant that there were no 'black holes' discovered in the
due diligence process that made either bank nervous about linking with the
other. Indeed, some Warburg executives claim they were reassured by the view
Morgan Stanley took of the strengths of their business.
The collapse of the deal leaves questions facing both banks, given their
rhetoric about the reason for linking together. If they will no longer be
able to combine to form the strongest global investment bank, how seriously
can they claim to be global players if they now remain independent?
The questions are loudest for Warburg, whose shareholders would have taken a
third of the equity in the new holding company. The bank was seen to have
tacitly admitted that it could not achieve global scale by itself, and had
failed to penetrate the US securities market seriously.
Warburg's executives were yesterday arguing that this was a logical fallacy.
They believed that they would have achieved a leap of five years in their
strategy through the merger. They now think that they can simply resume
their previous strategy of independent growth, accepting slower expansion.
Yet this reasoning did not cut much ice yesterday within Warburg's London
offices yesterday, where the collapse led to an angry inquest. 'I think the
merger was driven by two things: panic by people on the board who don't
understand this business, and greed,' said one Warburg employee.
Some Warburg employees said the handling of the deal had exposed weaknesses
in the bank's management. 'There's a lack of confidence in the people in top
management,' said the same executive. One problem is seen as the detachment
of Sir David Scholey, chairman, from day-to-day management.
Whether or not it can pacify its employees, the bank may have difficultly
persuading its shareholders and analysts to accept a resumption of the old
strategy. This appears to be what they will attempt, with executives arguing
that only Morgan Stanley was an appropriate merger opportunity.
The most obvious alternative would be a merger with another 'bulge bracket'
firm from New York such as Goldman Sachs or Merrill Lynch. Yet Warburg
executives believe that Goldman's more hard-driving and aggressive culture
would not match its own, and neither's businesses would fit its own.
But bids from other banks remain possible, especially given the attention
Warburg has drawn to its own valuation. Some potential acquirers yesterday
played down the chance of an immediate bid, although they said it might
become more attractive if Warburg was further weakened.
One rival said delay might be the best strategy. 'If I wait a week or two it
might get worse,' he said. He also argued that it would become easier to
take business from Warburg on the argument that 'a bank that handles its own
business so badly should not be advising anyone else'.
A further difficulty for Warburg is that the circumstances under which the
merger collapsed draws attention to divisions between it and MAM.
The fund management firm drew attention to its independence this year when
it penalised Warburg over its parent's handling of Enterprise Oil's bid for
Lasmo. The obstacles thrown by MAM in the way of the merger can hardly
improve relations between the two companies, although Warburg executives
insist that MAM's independence is vital to its success, and the value of its
75 per cent stake. Yet the embarrassment could provoke it to try to take MAM
back into full ownership. For Morgan Stanley, questions over the future
appear less pressing.
The firm's executives implied that buying MAM at a discount to the price
seen in US acquisitions was the main attraction of the merger. Morgan
Stanley has already built a larger European operation than Warburg's US arm.
Even so, the merger's collapse brings back questions for Morgan Stanley.
With strong capital and ambitions, it has built up a reasonable presence in
Europe, but it still has a long way to go, and it will now have to grow
organically. Its failure to gain control of MAM may also prompt it to search
for another fund management acquisition.
Probably the most bewildered participants in the entire week-long drama will
be the other investment banks and brokers of the City of London. After
Warburg's announcement last week, many reflected on how long they could last
under independent ownership, and without integrating.
The Warburg-Morgan Stanley incident has demonstrated once again that mergers
in the volatile and often temperamental world of investment banking are
easier dreamed up than achieved. If the fundamentals of the market have not
changed, rivals may at least resolve to take their time.
In the wider world of global investment banking, rivals may be relieved that
a strong global force is not created at a single stroke. Yet the fact that
two firms were prepared even to consider such a bold move shows how high the
stakes are becoming in the battle to build truly global firms.
Additional reporting by Nick Denton and Norma Cohen

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941216

