FT942-14342

FT  21 APR 94 / Volvo will dispose of Pounds 3.4bn assets to focus on
vehicles


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   GOTHENBURG


Volvo yesterday announced plans to sell up to SKr40bn (Pounds 3.4bn) worth
of assets to focus its operations exclusively on vehicles.
The disposals, to be completed during 1996, will include the sale of BCP,
the consumer products group, and a 28 per cent stake in Pharmacia, the
pharmaceuticals company. These two sales alone could raise between SKr25bn
and SKr30bn.
The Swedish company is also likely to sell its 20 per cent stake in Renault,
after the collapse of plans to merge with the French carmaker, and smaller
investments in stockbroking, property and investment companies.
Mr Soren Gyll, chief executive, set out the post-Renault strategy at Volvo's
annual general meeting in Gothenburg.
He said: 'Volvo's operations will be concentrated on passenger cars and
trucks and buses, supplemented by marine and industrial engines, aircraft
engines and a major stake in construction equipment.'
Mr Gyll also made clear that Volvo was not seeking a single long-term
partner to replace Renault. But he left the door open for specific
co-operative ventures with other vehicle groups and suppliers.
He said the company had to strengthen its balance sheet and reduce its
SKr14.7bn net debt to provide the resources for its automotive businesses.
Volvo acquired its holdings in BCP and Pharmacia only last year when it
agreed a split of the old Procordia group with the Swedish government. At
that point, BCP, which owns Swedish Match and many of Sweden's best-known
food and drinks brands, was seen as a valuable cash cow to support the more
cyclical vehicle business.
Volvo first wants to take 100 per cent control of BCP by offering to buy the
26 per cent which it does not already own. This offer was confirmed by
shareholders yesterday.
Volvo's room for manoeuvre with Pharmacia is more limited due to its pact
with the government. This prevents Volvo from selling its Pharmacia stake
before 1996, well after the government's planned sale of its 46 per cent
holding in the pharmaceutical company this June.
The group's non-core holdings will immediately be brought together in a
detached structure and under a separate management. Volvo did not specify a
precise timetable for each disposal, noting that the approach would vary
from company to company to maximise value. Units could be sold as a whole,
or in parts, or shares might be listed publicly.
Volvo's short-term prospects have been transformed by the weak krona,
booming sales in its main US and Swedish markets, and the success of the 850
model. The group said first-quarter sales at 100,000 cars were 25 per cent
higher than a year ago. Truck shipments were 30 per cent higher at 15,000
units.
The group is expected to rebound strongly into profit this year, after last
year's SKr2.64bn pre-tax loss. It would have made a profit in 1993 but for
SKr5.2bn in costs linked to the unwinding of its three-year alliance with
Renault.
Volvo seeks factory site in Russia, Page 3
Lex, Page 30

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940421

