FT942-16346

FT  11 APR 94 / BCCI's creditors refuse to approve Pounds 23m liquidators'
fee


   By ROBERT PESTON


The committee representing creditors of the collapsed Bank of Credit and
Commerce International is refusing to approve Pounds 23.7m in annual fees
demanded by the bank's liquidators, who are partners at the accountancy
firm, Touche Ross.
Touche is budgeting to receive Pounds 17.5m in fees for the UK portion of
the liquidation alone, for the year to next January. 'Everyone on the
committee believes that is too much,' one creditor said.
Although Touche's budget has not been approved, it can draw up to Pounds
550,000 a week on account.
The committee members cannot discuss their concerns about Touche's costs
with the thousands of BCCI creditors, because its six members have signed a
confidentiality agreement presented to them by Touche last year.
Creditors have yet to receive any cash from the realisation of the bank's
assets. All that UK creditors have received so far is payment from the Bank
of England's depositor protection scheme. The arrangement to keep committee
proceedings secret was introduced because Touche Ross became concerned that
there were too many leaks.
However, some creditors believe it is now stifling debate about how the
liquidation should be carried out and how much the liquidator should be
paid.
'The confidentiality agreement is draconian,' complained a lawyer. 'In
theory it even prevents the Bank of England's representative on the
committee from discussing Touche's pay with the Bank governor.'
It is understood, however, that the governor, Mr Eddie George, has been kept
informed of the committee's work and that the Bank is hopeful that a fees
discount can be negotiated with Touche.
The committee has been told that Touche had earned Pounds 98m in fees by mid
February from work on liquidating BCCI's UK operations. Payments to lawyers
working with Touche Ross in the same period were Pounds 35m, most of it
believed to have been received by the City firm Lovell White Durrant.
The figures cannot be compared with those on the costs of the liquidation
submitted to the Department of Trade and Industry, which were prepared on a
different basis.
A paper presented to the committee, dated February 1994, says BCCI's
liquidators throughout the world are budgeting to receive Pounds 31.2m in
fees in the coming year.
Of that, Touche expects to receive Pounds 23.7m, including Pounds 17.5m for
UK work. Touche's worldwide BCCI fees include Pounds 10.4m to be earned by
partners, with the balance earned by six grades of manager.
A Touche partner pointed out that the costs of the liquidation had been
falling since the bank was closed down in July 1991. 'At the peak, we had
450 people working on it,' he said. 'We are way down on that now.'
Touche is hopeful, though, that the courts will give their approval to a
recently negotiated arrangement with Abu Dhabi, BCCI's majority shareholder,
which would involve the emirate paying an estimated Pounds 1.8bn to
creditors.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940411

