FT942-12293

FT  30 APR 94 / Mine group wins landmark Irish planning appeal


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


A decision heralded as a breakthrough for the mining industry in Ireland was
announced last night by An Bord Pleanala (the Irish National Appeals Board)
which gave final planning clearance for the Dollars 65m (Pounds 44m) Galmoy
zinc-lead project in central Ireland.
Galmoy will be the first new base metal mine in Ireland for 20 years and
enhance the country's position as Europe's second-largest zinc producer.
The planning appeal was widely considered in the mining industry to be a
test case, setting the scene for a new generation of mining in Ireland where
the industry has been the target of a strong - and often successful -
anti-mining campaign for some years.
Arcon International Resources, the Dublin-based company in which Mr Tony
O'Reilly, the Irish businessman, has a 23 per cent stake, said that, subject
to it being issued with a department of energy mining licence, construction
of the Galmoy mine would start in September and be completed in 18 months.
Galmoy is projected to produce an annual 70,000 tonnes of zinc when in full
production (which should be 12 months after start-up), employ 350 in the
18-month construction phase and then provide 200 permanent jobs.
Professor Richard Conroy, Arcon's chairman, said the planning appeal outcome
showed that 'there will be severe environmental scrutiny of any projected
mine (in Ireland) but, as long as this scrutiny can be met, you will be able
to mine. I hope this will encourage other mining companies to look for base
metals in Ireland.' Environmentalists opposed to Galmoy gained some
consolation from the appeal because Arcon has now been instructed to put a
berm (ledge) around its waste pond.
Tara Mines, owned by Outokumpu, the state-controlled Finnish group, is
Ireland's only zinc producer with annual output of 190,000 tonnes.
However, only 8kms from Galmoy is the Lisheen zinc project, close enough to
suggest there is a series of big zinc-lead deposits over a wide area in the
so-called Rathdowney trend.
Mr Eero Laatio, managing director of Tara, recently estimated that the
development of Galmoy and Lisheen would create more than 5,000 jobs.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940430

