FT944-5971

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Rail upgrade 'to cost Pounds 800m' - West Coast
main line modernisation set to cover whole London-Scotland route


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


The West Coast main railway line between London and Scotland should be
upgraded over its entire route at a cost of Pounds 800m-Pounds 1bn, a team
studying the project said yesterday.
This would represent a more radical modernisation of the 550-mile line than
originally planned but was justified by the large savings which would be
made on maintenance costs, Mr Gil Howarth, Railtrack's director of major
projects, said.
The original proposals for the line envisaged a Pounds 500-Pounds 600m
upgrade concentrating on the oldest section between London and Crewe, with
the section to the north improved at a later unspecified date.
However, with annual maintenance costs of Pounds 150m for the line - and
track renewals costing a further Pounds 60m a year - a thorough upgrade of
the entire route would achieve an overall cost saving of 10 per cent over 20
years.
South of Crewe, the line and signalling are 30 years old while, to the
north, equipment is 20 years old.
The West Coast Main Line Development Company, which has been carrying out a
feasibility study of the modernisation plan, will put its final proposals to
the government and to Railtrack before Christmas.
They are expected to take a decision on the extent of the upgrade early next
year after consultation with the 17 train operating companies using the
line. Bidders will then be invited to tender for the project, which will
involve both private and public funds. Work is due to start next year.
The West Coast main line is an important part of the government's private
finance initiative designed to get private sector funds and expertise into
large infrastructure projects.
A basic upgrade costing Pounds 800m would provide a line capable of running
trains at up to 125mph, though some stretches would be restricted to 60mph.
If Railtrack and the train operators wanted higher speeds on some sections
of track, they would have to spend up to a further Pounds 200m, Mr Howarth
said.
The project team believes the entire upgrade could take place within the
existing track corridor. Higher train speeds to match the French trains a
grande vitesse, which reach 186mph, would require the track to be
straightened and would push up costs. However, the line will be designed to
accommodate tilting trains now in use in Italy and Sweden, which can travel
at up to 160mph.
Although the modernisation is not designed to accommodate very high-speed
trains, the upgrade would still reduce journey times between London and
Glasgow from five to four hours and London to Manchester or Liverpool from 2
3/4 to two hours.
The study team believes these journey times would compete with the airlines
over longer distances and attract more passengers to the route  - which is
one of the busiest in the UK.
Modern in-cab signalling systems would mean the entire route could be
controlled from a single centre.
The upgrade envisages installing an advanced train protection system
recommended in a recent safety inquiry to reduce the risk of accidents.
Pilot systems are at present being used on two routes in Britain - but this
would be the largest application of the system.
In Tuesday's Budget Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, said the
specification study for the West Coast main line refurbishment would be
finished by the end of the year. The transport project was one of a number
announced in the last year's Budget.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941201

