FT942-16200

FT  12 APR 94 / Bogus accountants feel profession's wrath


   By ANDREW JACK


A surprising number of non-accountants are passing themselves off as members
of the profession, a report showed yesterday.
The latest annual report of the ethics committee covering the UK's three
chartered accountancy bodies says it has 130 cases on file of individuals
calling themselves 'chartered accountants' when they have no right to do so.
The largest group is former accountants who have let their membership lapse,
followed by individuals without qualifications fraudulently misrepresenting
themselves as accountants to gain business, and those from other
professional bodies, especially from outside the UK.
There is no criminal sanction available to the professional bodies to deal
with these 'misdescribers', but officials have obtained 37 formal
undertakings and started 23 court cases to restrain their activities last
year.
The details come at a time when the accountancy profession is facing more
public scrutiny than ever and faces growing criticism of its ethical
conduct.
The report - due to be discussed by the Institute of Chartered Accountants
in England and Wales Council tomorrow - shows the number of inquiries to its
ethics services almost doubled in the last four years.
Oral inquiries to the Chartered Accountants Advisory Service on Ethics -
primarily from members in public practice - rose from 4,923 in 1990 to 8,871
in 1993, while written inquiries increased from 984 to 1,506 in the same
period. The trends have stabilised in the last year.
There were also 64 'substantive' cases and 118 less significant inquiries
last year to the industrial members' advisory committee on ethics, which
handles concerns raised by accountants working in business.
Mr Julian Osborne, committee secretary of the chartered accountants joint
ethics committee, said yesterday the increase reflected growing questions by
accountants on regulation matters, as well as the publicity given to the
advisory services.
He said many of the inquiries from accountants in business related to
pressure on finance directors from other board members to massage the
figures in their companies.
The report also reveals that the profession is launching an investigation
into how far accountancy firms develop 'sound ethical attitudes' among their
students and younger staff.
It has hired a graduate for an 18-week pilot study of the procedures in more
than 40 firms, which is likely to lead to a more detailed project later this
year.
'Ethics only recently became part of the professional examination syllabus
and is not a separate paper yet,' Mr Osborne said. 'Some firms were not
familiar with our bye-laws and it made us wonder what they were doing to
keep up to scratch.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940412

