FT942-16051

FT  12 APR 94 / Government Bonds: Gilts surprisingly strong ahead of
economic data


   By ANTONIA SHARPE and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


The UK government bond market vied with its Italian counterpart for the best
performance of the day yesterday. Analysts said they were surprised by the
gilt market's strength, given this week's heavy timetable of economic data
in the US and the UK.
UK trade figures for January are expected on Thursday and the more important
UK retail price index on Friday.
After February's disappointing numbers, the market will be looking for a
rise of 0.4 percentage points on the month in the underlying annual rate
(excluding mortgage interest payments) to 2.6 per cent.
The headline annual rate is expected to be unchanged from February at 2.4
per cent.
The market widely expects the Bank of England to make an auction
announcement on Friday. Some analysts said they expected the Bank to re-open
outstanding gilt issues with maturities of between 2006 and 2010.
On Liffe, the June contract on the long gilt future stood 1 7/32 points
higher in the late afternoon at 108 3/8 in moderate volume.
Italian bonds started the week in an optimistic mood, despite Sunday's
reiteration by Mr Umberto Bossi, the leader of the Northern League, that the
party would only help form a new Italian government if its federal,
free-market and anti-fascist values were respected.
Mr Troy Bowler, international strategist at PaineWebber, said favourable
coverage of Mr Bossi's comments in the Italian press helped to push bonds
and the lira higher. He noted that the yield on 10-year Italian government
bonds was now only 11 basis points higher than the yield on 10-year Spanish
government bonds. This was the closest that Italian bond yields had come to
Spain's since last October and compared with a yield differential of 100
basis points in early March.
Mr Jeff Brooks, fixed-income analyst at Merrill Lynch in London, said he
expected investors to switch into Spain because the Italian market had got
too far ahead of itself. 'There is no allowance in the Italian market for a
political collapse,' said Mr Brooks.
The June contract on the 10-year Italian government bond future on Liffe
rose 1.21 points in the late afternoon to 114.75.
Spanish government bonds finished higher in line with other European
markets. Dealers are looking to this week's consumer price index for March,
due on Thursday, for confirmation that Spanish inflation is heading
downwards. The market expects a rise of 0.3 per cent to give a yearly rate
of 4.95 per cent. The 10-year notional Spanish government bond future rose
0.54 points to 100.40.
German bunds held on to their early gains amid hopes that the Bundesbank
would cut the emergency Lombard funding rate at its council meeting on
Thursday. Dealers said that failing a Lombard rate cut, the market would
need confirmation from the Bundesbank that it would continue its recent
policy of slowly easing unofficial rates through the repo system. The bund
future on Liffe stood 0.54 points higher at 97.48 in late trading.
After weakening in early trading, US Treasury prices firmed at the long end
of the maturity range after another fall in commodity prices.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year bond was up  1/4 at 88 1/32 ,
yielding 7.230 per cent. At the short end, the two-year note was unchanged
at 99 15/32 , to yield 5.395 per cent.
After posting early declines in overseas markets, bonds opened weaker in New
York. Traders said the morning losses were a hangover from last Friday's
late sell-off. Later in the day, the long end recovered, aided by a sharp
decline in gold and other metal prices.
Apart from the rally, the market was quiet, with few willing to trade before
this week's economic data, starting with today's release of the March
producer prices index.
Analysts have forecast an increase of 0.1 per cent or 0.2 per cent in the
PPI, and a similar increase in the consumer prices index, which is due
tomorrow, as are the latest monthly retail sales data.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940412

