FT942-14696

FT  19 APR 94 / International Company News: Three in running for Banesto


   By TOM BURNS


   MADRID


The field to take over Banesto, the failed Spanish financial group which is
to be auctioned next month, narrowed yesterday to three of the largest
domestic banks: Argentaria, the government-controlled banking corporation,
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV), and Banco Santander.
The successful purchaser will become by far the largest financial
institution in Spain and one of the biggest banking groups in Europe.
The three banks informed the Deposit Guarantee Fund, the banking agency
managing the Banesto auction, that they contemplated making individual bids
for the financial group.
At the same time Banco Popular, the fourth domestic banking group, pointed
out the possible dangers of a Banesto acquisition.
Popular, which previously expressed an interest in Banesto and which, like
its rival banks, had closely examined the Banesto offer document, said it
would not bid because of the 'truncated' and 'opaque' nature of Banesto's
business.
It added that there was an 'excessive artificiality' in Banesto accounting
procedures and commented on the 'bad quality of its doubtful assets'.
Popular, which is 54 per cent owned by foreign institutions, said that while
a Banesto acquisition 'could be a normal risk for our colleagues, it
represents a high risk for us.'
Banesto was Spain's fourth-largest banking group when the Bank of Spain
intervened last year after an inspection discovered that it had grossly
over-valued its assets.
A subsequent audit established that Banesto had financing needs of Pta605bn
(Dollars 4.3bn), a sum that has been met partly by the transfer of the
bank's entire reserves to provisions and partly by a Pta180bn
re-capitalisation channelled through the Deposit Guarantee Fund.
The potential buyers of Banesto have until April 25 to deliver sealed bids
for the equity in the bank that is currently held by the Deposit Guarantee
Fund as a result of the rescue plan. The fund's shareholding represents 73
per cent of Banesto's reconstituted capital and under the terms of the
auction the buyer must maintain at least 30 per cent of this equity over
four years.
The winning bid for Banesto, which is likely to be in excess of the Pta180bn
that the fund has put into the institution, will be announced on or before
May 9.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940419

