FT941-16978

FT  07 JAN 94 / Russian deal with Belarus alarms reformers


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


Russia and Belarus have signed an agreement in principle that in effect
incorporates Belarus into the Russian economy - a move that has alarmed
Moscow's reformers.
The agreement, reached in secret by the two governments, could be the
forerunner of attempts to integrate other former Soviet republics in a
reconstruction of much of the old Soviet Union.
The possible damaging effect on reform moves has upset the Russian reformist
politicians battling for a place in the new cabinet whose structure is now
under discussion between President Boris Yeltsin and Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin,
the prime minister.
One source close to the reformers said last night: 'If this agreement
stands, the reformers have no place in the government.'
A central plank in the reformers' strategy last year was to end the system
of open-ended credits from Russia to its former Soviet neighbours. They
achieved this aim in the last quarter of 1993, with credits tailing off in
October and stopping in November and December.
The agreement signed on Wednesday would wholly reverse these moves by
allowing the Central Bank of Belarus to issue roubles for its ailing and
unreformed economy, to have access to Russian gold and hard currency
reserves and to exchange roubles for hard currency at the Moscow currency
auctions.
A clause in the agreement, a copy of which has been obtained by the
Financial Times, says that 'the volume of cash emission on the territory of
Belarus shall be regulated by the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus'.
In exchange, Russia would gain control of the heavily industrialised Belarus
economy and extend its authority over the smallest of the three Slav states
which formed the core of the former Soviet Union. The third, Ukraine, is in
worse shape than Belarus - and pressure will rise there from the powerful
pro-union lobby for a similar deal.
The pressure will be greater since, according to Mr Valery Dashkevich, an
adviser to the Belarus Central Bank, 'Russia is ready to sell oil and gas to
Belarus at rates slightly lower than world prices, trying to bring them
closer to (Russian) domestic prices'.
Ukraine has been forced to pay full world prices for Russian energy, and is
suffering power cuts as a consequence.
Mr Andrei Illarionov, deputy director for the Russian Centre for Economic
Reformers, said last night that the move would immediately transfer
Rbs1,600bn from the Russian economy to that of Belarus. This was because the
agreed exchange rate between the Russian and the Belarus roubles was set at
1:1 - even though the Belarus currency is presently trading at five to one
Russian rouble.
Mr Illarionov blamed the move on Mr Viktor Gerashchenko, conservative
chairman of the Russian central bank who, he said, had been seeking to
destroy the strategy of ending credits to other states in pursuit of his
plan to try to re-create an economic union centred on Moscow.
A western economist for the Centre for Economic Reforms said: 'This would
completely destroy any hope of financial stability this year. At a stroke,
Russia has agreed to pay out the whole of the second tranche of the
International Monetary Fund's systemic transformation facility (Dollars
1.5bn) for which it will soon be negotiating.'
Economy improves, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940107

