FT941-4097

FT  12 MAR 94 / Markets: Investors who live on borrowed time - Serious Money


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR, Personal Finance Editor


Investing with borrowed money is the kind of activity you associate with
hedge funds run by professional traders such as George Soros. No prudent
private investor would do it - would he?
Individual investors, however, are soon to be actively encouraged to trade
on borrowed money. And the people doing the encouraging are the governor of
the Bank of England and the chairman of the London Stock Exchange. Not, of
course, that these guardians of financial rectitude are setting out
deliberately to turn Britain into a nation of speculators. It is just a
by-product of their plans for a re-vamped stock market settlement system.
The Bank's proposals for an electronic system, known as Crest, have the
needs of large institutional investors in mind. Private investors are an
afterthought, at best. And the new system - whatever its overall merits -
will be generally bad for individuals. Their biggest gripe has been that
Crest virtually forces them to put their shares into 'nominee accounts'
which deprive them of some of their traditional shareholders' rights - such
as getting company documents and going to meetings.
Far less attention has been paid to the imminent introduction of margin
trading - investing in the stock market using borrowed money. This has long
been common practice in the US and in futures markets worldwide but, until
now, the UK stock market has worked on a peculiar system. All deals done by
an individual investor within a certain account period, usually a fortnight,
are netted out and settled six working days after the end of that period.
In July, the account system will be replaced by something called rolling
settlement under which each deal will be settled a certain number of days
after the actual bargain is struck - initially 10 but, eventually, five or
even three. There will not be time for investors to settle up within the
deadline. They will have two choices: either they keep substantial funds
with their broker or they open a margin account.
This means either that you put up a certain proportion of the cash you will
need for a share purchase and borrow the rest from your broker, or that you
pledge some of your existing shares to your broker as security against new
purchases - and borrow the rest of the purchase costs.
If, for example, you had a portfolio worth Pounds 50,000, you might be able
to borrow Pounds 25,000 for new purchases. But if the price of your shares
fell, your margin could fall below the agreed level and you would find your
broker making a margin call - in other words, asking you to top up your
deposit.
Here is a lucid exposition of how margin trading can oil the wheels of the
stock market mechanism. 'In the stock market, the buyer of securities on
margin gets full title to his property in an unconditional sale. But he rids
himself of the most grievous burden of ownership - that of putting up the
purchase price - by leaving his securities with his broker as collateral for
the loan that paid for them. The buyer . . . gets the full benefit of any
increase in value - the price of the securities goes up, but the loan that
bought them does not . . .
'The machinery by which Wall Street separates the opportunity to speculate
from the unwanted returns and burdens of ownership is ingenious, precise and
almost beautiful. Banks supply funds to brokers, brokers to customers, and
the collateral goes back to banks in a smooth and all but automatic flow . .
. Margins are effortlessly calculated and watched.'
It all sounds very efficient. But what is a touch worrying is that the
quotation comes from Professor JK Galbraith's classic book, The Great Crash
1929*. It describes in pitiless detail how margin trading eased the wheels
of the Wall Street boom and prepared the way for the bust.
When share prices started to fall, margin calls volleyed forth but, all too
often, went unanswered - because the investors, quite rapidly, ran out of
real money. Wall Street encountered the problem of 'negative equity' long
before British home-owners.
Of course, margin trading does not always have such tragic consequences. The
system flourishes in New York today without spreading routine financial
devastation. But, in the United States, margin requirements are controlled
tightly by the central bank. As yet, both the Bank of England and the London
Stock Exchange seem to be shrugging off all responsibility for margins.
Let us not exaggerate. Reckless trading on margins is likely to be a
minority problem. But it is ironic that the Bank is partly responsible for
introducing a potentially explosive system into this country.
Tax collectors have long ranked with pharisees and sinners as legitimate
popular hate objects. And avoiding paying unnecessary tax is almost a sport
among the investing classes. Early spring is the peak season for this.
Taxation phobia can become dangerous, however, if investors start choosing
investments purely because they are tax-effective. For example, many people
who went into business expansion schemes to enjoy the 40 per cent tax relief
ended up with a worthless investment. Be warned.
*The Great Crash 1929, by John Kenneth Galbraith (Penguin).

The Financial Times


London Page II

940312

