FT942-12349

FT  29 APR 94 / Hurd to stress Tory 'middle way' of working within EU


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and KEVIN BROWN


Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, will today stress the government's
commitment to the European Union when he reasserts his personal vision of
Britain's future in Europe.
Amid renewed questions from rightwing Euro-sceptics about the government's
ability to roll back the tide of federalism, Mr Hurd will re-state the
government's determination to shape the future of, rather than stand aside
from, the EU.
Aides said the foreign secretary would use a European election campaign tour
in the west country to contrast the 'middle way' offered by the
Conservatives in promoting a wider, decentralised Europe with the 'Brussels
federalism' of the Liberal Democrats.
But Mr Hurd will make clear that suggestions being floated on the Tory right
that Britain could prosper outside the mainstream of the EU are totally
unrealistic.
The speech will follow claims on the Tory right that an earlier plea by Mr
Hurd for the party to end its 'lunatic' argument over Europe has been
fatally undermined by a Euro-sceptic surge among constituency activists.
Some say the surge was provoked by the retreat of the prime minister, Mr
John Major, on the EU's qualified majority voting system. Others say
Conservative activists are becoming concerned about the growing powers
delegated to the European parliament by last year's Maastricht treaty.
Party leaders had hoped the divisions would be contained by Mr Major's
promise to build a free-market Europe of nation states. The promise, in an
Economist article last autumn, was the basis for an as yet unpublished
compromise manifesto for the European elections, which is intended to heal
the rift.
Uncertainty over the party's stance on Europe was underlined last night by
reports that Mr Major had ordered a redrafting of the manifesto. It is
understood that Downing Street officials believe the draft document is too
long, and needs to be 'less elegant and more street-fighting'.
Rightwingers, however, say the party is moving away from Europe so fast that
compromise will only be possible if the Tories achieve an unlikely triumph
in the elections. Heavy Tory losses would put pressure on Mr Major to adopt
an aggressively Euro-sceptic stance, they say.
'The morale of the party faithful will be at rock bottom, and our only hope
at the next election will be to offer a distinctive position on Europe,'
said a leading Euro-sceptic.
The growing confidence of the Euro-sceptics appeared to lie behind reports,
dismissed as 'nonsense' by Downing Street, that to appease the right Mr
Major was considering a referendum on continued British membership of the
EU.
Election reports, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940429

