FT943-947

FT  27 SEP 94 / Technology: X-ray vision of the future - A new
'super-microscope' facility for probing the structure of molecules


   By CLIVE COOKSON


The world's biggest and brightest X-ray source, the Pounds 300m European
Synchrotron Radiation Facility, begins operating this week.
Twelve European nations have clubbed together to build the ESRF in Grenoble,
at the foot of the French Alps. It will give academic and industrial
researchers a super-microscope for probing the atomic and molecular
structure of materials.
Several thousand scientists are expected to use the ESRF over the next few
years from many fields, including physics, chemistry, biology, materials
science, geology, environmental studies and medicine. Applications range
from examining surface corrosion of metals to identifying the structure of
enzymes as potential targets in pharmaceutical research.
The ESRF has 11 X-ray beams in operation, generating radiation one billion
times brighter than a typical hospital X-ray machine. By 1998, 40 beams will
be available.
X-rays are well suited for probing molecular structures because their
wavelengths - less than a millionth of a millimetre - are similar to the
distances between atoms in molecules.
The main technique for discovering the structure of an unknown compound,
X-ray crystallography, has been known for 80 years. Its best known success
was in enabling James Watson and Francis Crick to propose a double helix
structure for DNA.
But deducing a structure from an X-ray diffraction pattern is still a very
tricky and time-consuming job; the brilliant, narrowly focused beams from
the ESRF will give clearer patterns than conventional sources.
Synchrotron radiation is given off whenever charged particles are
accelerated close to the speed of light. When scientists first observed the
phenomenon in the primitive particle accelerators of the 1940s, they found
it a nuisance because it diverted energy from the particles.
But by the 1960s they realised that synchrotron radiation was a useful
research tool in its own right and they started to tap the X-rays emitted by
accelerators that had been designed for fundamental physics research.
During the 1970s and 1980s, about 40 accelerators were built around the
world as dedicated synchrotron radiation sources.
The ESRF is the first of a new generation of ultra-bright synchrotron
machines. It will be followed by the US Advanced Proton Source, due to begin
operations at the Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago in 1996, and
Japan's SpRing-8 at Tsukuba science city in about 2000.
In the ESRF an intense beam of electrons, as thin as a human hair,
accelerates around a giant ring 844 metres in circumference. An array of
magnets keeps the beam in shape and controls the radiation. There are 64
'bending magnets' to direct the electrons around the ring, and special
'wigglers' and 'undulators' to make the beam twist and turn in a way that
gives off particularly intense X-rays.
Industrial researchers will have two routes to using ESRF. If they want to
keep their work secret, they will be able to buy time on the machine at a
rate of Pounds 3,300 per eight-hour shift.
Alternatively, if a company intends to publish its experimental results, it
can submit a proposal to the ESRF 'peer review' panels which divide up the
machine's 'public time' between competing research groups according to their
scientific merit.
Richard Oldman, a chemist at ICI, the UK chemicals group, has been allocated
beam time during the first round of experiments this autumn, for a
collaborative experiment with Keele University to investigate the structure
of polyester, a common polymer (plastic). He and his colleagues will be
making molecular movies, to see how the long polyester chains behave during
industrial processing.
'Polyester is widely used in industry, for example to make plastic bottles
for soft drinks,' Oldman says. 'We hope to learn more about the way the
polyester chains relate to the mechanical properties of the bottle, so that
we can sharpen up our processing and make stronger plastics.'
ESRF will also have a medical beam. This will be perfectly suited to
angiography, for example, enabling researchers to take detailed pictures of
the fine blood vessels around the heart, whose narrowing is a sign of
cardiovascular disease.
As well as the main public beamlines, which will be used for a great variety
of short-term studies, the ESRF has reserved several slots for long-term
projects. For example, the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council has given Malcolm Cooper of Warwick University and William Stirling
of Keele University a Pounds 2.3m grant to build an X-ray facility for
British scientists to study the structure of magnetic materials.
Cooper says there are several reasons why the ESRF will enable them to do
research that would not be possible with less powerful national X-ray
machines such as the UK Synchrotron Radiation Source at the Daresbury
Laboratory in Cheshire. One is that ESRF beams 'can be focused down to small
focal spot sizes (less than 0.2mm by 0.3mm) so that small samples and thin
films can be studied'.
Even when the ESRF is fully operational, the demand for intense X-rays will
be great enough to require new national synchrotron sources too, Cooper and
Oldman say.
In the UK, government-funded research councils are considering spending
about Pounds 100m on a Medium Energy X-ray Source as a successor to the
Synchrotron Radiation Source at Daresbury. If MEXS goes ahead, it will start
operating in 2001 or soon afterwards.
There is no doubt that X-rays have a brilliant future in materials research.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940927

