FT941-12876

FT  28 JAN 94 / The Soviet insider, the gold, and Kyrgyzstan's political
innocents: The western Mr Big with top-level connections in four former
Soviet republics


   By LEYLA BOULTON


Mr Boris Birshtein, a Soviet emigre who runs a Zurich-based trading company,
enjoys the rare distinction of having caused the resignation of one
country's government and of being involved in the downfall of another's
vice-president.
As a result of the scandals which have erupted around him, his Seabeco
group, with annual turnover of Dollars 500m, has attracted more publicity
than otherwise warranted by its size. Since the Soviet Union's collapse, he
has gained impressive access to the leaders of at least four of the new
republics, offering them foreign trips and practical help in running their
affairs.
Not surprisingly for the state-dominated economies of the former Soviet
Union, where good political connections have always been essential to clinch
deals, Mr Birshtein was able to expand his business with their assistance.
As the political leaders struggled with the problems of trying to establish
functioning governments and market economies on the ruins of the monolithic
Soviet system which concentrated expertise, resources, and talent in Moscow,
his help came as a godsend.
But their inexperience and low pay made them prone to the corruption and
incompetence which have fed nostalgia for the old Soviet Union - the
sentiment on which Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the Russian neo-fascist,
campaigned to win a large chunk of the vote in last month's parliamentary
elections.
Mr Birshtein can certainly point to simply being good at business in a
half-reformed system where high-level political connections have long been
essential for clinching deals. The information unveiled as a result of the
scandals around Seabeco says more about the officials who have treated state
property as their own and, in the case of Russia, exploited false
allegations against him to settle political scores.
'It's not a secret for anybody that there is corruption in Russia but I'm
not a policeman. I never in my life did anything illegal,' says Mr
Birshtein.
A native Russian speaker who started building up business contacts in Moscow
after emigrating to Canada in 1979, Mr Birshtein was in a unique position to
exploit opportunities offered by the Soviet Union's collapse in December
1991.
As Mr Birshtein told the Financial Times: 'From 1982 ..I spent a lot of
time, step by step, meeting a lot of people, building connections and
relations. These connections led me to the top.'
As the president of Kyrgyzstan, Mr Askar Akayev, then one of his eager
partners, recalls: 'Boris Birshtein made a big impression on us. First of
all through his respectability. He had his own private jets, and when in
Moscow, he stayed in places to which only the most powerful Politburo
members had access. Birshtein did not hide this and was proud of his ties
with the great and powerful of this world. Secondly, his commercial
proposals corresponded to what we were looking for.'
Nowhere is the inexperience of his partners clearer than in Kyrgyzstan, one
of the smallest and poorest republics, where the entire cabinet resigned
last month over allegations that Mr Tursun Chyngyshev, the prime minister,
personally profited from a joint venture set up with Mr Birshtein to develop
the republic's gold wealth.
In 1992 Mr Birshtein's private jets ferried 1.6 tonnes of gold concentrate
from Bishkek, the remote Kyrgyz capital, to Zurich. In Switzerland, the gold
was refined by a Swiss company called Metaux Precieux SA Metalor, and stored
in the vaults of Union Bank of Switzerland as collateral for a Dollars 13.8m
credit line to Kyrgyzstan. A parliamentary investigation claimed
irregularities appeared in the spending of this money, as well as in the
amount of gold finally put at the disposal of the Kyrgyz public purse in
February 1993.
It also asked whether the gold was used secretly by Kyrgyz officials to
raise funds for their own benefit before the credit line was made available
in February 1993. Until then, ingots produced by Metalor from Kyrgyz
concentrate were kept for an annual fee of 0.2 per cent at Banque Indosuez
in Zurich in the gold deposit account of a Liberian-registered company
called Wico International - in which 50 shares were held by Seabeco, and the
remaining 450 by Kyrgyzstan.
But Mr Chyngyshev has come under particularly harsh scrutiny for joining the
board of a joint venture called Seabeco Kyrgyzstan, whose founding documents
describe its aims as 'trading in goods of all kinds ..financing of
investment projects ..consultancy in economic and financial matters ..and
purchase of real estate'.
Illustrating the government's dependence on Mr Birshtein, who was even
appointed head of an official committee for the reconstruction and
development of Kyrgyzstan, the government said it paid Dollars 1.96m to
Seabeco out of the Dollars 13.8m credit line. It said this was repayment for
items including weapons for the leadership's bodyguard, four Volvo-940
limousines to ferry around the president and other high officials, and
equipment to upgrade Kyrgyzstan's gold mining industry.
Again, as part of Mr Birshtein's helping hand strategy, Seabeco helped set
up Kyrgyzstan's first international business school, which last month
produced its first 40 graduates. It was also instrumental in bringing to
Kyrgyzstan the man who devised its first market reform programme, Mr Charles
McMillan, previously an adviser to Mr Brian Mulroney, the former Canadian
prime minister.
But parliament challenges the government's version of how the government
spent the Dollars 13.8m, including the payments made to Seabeco. Parliament
said the weapons and cars were given to the Kyrgyz leadership by Seabeco but
were subsequently described as a purchase to help the government plug holes
in its account of how the money was really spent.
Although it is still not clear exactly how much money was pocketed by
officials, Mr Akayev does not disagree with an estimate that at least
Dollars 4m went missing.
'Even if it was just Dollars 4m, that is a substantial amount for a small
republic like Kyrgyzstan,' said Mr Ramazan Derildayev, deputy chairman of
the commission which conducted the investigation.
'If people who are supposed to be monitoring the use of resources decide to
enrich themselves, then you have to say they are corrupt. We hope that the
fact the president understood us and that parliament supported us means
there will be less ugliness in future.'
In trying to unravel the Seabeco inheritance, the Kyrgyz parliament is also
keen to review the contract for the development of Kyrgyzstan's Kumtor gold
deposit awarded to Cameco, a Canadian mining company introduced to the
Kyrgyz leadership by Mr Birshtein. Cameco is a well-known Saskatchewan
company which is the world's largest uranium producer and has been looking
for ways to diversify into other metals, such as gold.
Although they said they would now think twice about using Mr Birshtein as
their agent because of the controversy which has erupted around him, Cameco
executives said he did a good job in helping them arrange the deal. Since
then, however, the repercussions of the Seabeco scandal have sufficiently
alarmed Cameco to prompt its local representative to defend the deal in a
Bishkek newspaper article.
The article said that Cameco had signed the deal only after verifying that
it was in line with Kyrgyz law, that it had revised the terms of the deal
several times to satisfy the Kyrgyz side, and that it had already invested
Dollars 6m in the project and hoped to go ahead - but only on condition that
the Kyrgyz side removed 'uncertainty' over the deal. Parliament has set the
new government - which includes many of its old ministers - a February 18
deadline to satisfy its queries. These include parliament's claim that the
government should have sought tenders from rival companies before picking
Cameco.
The Kyrgyz prosecutor's office is now examining the commission's findings to
determine whether it has enough evidence to bring criminal charges against
the ex-prime minister and other high officials.
Although he said he did not exclude greed, President Akayev, who has not
been implicated in the affair, has blamed most of the losses on inexperience
and incompetence of officials.
'I am sure that International Monetary Fund and World Bank's programmes fail
in 90 per cent of cases because of bureaucrats,' he said in a recent
interview.
On Sunday, Mr Akayev is putting his own prestige on the line by asking for a
vote of confidence in a nationwide referendum. Although he is expected to
scrape through in a vote he initiated to avoid holding early parliamentary
and presidential elections, the poll may well reflect disillusionment with
his reformist but inexperienced rule similar to the results in last month's
parliamentary elections in Russia.
That Mr Birshtein's deal-making success was commensurate with his access to
the politicians is borne out by his achievements in Moldova, another small
republic on the periphery of the former Soviet Union. There, Mr Birshtein's
joint venture is headed by the republican president's son-in-law, Mr Artur
Gherman. The former Communist party hotel, now called the Seabeco Hotel and
the only place to stay for western businessmen and visiting officials in the
capital Kishinyov, belongs to the joint venture, which also enjoys various
import duty exemptions, and the rare right to set up casinos.
Mr Birshtein boasts that he arranged a meeting between the then Russian
vice-president, Mr Alexander Rutskoi, and Moldova's President Mircea Snegur,
which helped defuse a fierce conflict over Moldova's Russian-speaking
enclave of Dnestr. 'I had a meeting with the Moldovan president. He was very
depressed. I said I see how you are suffering. I said I could arrange a
meeting with Mr Rutskoi as I knew him.'
It was in Russia that Mr Birshtein's practice of cultivating political ties
to promote his business interests backfired against him spectacularly. Mr
Birshtein's contacts went so high in the polarised Russian political world
that by the summer of 1993, he found himself at the heart of a ferocious
power struggle between Mr Yeltsin and two powerful opponents by then in open
alliance, Mr Rutskoi and Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker.
Concerned about the effects of Russia's political instability on business,
Mr Birshtein says he tried to mediate a truce between Mr Yeltsin and Mr
Khasbulatov ('I got a meeting with the president. It's much simpler than you
think'). Within weeks, however, the president's men produced allegations
that Mr Rutskoi had received kickbacks from official imports of babyfood
with Mr Birshtein's help, which were then used as a pretext to expel him
from his Kremlin office.
A presidential decree suspending Mr Rutskoi 'pending clarification' of the
allegations proved little more than a manoeuvre to clear the way for Mr
Yeltsin's unconstitutional dissolution of parliament on September 21. This
was followed by Mr Rutskoi's leadership of the armed parliamentary rebellion
on October 3, for which he is now awaiting trial.
However, four months after the initial corruption allegations were made, Mr
Gennady Ponomaryov, the Moscow city prosecutor in charge of the case, has
found 'no evidence' to charge Mr Rutskoi with corruption. Now he wants to
prosecute for slander the presidential officials who made the allegations in
the first place.
The case provides the clearest illustration of how Russian politicians,
including Mr Yeltsin, have used corruption allegations to discredit
political rivals rather than to fight the corruption that is gnawing at the
heart of Russian society.
Mr Ponomaryov did, however, launch a criminal investigation into Agrokhim, a
state-owned monopoly producer of mineral fertilisers, over its use of a
joint venture with Mr Birshtein's Seabeco.
Mr Ponomaryov has queried a transfer of Dollars 5m from Agrokhim to the
Seabeco Trade and Finance joint venture in the final years of the Soviet
Union's existence, when managers of state enterprises began using foreign
partners to keep state funds out of the country. The investigation appears
to be trying to make the case fit a pattern. In other cases managers of
state-owned companies have made money by fudging figures on the value of
imports and exports and siphoning profits to joint ventures in the west.
Mr Yuri Orlov, a senior Agrokhim executive at the time, explains that the
joint venture with Seabeco was a convenient vehicle for marketing fertiliser
exports in the west and importing western equipment and consumer goods
needed by the corporation at home. Claiming that state funds channelled
through the joint venture were 'strictly controlled' by the Soviet
authorities, he said he saw nothing wrong with the fact that Agrokhim
received part of the commission fees it paid to its own joint venture for
selling its own fertiliser.
For his part, Mr Birshtein, who deplored damage done to his business by the
allegations against him and Mr Rutskoi, says his only mistake was getting so
closely involved in politics. 'I'm never going to do anything like that
again,' he said. 'Everybody has to know their place. If you're a
businessman, don't touch politics.'
Additional reporting by Chrystia Freeland in London, Steve LeVine in
Tashkent, Jill Barshay in Kiev and Bernard Simon in Toronto

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940128

