FT941-4136

FT  12 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Lawnmower buy for Tomkins


   By DAVID WIGHTON


Tomkins, the UK-based conglomerate, is making its first acquisition since
its Pounds 990m takeover of food group Ranks Hovis McDougall in December
1992.
It is paying about Dollars 115m (Pounds 78m) for the lawnmower and
snowblower businesses of Noma Industries, a quoted Canadian group.
Mr Greg Hutchings, chief executive, described it as 'an excellent bolt-on'
to Murray Ohio, the group's US lawnmower manufacturer.
'It is a smaller competitor with a complementary range of lawnmowers. The
snowblowers, which are about 25 per cent of turnover, give us some counter
seasonal activity.'
Tomkins is paying less than asset value for the businesses which had sales
of Dollars 239.4m last year. Tomkins has agreed not to disclose what, if
any, profits it made but Mr Hutchings admitted it had been 'struggling'.
It has two modern factories in Tennessee and one in Brampton, Ontario. Most
of the sales are in the US with the rest split between Canada and Europe.
Mr David Lang, an analyst at brokers Henderson Crosthwaite, said: 'It will
ease Murray Ohio's capacity shortage in America and gives them a window into
Canada.'
Mr Hutchings would not comment on plans for the Noma plants or quantify the
likely job losses. But, he said: 'It will be self-financing once we get to
grips with it.'
The consideration, which will be at a fixed discount of Dollars 11.75m to
net assets, will be met from existing cash resources which stood at Pounds
170m in October. Tomkins will also assume Dollars 16.7m of long-term debt
and operating lease liabilities of Dollars 12.4m.
The businesses consist of Outdoor Products, which makes and distributes of
power mowers, garden tractors and snowblowers, and Dynamark Plastics, a
small custom injection moulder, which supplies Outdoor Products and other
Noma Industries businesses.
Competition in the US lawnmower market has been fierce and in the six months
to October Tomkins said Murray Ohio had made volume gains at the expense of
lower margins.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940312

