FT944-11166

FT  08 NOV 94 / Bank lottery lures Japan's savers


   By GERARD BAKER


   TOKYO


Cynics who have come to regard opening a Japanese bank account as tantamount
to buying a ticket in a lottery have had their suspicions confirmed.
Johnan Shinkin Bank, the country's largest credit association, yesterday
launched a deposit account that includes eligibility for a raffle with cash
prizes of up to Y50,000 (Pounds 317).
The one-year 'Super Dream' account, the first of its kind, can be opened
with a minimum deposit of Y100,000 and carries an interest rate of 2.1 per
cent per year, in line with one-year deposit account rates at other leading
banks.
But every six months, account holders will be entered into a kind of
financial tombola, with winners receiving between Y3,000 and Y50,000 when
their deposits mature. More than 4,000 prizes will be won every half-year
and bank officials said the structure of the lottery would give customers a
3.38 per cent chance of winning something.
Johnan Shinkin's scheme is the latest in a proliferating series of special
attractions offered by banks to lure customers in a more challenging, less
regulated competitive environment. A key element in the recent financial
deregulation has been the liberalisation of deposit interest rates.
The process began a decade ago but was completed only last month, when all
remaining controls on banks' deposit rates were lifted.
The reforms leave banks in the unfamiliar position of having to compete
energetically for depositors.
Among the more successful post-liberalisation campaigns has been one by a
regional bank that fixed its interest rate to the batting average of the
local baseball star.
More predictably, there has been a rapid growth in the number of accounts
carrying with them the sort of cute freebies for which the Japanese have a
penchant.
The frontiers of consumer choice in this field have recently been extended
to include giveaway toys depicting everything from Walt Disney's creations
to the increasingly popular 'Dinky the Dinosaur' cartoon character.
But the more serious competition centres on the pecuniary advantage that
banks are now able to offer their customers. Since last month's changes, a
small but significant differential has opened up between bank deposit rates.
The gap seems set set to grow wider, which will threaten the already anaemic
profitability of Japan's banks as demand for lending remains sluggish, and
they struggle with a heavy burden of non-performing loans.
Johnan Shinkin estimates that the Super Dream account will cost the bank
about the same as an extra 0.2 percentage point added to interest on a
one-year deposit.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941108

