FT941-4065

FT  12 MAR 94 / Books: Life and times of a paper tiger - The self-appointed
voice of Britain's Jewish community


   By GERALD KAUFMAN


THE JEWISH CHRONICLE AND ANGLO-JEWRY, 1841-1991 by David Cesarani Cambridge
University Press Pounds 40, 329 pages
Two Jews stood before a firing squad. Said one, 'I'm going to ask for a
blindfold.' Retorted the other, 'Don't cause trouble.'
For most of its 150 years as the self-appointed voice of Britain's Jewish
community, the Jewish Chronicle has been trying not to cause trouble.
Occasionally the newspaper has been led by men, either wayward or brilliant,
who have failed to base their editorial policies on a groping search for the
lowest common denominator. In 1927 Leopold Greenberg, ignoring the timorous
bleatings of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, campaigned -
successfully - on behalf of Oscar Slater, a Jew wrongfully convicted of
murder. In the 1930s Jack Rich, again shaking off restraint from the Board
of Deputies, advocated boycotting German goods after the Nazis came to power
and supported opposition to fascist marches in the streets of London's East
End.
In 1946 Ivan Greenberg was sacked for supporting the terrorist gangs running
amok in British-occupied Palestine; the Jewish Chronicle's directors drew
the line at his hailing various atrocities as 'Jewish Resistance
Operations.' A very different kind of editor - perhaps its best ever - was
William Frankel, who wrote in 1974: 'It is today beyond doubt that the
Palestinians have developed a real sense of identity. They form an intrinsic
part of the jigsaw puzzle of Middle East politics and they cannot be ignored
or wished into silence.'
Mostly, however, the newspaper's editors have accepted the dictum which is
attributed by David Cesarani in this book to Frankel's successor, Geoffrey
Paul, that: 'a newspaper, at least one like the Jewish Chronicle, could not
run ahead of its readership, crusading for one particular cause which they
did not share.' Paul banned his reporters from interviewing representatives
of the Palestine Liberation Organisation on the grounds that: 'a majority of
our readers would misinterpret our intentions.'
That approach would have found favour with the Jewish Chronicle's directors
who, in announcing the dismissal of Ivan Greenberg, laid down the 'main
lines' of the paper's policy as 'Moderate Zionist in respect to
Palestine/Orthodox as regards the Jewish religion/Strictly loyal in relation
to HMG.'
At times the paper's Zionism was so moderate as to be almost indiscernible.
When Theodore Herzl announced the convening of a congress to found the
Zionist Organisation, the Chronicle wailed that 'the very notion of an
'International Congress' was an insult to the patriotism of Jews' and liable
to give rise to 'groundless insinuations that Jews are now confessedly
unpatriotic.'
Strict loyalty to HMG was at delicate moments interpreted so assiduously as
to make cringing seem positively daring. The most venomous anti-Semites,
when advocating anti-Jewish immigration legislation at the beginning of this
century, could not have outdone the Jewish Chronicle's categorisation of
wretched newcomers from Eastern Europe as 'the mediaevalised overflow of the
Russia and Romanian Ghettos', its jocularly expressed bafflement as to 'why
these magnetic Poles are attracted to our shores', and its advocacy of
repatriation, based on the belief that 'men such as these should be returned
to their native places.'
Such views were supported by letters from readers, which expressed fear of
'competition from lowly paid foreign Jews.' It is indeed the comfortably-off
who have generally been most at home with the paper. The upwardly-striving
were guided by property advertisements in its columns to move house to those
posh neighbourhoods of Golders Green, Edgware and their like which were the
preferred locations for what Cesarani calls the 'galloping suburbanisation'
of London Jewry.
Although in 1938 the Chronicle expressed the view that in order that
ostentatious affluence should not provoke anti-Semitism - 'It might be a
good or a bad thing if Jews were to ration, if they could, their
representation in the professions' - by 1985 readership surveys (says
Cesarani) 'showed that 48 per cent of JC readers were in social classes A
and B, although only 17 per cent of the total British adult population
normally fell into these categories . . . The terminal age of education was
'considerably higher' than the national average, and the percentage of home
ownership, at 87 per cent, was 'far in excess' of nationwide trends.'
No wonder that, when the paper did poke its head above the parapet to bemoan
anti-Semitism, its particular concerns included exclusion of Jews from
certain golf clubs and quotas against Jews seeking admission to public
schools.
In this admirably researched, if somewhat gracelessly written, volume,
Cesarani points out that its 'readership profile makes the Jewish Chronicle
a highly attractive medium' for advertisers; indeed, each week the paper's
pages demonstrate anew that this successful and long-lived publication
faithfully reflects that minority of the Jewish community who buy it, in
being prosperous, conformist and complacent.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940312

