FT941-17075

FT  06 JAN 94 / Economic Viewpoint: The spectre that is haunting Europe


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Marx and Engels began their celebrated Communist Manifesto of 1848 with the
resounding words: 'A spectre is haunting Europe - the spectre of communism.'
Communism may have gone. But a different economic spectre is haunting the
west. It is one known by the less resounding title of 'the factor price
equalisation theorem'.
To appreciate what this is all about we need to go back to the fundamental
proposition of international trade theory and indeed of all economics. It is
that voluntary exchange makes both sides better off. Otherwise the exchanges
would not take place. The proposition has been known for over 200 years, at
least since Adam Smith. The rest is elaboration.
Part of this elaboration has, however, been casting a shadow over the free
trade case for the last 70 years or so. For in the 1920s a 'theorem' was
promulgated by the Swedish economist and statesman Bertil Ohlin known as
'factor price equalisation'. A 'factor' is what a businessman would call an
input. Trade economists tend to group these inputs into very broad
categories, such as capital, land, skilled and unskilled labour.
The modern statement of the theorem is due to the Nobel Prize winning
economist, Paul Samuelson. It asserts what many practical men have long
supposed: that when available production techniques are similar, transport
costs are low, and several other conditions are met, the earnings of
'factors' in different countries will tend to equality under free trade. For
instance, wages of unskilled labour in the US will fall and unskilled labour
in India and China rise towards a common level.
During the golden age of the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s there was much
arid armchair discussion of the assumptions under which factor price
equalisation held and how likely they were to be fulfilled. (The interested
reader will find the key arguments in, for instance, the 1969 Penguin
International Trade Selected Readings, and in Max Corden's International
Trade Theory and Policy, Edward Elgar, 1992). Meanwhile, trade was being
liberalised and expanded and real pay was rising in the industrial west.
But with the stagnation in US blue-collar wages of the 1980s, and the rise
in European unemployment, factor price equalisation entered the world of
policy argument. Indeed, in another echo of Karl Marx, some economists have
been reminded of his theory of the immiseration (growing poverty) of the
proletariat. An American economist of uncompromising pro-free trade views,
Jagdish Bhagwati, subtitled a recent co-authored paper (available from the
American Enterprise Institute) 'Is Marx striking again?' A well-known
British economic consultant, Douglas McWilliams, has called a recent lecture
'Perhaps Marx was right after all'.
Paul Samuelson himself, lecturing in Italy in 1992, remarked with cautious
alarmism: 'As the billions of people who live in east Asia and Latin America
qualify for good, modern jobs, the half-billion Europeans and North
Americans who used to tower over the rest of the world will find their
upward progress in living standards encountering tough resistance.'
Nevertheless, a person's younger self is often wiser, and I found more
helpful a statement Samuelson made 51 years before: 'It has been shown that
the harm which free trade inflicts upon one factor of production is
necessarily less than the gain to the other. Hence, it is always possible to
bribe the suffering factor by subsidy or other redistributive devices so as
to leave all factors better off as a result of trade.' This, indeed, would
also be my own 'executive summary' of the whole discussion.
Is freer trade, however, really depressing the pay of an important section
of workers in the west? Average real hourly earnings of all US private
sector workers fell between 1979 and 1989 from Dollars 8.17 (in dollars of
1982 purchasing power) to Dollars 7.45. Even allowing for fringe benefits,
and taking in the self-employed, they virtually stagnated (rising by an
average of  1/2 per cent per annum). The dispersion between high and
low-paid workers has increased to levels greater than anything seen since
1940. In the same period the differential earnings of college graduates
increased by 30 per cent relative to those with only high-school education.
Worst of all, the real hourly wages of young males with 12 or fewer years of
schooling dropped in absolute terms by 20 per cent.
The same pressures that have expressed themselves in the US in pay
stagnation have come to the surface in Europe in unemployment and
non-employment (that is workers who have left the official labour force). In
the UK both symptoms can be found, as detailed by Edward Balls in his
contribution to the booklet Work and Welfare (published by the Institute of
Public Policy Research).
His view is that developing country exports still account for too small a
proportion of manufacturing sales in the west to explain the downward
pressure on unskilled wages. Bhagwati also dismisses scare stories about
cheap foreign imports depressing the pay of unskilled workers in the US. For
the same influences should also depress prices of US imports and domestic
substitutes for imports, relative to prices in general; there is no sign of
this.
Bhagwati's explanation is 'skill-based technical change' mainly of domestic
origin. Technical change, he suggests, has been focused more than in the
past on the sectors needing high skills. Trade may, however, have an
indirect effect here. For it makes production footloose and small cost
changes can cause production to migrate between countries. This results in
more labour turnover and less training effort. Other sources of pressure
include the effect of import pressure in eroding the differentially high
wages obtained by unions in industries such as cars and steel.
But whatever the position in the past, international trade movements could
well impose pressures on pay levels in future. McWilliams suggests that real
hourly labour costs in Europe are likely to decline by over 1 per cent per
annum over the next quarter century. He argues that a combination of
population growth and spreading literacy will expand the world's labour
force - skilled as wells unskilled - from 600m at present to around 4bn in
25 years. Thus labour will become very plentiful and capital extremely
scarce.
But there are countervailing factors. If real pay in the developing and
former communist countries remains low relative to productivity, as
McWilliams postulates, then there must be one of two consequences. There
could be a rise in the real exchange rates of these countries, thus
dampening their competitive edge. Alternatively, they will accumulate vast
export surpluses which can be used to finance the required increases in the
world capital stock. This investment in itself will be a source of demand
for the products and labour force of the old, as well as of the new,
industrial countries.
The implications for policy are indeed not very different whether the
downward pressures on labour demand come from imports or from indigenous
change. A familiar response is the call for more education and training.
There is also the need for more sensitive social security arrangements which
will encourage people to stay in the labour market even on low or part-time
pay.
But so far the debate is very incomplete. Much more analysis is required of
likely pay trends in developing and former communist countries and how they
are likely to spend their growing export proceeds. If this were done, their
emergence into the world economy may seem less of a threat and more of an
opportunity than it does at present.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940106

