FT943-13148

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (5): On the mend, despite the hospital
rats - How foreign aid and reform are helping to shake up the nation's
archaic health service / Medical care


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


For decades the Albanian health service, starved of funds and equipment,
coped as best it could with the medical consequences of poverty, dirt,
pollution and ignorance.
The situation has improved substantially over the last three years with the
delivery of substantial medical aid and equipment. Over the next three years
Lek12.8bn, nearly 18 per cent of total public investment, will be devoted to
'human resource development' - including health, education, building a
social safety net and labour market services, such as employment exchanges
and re-skilling.
The changes can best be seen at Tirana's University Hospital, the country's
premier teaching hospital, where doctors have received new equipment and
have also noted a marked change in the pattern of disease over the last
three years.
'Malnutrition used to be a big problem. But since land was redistributed and
people have been allowed to have their own cows, sheep and chickens again
malnutrition is now rare.' says Dr Mehdi Alimehmeti, the hospital's deputy
director. Deterioration of the country's infrastructure, however, has
created new problems, such as a serious outbreak of hepatitis due to the
contamination of fresh water with sewage from pipes laid over 50 years ago.
But Dr Heta Hyseh, who heads the child surgical unit, has noted a decline in
bronchial infections and abnormalities in the digestive tract.
At the same time, however, the trauma department has seen a sharp rise in
car accident victims following the simultaneous appearance of thousands of
inexperienced drivers. The influx of western cigarettes has also done
nothing to moderate the high incidence of lung and other smoking-related
cancers.
Dr Alimehmeti also notes subtle changes in the behaviour of patients and
their families since the emergence of a more consumerist society.
Traditionally villagers from even the remotest parts of the mountainous
north east and other obscure parts of this mountainous country of poor roads
and inadequate public transport brought their children or relations to the
University hospital for treatment. Once inside they squatted down there
until the patient recovered or died. This continues. Compared with the
situation three years ago, however, Dr Alimehmeti notes that 'people have
become quieter, more respectful'.
Meanwhile, the morale of hospital staff has improved with the delivery of
new beds and new ambulances, mostly donated by foreign governments and
charities. New equipment includes a Dollars 500,000 laser kidney-stone
smashing machine from Germany, brain scanners and a cardiac scanner from
Kuwait.
'Two years ago we had no sheets or blankets and only ancient beds. The lifts
did not work and we often ran out of oxygen and other essential items for
operations. At the same time, the hospital was surrounded by piles of
garbage and it was impossible to keep the hospital clean. Now the garbage
has been cleared, the wards are much cleaner and we intend to privatise the
laundry, catering and other services,' he adds.
Even so, much remains to be done. Rats scurry in broad daylight over garbage
piled up against a perimeter fence which abuts one of the city's biggest
markets. The oldest wards are still dank, airless rooms packed with 10 beds
and lit by a bare bulb shaded by an old newspaper. Sheets are hand washed
and hung on hedges to dry.
Standards in provincial hospitals reportedly remain low. But here at the
University hospital, where six formerly separate hospitals are being
re-organised into one coherent whole, the level of service and dedication
seem higher.
A new neurological unit and a new 'resource centre for health' partially
financed by a Dollars 120,000 grant from the Soros foundation, will further
upgrade the facilities.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940721

