FT941-4269

FT  11 MAR 94 / International Company News: AMD wins round in Intel fight


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


A US court has reaffirmed Advanced Micro Devices' rights to use Intel
technology to compete in the lucrative microprocessor market. The jury
verdict, reached yesterday, represents a serious blow to Intel, the world's
largest chip maker.
AMD can use Intel's 'microcode', the internal software in a microprocessor
chip, the jury determined. It found that a 1976 licensing agreement between
the two companies granted the company the right to use the copyrighted
programs. During the trial, Intel argued that the agreement did not extend
to microcode.
The verdict ended a long-standing dispute between the two Silicon Valley
chip makers. In 1992, Intel won the first trial of the same case, but the
verdict was subsequently set aside when Intel was alleged to have withheld
relevant documents.
For AMD, the new verdict removes a serious threat that could, at least
temporarily, have forced the company to withdraw from the microprocessor
market.
'We feel that this verdict is a major, major victory,' said Mr W. J. Sanders
III, chairman and chief executive officer of AMD. 'For nearly a decade,
AMD's growth, profitability and indeed very existence have been threatened
by Intel's unwillingness to live up to its agreements with AMD, preferring
to compete in the courtroom instead of the marketplace. We are deeply
gratified that our rights have now been confirmed by the unanimous verdict
of a federal jury.'
Mr Sanders said that he was asking Intel 'to accept this verdict, recognise
that competition can be beneficial even to Intel, and end the harassment of
AMD in the courts'. However, Intel said that it would appeal against the
verdict and continue to pursue outstanding issues in two related disputes
between the companies.
'We now have two distinctly different jury verdicts,' said Mr Thomas Dunlap,
Intel general counsel. 'Therefore, the Court of Appeals must now decide
which verdict stands.
'AMD has always had the option of competing fairly in the market place by
writing its own microcode. If they chose to do that these disputes will be
resolved.'
Intel dominates the market with close to 90 per cent market share. 'Intel
made more profits in 1993 than the next nine semiconductor manufacturers
together,' noted Mr Sanders.
AMD said that it plans to ship over 900,000 Intel-style 486 microprocessors
in the current quarter, up from 350,000 in the last quarter, and is aiming
for a 25 per cent share of the world market for PC microprocessors. By
removing the legal cloud over AMD the verdict could boost demand for its
microprocessors, the company said.
Intel shares closed at Dollars 70 1/8 , down from yesterday's close of
Dollars 71 5/8 , while AMD shares rose from Dollars 22 3/4 to Dollars 29.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940311

