FT941-16911

FT  07 JAN 94 / Insurer fined Pounds 145,000 for three rule breaches


   By ALISON SMITH


Fines totalling Pounds 145,000 have been imposed on the Life Association of
Scotland, the Edinburgh-based insurer, for three rule breaches relating to
recruitment and advertising.
Lautro, the self-regulating body for the life insurance industry, yesterday
said it had fined LAS Pounds 135,000 for two breaches of the rules intended
to ensure that only suitable individuals act as company representatives, and
a further Pounds 10,000 for a misleading 'pensions time-bomb' campaign in
November 1992. LAS admitted the charges.
The total is close to the record imposed by Lautro, which fined Interlink
Assurance Pounds 160,000 in April last year over its sales of pensions to
nurses.
LAS's fines will be paid by Internationale Nederlanden Groep, which sold LAS
to Britannia Life last autumn, after the breaches had taken place.
Mr Adrian Walsh, general executive assistant at Lautro, said the fine
reflected how seriously the regulator regarded LAS's breach of the general
principle that it should organise and control its internal affairs in a
responsible way.
Lautro found that in the period of just over two years from summer 1990, 35
individuals were LAS company representatives even though the company's
compliance officer was not satisfied that they were suitable. All 35 were
suspended by LAS, and about 30 then left the company. When Britannia Life
acquired LAS it terminated the contracts of all the direct sales force
because it has alternative ways of selling its products, particularly
through the building society with which it is linked.
Ms Elspeth McLean, head of corporate services at Britannia Life, said that
before the takeover LAS itself had taken steps to ensure that its
recruitment and advertising procedures met all Lautro requirements.
While Lautro did not object to the theme of the 'pensions time-bomb'
campaign, it said that the references in it to the Maxwell pensions scandal
were wrong and irrelevant.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940107

