FT942-12270

FT  30 APR 94 / Car service industry faces squeeze


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


A harshly competitive future is being predicted for the car repair and
servicing industry. Several thousand outlets are forecast to close as a
result of improved car reliability and the projected ability of many
vehicles to travel 30,000 miles between services by the end of the decade -
more than double the present norm.
This means the retail market for servicing and repairs will grow in value by
just 14 per cent between now and 2000 from Pounds 6.4bn to Pounds 7.2bn - a
decline in real terms, says Market Facts & Business Information, the
research group.
As a result some 3,600 of the nearly 20,000 independent companies in the
sector are likely to disappear by 2000, according to a study of the sector
by the group.
It says the heightened competition will mean that those jostling for a share
of the market - franchised dealers, 'fast-fit' chains and 'superstore'
outlets such as Halfords in addition to the independents - will be unable to
increase charges to offset the decrease in volumes.
They will also face demands for higher standards of service from motorists,
who will require longer opening hours, a wider range of services and
guarantees of quality on workmanship.
'Garages need to realise that there is a significant difference between
providing the various services motorists need, and the standard of service
quality with which those services are delivered,' the study's author, Mr
Robert Macnab, said.
Interviewing 1,000 motorists for the study, the group found that drivers
still largely mistrust the retail service and repair trade.
As a result, it concludes, the successful participants in the market will
increase their share of the business by using high-quality service as a
competitive advantage. 'The losers will be those who pay lip service to
customer-service quality,' it says.
Independent garages are most at risk, the report warns, and adds that there
will also be a further decline in franchised dealerships which make up the
remainder of the 31,000 companies operating in the sector.
The Retail Car Servicing and Repair Market. MFBI, Pippingford Park Manor,
Nutley, East Sussex TN22 3HW. Pounds 95.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940430

