FT942-15891

FT  13 APR 94 / Arts: A beautiful baritone - Recital


   By DAVID MURRAY


Nathan Berg wields, at the moment, a remarkably beautiful baritone voice. I
put it that way not because he faces some imminent risk, but because this
Canadian singer - from Saskatchewan, like Jon Vickers - is only 25 years
old. Like all the most promising voices these days, Berg's has been trained
up (at Banff, Aspen, Versailles and the Guildhall School) to a precociously
serious level of interpretation. Unlike most, he still boasts a richly
'natural' timbre: vital, warm-blooded, affecting and stirring.
There is no telling where well-schooled vocal art takes over from the
born-lucky instrument. Equally, however, there is no knowing whether the
youthful bloom will mature into another kind of appeal or just fade away,
leaving a duller ring behind. Think of Olaf Baer . . .] 'At the moment',
then, Berg's singing should give intense pleasure to any (Western) lover of
the human voice.
The glory of his true baritone lies now in his middle voice, plangent and
splendidly direct, with a solid, satisfying complement toward the bass end.
Remarks overheard during the interval at the Wigmore Hall on Monday
suggested that he is really a bass-baritone. Not so: the tessitura of real
bass-baritone stuff lies rather below Berg's most vibrant range.
Nevertheless, his top notes do not open easily yet - though in soft
head-voice he produced lovely sounds, seamlessly matched to his virile
mid-register.
He chose an eminently serious programme: familiar Brahms, lusty Richard
Strauss and Mahler's Ruckert Lieder, but also Wolf's dark Michelangelo
songs, Schoeck and Jacques Ibert, and some unfavoured Duparc. Though his
German and his French were irreproachable, fluent beyond mere phonetics, the
sense of each song's burden remained a bit general; we wanted more phrases
lit up immediately and spontaneously.
Berg likes generous room to expand in, where swifter concision might strike
better sparks in him. He needed a less subservient accompanist than Julius
Drake - excellent in Ibert, but otherwise too languid for his singer's good,
and tediously indulgent with epilogues - to chivvy him along. Nothing
concentrates an interpreter's mind like having to make his effects register
in a limited space.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940413

