FT942-12188

FT  30 APR 94 / Markets: The hidden risks of life insurance - Serious Money


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR, Personal Finance Editor


The good news is that life insurance salesmen are finally being compelled to
tell the customer most of what he needs to know. The bad news is that
several popular types of life insurance policies are getting steadily less
rewarding. Saving through inflexible life insurance contracts has long lost
its outstanding tax advantage. And new user-friendly tax havens - notably
Personal Equity Plans - have been created. So the arguments in favour of
saving through life insurance are getting rather thin on the ground.
The disclosure requirements (discussed on page VII) look remarkably sensible
to the innocent eye. Life insurance salesmen will have to tell you in
English how a life policy, personal pension or endowment mortgage works;
they will have to give you an approximate estimate of what you might get out
of it - both if you cash it in early and in the long term, and they will
have to tell you how much of your investment is mopped up in commission and
other expenses. There is even an explicit warning that if you cash in your
policy early, you may get back less than you have paid over.
Nothing remotely controversial in any of this, you might think. But the
insurance establishment has been fighting the proposals every inch of the
way. Its argument is that, once consumers are told the costs, some companies
(notably insurers who are part of a bank) will look much better bets than
others, and that fewer people will buy life insurance. Fair enough - as far
as self-interest is concerned. But the insurers then make the amazing mental
leap of saying that what is bad for the insurance industry is bad for the
consumer.
Why? Because the consumer cannot be trusted to put his own financial affairs
in order. So even a humdrum investment in an insurance policy with high
costs is better than no investment. And high costs are inevitable because
the consumer is so blind to his own interests that he will not buy without
some fairly forceful arm-twisting from the salesman. How lucky he is that
the insurance industry is prepared to play Nanny.
Does the insurance industry's record support its claim that it can be
trusted to look after you?
Many customers have already been shocked to discover that insurance bonuses
 -like share prices - can go down as well as up. Cuts in with-profit life
insurance and pension payouts have damaged the retirement prospects of many
older people. And worries about low-cost endowment policies failing to cover
mortgage commitments dog the younger generation.
Now comes a discussion paper* suggesting both that there are more payout
cuts to come, and that the way the insurance companies have handed out money
in the past has been downright irresponsible.
Start with the payout record. In the high inflation 1970s and early 1980s,
the real return on with-profit policies (ones whose returns are indirectly
linked to the stockmarket) was negative. But by the end of the 1980s, real
returns on some policies reached 10 per cent - outstandingly good. The
reason the insurers could be so generous was simple. The companies had in
their paternal fashion been cooking the books. Throughout the 1980s payouts
rose strongly, but they still lagged well behind the rise in the value of
the underlying investments. In other words, people cashing in their policies
in the early 1980s were being short-changed, because some of their profits
were held back for the benefit of other policyholders.
You cannot perhaps fault the insurance companies for being cautious. But
they then went to the other extreme. The value of the underlying investments
had started falling well before the end of the 1980s in some cases. But
insurance payouts continued to rise, partly because of 'the need to
demonstrate that with-profits still offers value for money in the face of
unit-linked products'. And even when the first payout cuts came through in
the early 1990s, they were far smaller than they would have been if related
directly to the fall in underlying assets.
This is not quite as imprudent as it may sound. The companies have always
practised 'profit smoothing', and they used some of the profits not paid out
in the 1980s to bolster payments in the early 1990s.
Profit smoothing is in some ways comparable to an industrial company paying
a short-earned dividend out of reserves. But there are crucial differences.
First, the fact that a dividend is not covered by profits is obvious to any
reasonably numerate investor. Second, dividend smoothing can be defended as
being in the interests of longer-term investors. Smoothing insurance profits
out between different generations of policyholders is robbing Peter to pay
Paul.
The problem is not going to go away. Like all spendthrifts, the insurance
companies are running through what's left in their smoothing accounts. True,
another burst of abnormal stockmarket growth could come to the companies'
rescue, but this seems unlikely. So insurance payouts are likely to be cut
further.
And these are the companies who are saying 'Trust me, I'm an actuary.'
With Profits Maturity Payouts, Asset Shares and Smoothing, recently
presented to the Faculty of Actuaries.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940430

