FT942-14903

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (9): Jewel in the manufacturing sector's
crown - The country's electronics industry is a leader in south-east Asia


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


A historic aptitude for making hairpieces and cameras may seem a decidedly
unpromising source of national advantage in fast-moving high-technology
markets. Yet for Singapore the two activities have provided a launch-pad for
one of the most successful and fast-growing electronics industries in
south-east Asia.
Electronics is the jewel in the crown of the country's manufacturing sector.
Not only does its SDollars 38.4bn output last year - a 20 per cent increase
on 1992 - make it the largest single industry; it is the flagship of
Singapore's determined efforts to carve out a steadily larger role in
research-intensive businesses with high value-added content.
Singapore's proudest claim is that it produces more than half the world's
computer hard disc drives, a distinction which it has kept despite growing
competition from Asian neighbours with lower labour costs and a drastic
restructuring of local disc-drive manufacturing in the past few years.
In addition, the country hosts production of a wide range of consumer,
telecommunications and office automation products. Most of the output
supplies markets across south-east Asia and, in many cases, other parts of
the world as well.
Singapore also recently strengthened its components capability with the
opening of a state-of-the-art sub-micron wafer fabrication plant, a joint
venture between Texas Instruments, Canon, Hewlett-Packard and the national
Economic Development Board.
Singapore's bedrock strength is a talent for high-quality precision
engineering. Mr Lee Suan Hiang, deputy managing director of the EDB, likes
to tell how, when electronics companies first set up in Singapore, female
workers turned their traditional adeptness at threading hair into wigs to
cramming components on to printed circuit boards.
This ability was enhanced more than 20 years ago when Rollei of Germany set
up a local camera plant and trained workers in mechanical engineering. 'The
plant closed, but the skills stayed on,' says Mr Lee.
Basic manual dexterity has become less important as acute labour shortages
and rising wages have encouraged increased automation. Sony, for instance,
now produces 3.6m television picture tubes annually at a showpiece plant
employing 600 people - the same number it needs to make 1.6m tubes at
Bridgend, South Wales.
Staff numbers at Apple Computer's Singapore factory have recently been
falling by 10 per cent a year, despite a steady expansion of its range which
now includes all the company's products except the recently launched Newton
electronic notebook.
In theory, these trends might seem to diminish Singapore's attractions to
the world's electronics industry. After all, the capital costs involved in
automation are the same all over the world - a fact which led many US
personal computer makers in the early 1980s to repatriate final assembly
operations previously done in Asia.
However, the country possesses other assets. One is the steady expansion of
a sophisticated and reliable on-shore supply network. Sony says that when it
began producing in Singapore 20 years ago, it mostly assembled imported
components. Today, it sources 85 per cent of them locally.
Mr Jeff Dryjanski, regional director of Motorola, which has long had
operations in Singapore, also points out that imported components and
sub-assemblies carry far smaller duties than, say, in China.
Furthermore, he says, Singapore's excellence in production engineering - of,
for example, the miniature pagers which Motorola makes produces there - is
so outstanding that it is now setting the standard for some of the company's
operations in other parts of the world.
Nevertheless, some observers wonder how much longer Singapore can hope to
retain its competitive edge in the electronics manufacturing sector. They
point out that the output of lower-margin products, such as smaller disc
drives and some categories of consumer electronics, is increasingly shifting
over to cheaper countries.
This prospect does not worry the government, which points out that one of
Singapore's greatest strengths has been its proven ability to move quickly
out of maturing activities and into emerging ones.
'We are preparing for the day when there will no longer be a hard disc drive
industry in Singapore,' says Mr Lee of the EDB.
The next big growth wave to which Singapore is pinning its hopes is in
multi-media technologies and, in particular, the production of CD-Rom
interactive information and entertainment systems. These developments are
also providing opportunities for home-grown entrepreneurship, a phenomenon
hitherto not much in evidence in Singapore's electronics industry.
Several companies have recently been formed to cash in on multi-media. They
include Aztech, Creative Technologies and IPC. Most have been founded by
Singaporeans who gained experience working for local subsidiaries of foreign
multinationals.
Central to the government's longer-term strategy for the industry is the
encouragement of more local research and development activities, with a
particular emphasis on manufacturing technologies.
One way is through collaboration between multinational companies and local
government and academic research centres. For example, Singapore
University's Institute of Microelectronics has established close links with
AT&T's Bell Laboratories.
The government is prepared to back such initiatives with generous financial
incentives. The National Science and Technology Board, for example, is
contributing, in the form of a grant, a quarter of the SDollars 10m cost of
a multi-media and microchip software R&D centre which Sony recently decided
to set up.
Apple Computer is also stepping up local R&D, with the aid of a SDollars
9.3m government grant. It has already designed a computer monitor in
Singapore and develops there Chinese-language operating software for its
machines.
The company is now considering expanding its number of researchers by
recruiting in China and India, where trained scientific brains are plentiful
and relatively cheap.
However, Apple does not conceal the fact that, for all Singapore's other
advantages as a location for research, the availability of public funding on
easy terms remains decisive.
Without that incentive, the company would probably not have located some R&D
activities there, admits an executive. He says: 'The future of our research
here will be very much dependent on government support.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

940418

