FT941-4016

FT  14 MAR 94 / Kohl's party loses support in state election


   By MICHAEL LINDEMANN and QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


Germany's opposition Social Democratic party (SPD) coasted to a clear
victory in the state election in Lower Saxony last night, with Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union slipping to its worst result in the
state since 1959.
As the first of 19 separate elections this year - 16 state and local
authority elections, an electoral assembly for federal president in May,
European elections in June, and finally the general election on October 16 -
the Lower Saxony vote is seen as a key indicator. It confirms the long
uphill struggle Mr Kohl faces if he is to win re-election, even if the SPD
has yet to gain a decisive lead at a national level.
Mr Gerhard Schroder, the SPD premier, won 44.3 per cent of the vote. That
translates into a one-seat majority in the Hanover-based state parliament.
Mr Schroder said he would rule without his former coalition partner, the
Green party.
'It is a great result saddled with a great responsibility,' he said. Without
the Greens 'we can create (policies) more quickly and effectively'.
The CDU fell by almost 6 points from their 1990 showing, scoring 36.4 per
cent. However, the biggest loser of the evening was the Free Democratic
party, Chancellor Kohl's partner in the Bonn coalition, which slumped from 6
per cent last time to 4.4 per cent, failing to make the 5 per cent threshold
needed to ensure seats in the state parliament.
Mr Jurgen Trittin, the leading Green party minister in the outgoing
SPD-Green coalition in Hanover, said: 'This is the day the 'twilight of the
chancellor' began in Bonn.'
Yet the result amounts to less of a setback for Mr Kohl than had been feared
by some party members, and less of a victory for the Social Democrats, who
improved only fractionally on their vote from 1990 in spite of the Bonn
government's obvious unpopularity.
The CDU did far worse in both the previous local elections - in Hamburg last
September, when its vote fell to 25 per cent, and in Brandenburg in
December, when it barely won 20 per cent and fell to third place behind the
Democratic Socialist Party (PDS), the former Communists.
Despite strong winds and heavy rain until two hours before polls closed,
73.8 per cent of voters turned out, slightly less than in 1990, but good
news for the two main parties who feared they would be the first victims of
voter apathy.
The result showed that the rise of protest parties has not happened to the
extent predicted by some political observers.
The Green party won 7.4 per cent of the vote, up from 5.5 per cent in 1990;
the right-wing Republicans secured 3.7 per cent, up from 1.5 per cent; while
the Statt Partei, which won more than 6 per cent in Hamburg last year, took
1.3 per cent.
Clinton wants talks with Scharping, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940314

