FT943-719

FT  28 SEP 94 / CBI calls for Pounds 1bn support in Budget


   By GILLIAN TETT, Economics Staff


The annual round of business pre-Budget lobbying was stepped up yesterday as
the Confederation of British Industry called for modest tax measures in the
November budget to boost investment and support smaller companies.
The demands, in the CBI's submissions to Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
ahead of the November budget, would cost about Pounds 1bn a year.
But the CBI said it recognised the scope for further tax cuts was limited,
and broadly supported the chancellor's tight fiscal policy.
The CBI said the top priority for business was measures that promoted
balanced economic growth and staved off further interest rate rises.
In particular, public spending should be reduced below the levels projected
in the government's present plans to cut the public sector borrowing
requirement.
The CBI said that the healthy state of the economy meant further savings
could be made by using money currently set aside in a contingency reserve.
Next year this reserve could be cut by Pounds 5bn, with a Pounds 12bn
reduction by the end of the 1997 fiscal year.
Mr Andrew Buxton, chairman of the CBI's economic affairs committee, said:
'The reduction of Pounds 5bn should be directed mainly towards a reduction
of the PSBR rather than lower taxation.'
Nevertheless, the CBI yesterday called for a few small measures to boost
investment, including:
Relief from capital gains tax for long-term holdings of company shares.
A 100 per cent depreciation allowance for the first Pounds 200,000 invested
in plant and machinery.
Extension of tax relief for employer-provided childcare.
A further package of measures to assist smaller companies should be
considered in the longer term, not least because they were potentially the
greatest provider of jobs, the CBI said.
It said the profit limit applied to the 25 per cent corporation tax rate
should be raised and the VAT registration threshold increased. There should
be changes in inheritance tax.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940928

