FT944-5967

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Boost for specialist colleges


   By JOHN AUTHERS


The government hopes to convert 250 secondary schools into specialist
technology and modern language colleges over the next three years using
Pounds 60m released by the Budget, it was announced yesterday.
Fifty schools have become technology colleges since the scheme was piloted
earlier this year, with government expenditure of Pounds 6m. Funding will
expand to Pounds 15m in 1995-96 and to Pounds 25m in 1996-97.
The new scheme represents a sharp expansion, however, as it will be open to
all local authority schools in England to apply for funds. Until now funds
have been restricted to grant-maintained schools which have opted out of
local authority control and voluntary-aided schools - usually church
foundations.
Teachers' unions criticised the scheme as a thinly disguised financial
incentive for schools to opt out of their local authorities.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers, said the government had offered 'a bribe which was not working'
and welcomed the move to offer funds to local authority schools.
Sir Cyril Taylor, of the City Technology Colleges Trust, which has
co-ordinated fund-raising for the initiative, said the relaxed restrictions
would allow technology colleges to be established in Manchester and
Liverpool for the first time.
He added that he hoped to provide a specialist college in every local
education authority in England, and that schools would compete for the new
status. 'We will be able to choose the best schools, not just from academic
ability, but from their motivation to be specialists in maths, science and
technology,' he said.
Under the scheme, schools must raise at least Pounds 100,000 from the
private sector to put towards extra technology facilities. This triggers
government matching funds on a pound for pound basis, plus an extra Pounds
100 per pupil in annual maintenance grants for seven years.
Donations in kind, such as computer equipment, also qualify for matching
funds, and Rolls-Royce, the manufacturer, has provided two Derby schools
with working aircraft engines for use in technical demonstrations.
Mr Robin Squire, schools minister, said the scheme set an 'attainable
figure' for business sponsorship, following the disappointing response to
the 1988 City Technology College initiative, where businesses were asked to
provide more funds. Only 15 city technology colleges were opened.
Detailed proposals for modern languages schools will be published in
January. However, organisers expect that schools will be required to show
that they are offering intensive tuition in at least three languages,
including one 'hard' language - taken from a list likely to include Chinese,
Japanese and Russian.
Sir Cyril said Dartford Grammar School, in Kent, had already expressed an
interest in becoming a language college and he predicted strong interest
from exporters in sponsoring them.
The Confederation of British Industry strongly welcomed the plan, it said it
would encourage members to sponsor language colleges.
Further plans for creating specialist sport colleges are being handled by
the Department of National Heritage and the education department.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941201

