FT942-15737

FT  14 APR 94 / World Trade News: EU countries lose sight of solidarity -
Marrakesh Diary


This week's ministerial conference of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade has not so far been a glorious showcase for the European Union's
post-Maastricht solidarity. Indeed, many member governments have seemed
determined to cling to sovereign prerogatives with a tenacity which would
warm the heart of diehard Tory Eurosceptics in Britain.
Take France, for instance. Mr Gerard Longuet, its industry minister,
astutely captured the headlines by making his first priority a bilateral
meeting with Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, within hours of
the latter's arrival on Tuesday.
Mr Longuet had the double satisfaction of getting to see Mr Kantor before
Sir Leon Brittan, the EU trade commissioner, did so and of then immediately
holding a packed press conference at which he pontificated on the great
global economic issues.
Mr Longuet justified this exercise in freelance diplomacy on the grounds
that he was entitled to act independently in those areas not covered by
'Community competence' - the jargon for jointly agreed EU policies. He
freely admitted, however, that he would be hard put to say exactly where the
boundaries of such policies fell.
What does seem clear, though, is that Paris is increasingly overcoming its
traditional mistrust of all things American and discovering common ground
with Washington. Mr Longuet made clear that, as well as being 'in perfect
agreement' on financial services liberalisation, the two sides shared
similar objectives in pressing for a 'workers' rights' clause in the Gatt.
They also seem to be employing the same public relations adviser. Obviously
shaken by widespread suspicions among developing countries that workers'
rights was merely a synonym for protectionism, they have decided to take
another tack.
Mr Longuet has fallen back on the ingenious argument that the whole issue is
really a way of enabling the French government to defend free trade
principles against unnamed populist pressures for protection. Mr Kantor,
meanwhile, is claiming that the US is simply waiting patiently for the Gatt
to put into effect a provision envisaged when establishment of the
organisation was first mooted almost 50 years ago.
However, he tactfully omitted to mention that the grand scheme was sunk when
the US Congress killed off plans for a powerful International Trade
Organisation.
* * *
Sir Leon, meanwhile, seems to be content to take a backseat in the PR battle
by allowing the US to do most of his briefing for him. As of lunchtime
yesterday, he had given no press conference and had none planned. His sole
contribution was a fleeting appearance at Mr Kantor's side.
Asked whether Mr Longuet's earlier endorsement of China's plans to join the
planned World Trade Organisation represented EU policy, Sir Leon blustered
about his statement to Gatt ministers earlier in the day - which never even
mentioned China by name.
Top US trade negotiators, by contrast, had already held one press briefing
by lunchtime yesterday and had called another for a few hours' later.
* * *
Catering to the communications needs of the roughly 3,000 delegates and
journalists at the Marrakesh conference has strained to the limit the
resources of ONPT, the Moroccan telephone monopoly. On the whole, its
employees have risen to the challenge with enthusiasm and good humour.
However, there has been the occasional technical glitch.
One recurring problem is that several delegations have had their lines cut
off without warning - allegedly while essential maintenance work is carried
out on switchboards. After service has been restored, some have found that
their numbers have been mysteriously switched for those of other
delegations. The diplomatic consequences can only be guessed at.
But none of this should trouble the office of the Moroccan information
ministry at the conference press centre, where a single official sits
surrounded by no fewer than 12 telephones. As they say, information is
power. . . .

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940414

