FT942-14365

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (23): Airports of the world - Great
shops; a pity Paris is so far / Charles De Gaulle


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


Charles de Gaulle may have lost a little of the sci-fi stylishness that made
it seem so funkily futuristic when it opened in the 1970s, but beneath its
grubby concrete facade lurks a remarkably efficient international airport.
Despite the grime, it is still a thrill to whizz up and down the glazed
escalators in Terminal One. While Terminal Two boasts the visual treat of a
Thunderbirdesque ring road that comes into its own when illuminated at
night.
The shops at both terminals are spectacular: as befits France's biggest
airport. The epiceries sell everything from cheeses to foie de gras. Even
the clothes shops (a sore point at most airports) are passable so that, if
the worst came to the worst and you lost all your luggage, you need not end
up looking like Eurotrash.
Charles de Gaulle also scores highly on the lounge front. The Concorde
lounge, predictably, is best for celebrity spotting, particularly during the
fashion season when posses of super-models fly in. Even the ordinary
business lounges are kitted out with all the necessary facilities. Although
the 'capsule' accommodation (literally a bed and basin) for passengers on
delayed flights should be avoided at all costs.
The big hitch about using Charles de Gaulle, other than the high statistical
probability of having your luggage pillaged by its sticky-fingered baggage
handlers, is getting there. The 25km trip between central Paris and the
airport can take as little as 30 minutes and cost around FFr100 (about
Pounds 12), but that is only on those very rare occasions (mainly between
the insomaniacal hours of 4am and 5am) when the roads are clear.
Even at moderately busy times the journey stretches to an hour and the fare
rises to FFr180 to FFr200. Anyone deluded enough to venture out to the
airport during the rush hour or, worse still, on the eve of one of France's
numerous national holidays, should allow for anything up to two carbon
monoxide-choked hours in an apparently endless traffic jam and a FFr250 bill
at the end.
The buses, which leave every 20 minutes or so to destinations such as the
Arc de Triomphe and Gare de l'Est, take just as long as taxis: but they are,
at least, cheaper at FFr40 a ticket.
The other option is the train, which is even cheaper with tickets at just
over FFr30. The snag here is having to wait - and wait - for the buses that
ferry passengers from the terminals to the Roissy RER station. There is also
the risk of public sector strikes (nearly as numerous as French national
holidays) and finally the threat of the thieves and flashers that prowl
around the Roissy line.
Any passenger really must watch his or her wallet at all times and it is not
safe to travel alone after dark.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940420

