FT944-6046

FT  01 DEC 94 / Kohl invites eastern states to EU summit


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany yesterday came off the fence and invited
six leaders from central and eastern Europe to attend the closing session of
next week's European summit in Essen.
The invitation - coupled with likely agreement on a more generous market
access package for the east Europeans - raised hopes that the Essen summit
would reinforce the German-led strategy to build a wider Europe.
Mr Kohl's decision to invite leaders of Poland, Hungary, the Czech republic,
Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania to Essen followed a 'strategic bargain'
between France and Germany aimed at balancing the priorities of eastern
Europe and the Mediterranean, specifically North Africa, with regard to
trade concessions and financial benefits from the Union.
Under an understanding reached at a meeting of EU foreign ministers in
Brussels earlier this week, EU funds allocated to the Mediterranean over the
next five years will rise but not quite keep pace with spending on eastern
Europe. The Commission has bid for Ecu5.5bn and Ecu7bn respectively between
1995 and 1999, though ministers have yet to agree final totals.
Germany, which hands over the rotating presidency of the EU to France on
January 1, has also won agreement for a progressive weakening of
anti-dumping provisions against the six associate EU members. The EU
concession is tied to east European price undertakings and steps to modify
laws, standards, and competition policy to the single European market.
Separately, the European Commission agreed yesterday to submit proposals to
ministers for phased modification of rules of origin (which affects
eligibility for trade concessions) in order to stimulate trade and
investment in eastern Europe - a move hitherto opposed by countries such as
Portugal which fears its textile industry might be undermined by cheap east
European labour. Details of the proposals are expected shortly, said a
Commission official.
Mr Kohl, who had delayed issuing an invitation until he was sure of an
internal EU consensus on Essen, said in Bonn yesterday that the central
Europeans would be informed of the results of the Essen meeting. The message
was that the EU was not a 'closed shop', he said.
Some central Europeans had hoped to attend the summit in full so as to
enhance the impression of being consulted about the outcome, but other EU
member states are nervous about moves to concede membership through the back
door.
Mr Kohl said: 'We want to show that these countries will be welcome if they
want to join (the EU) and if their domestic and economic situations permit
that.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941201

