FT941-4202

FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (4): Why Austria stays tough
 -The difficulties facing foreigners


   By AUDREY POWELL


It is not impossible to buy property in Austria if you are a foreigner, just
difficult. And it helps to have an experienced adviser.
Often, people are told that foreigners cannot buy homes there, but a
spokesman at Austria's embassy in London says: 'That is totally wrong. We
let foreign people buy. It depends on the area.'
Yet, a wide variety of reasons continues to be given for not letting people
buy. Among them: Austria is a small country (32,378 sq miles); wealthy
foreigners building holiday homes in the best scenic areas have kept out
local people and put up prices; and there would be ghost villages populated
for only part of the year.
Another embassy staffer had a further explanation for Austria's resistance:
that, with only 13.5 per cent of the country suitable for settlement, there
was a projected increase of 18 per cent in the population of 7.6m by 2011.
He conceded, however, that if his country joined the European Union, some
changes would have to be made.
Indeed, the requirement for citizens of other EU countries to be allowed to
buy in Austria has been one of the main sticking points in negotiations for
its entry. A referendum on joining will probably be held in June.
Some people have assumed that Austria might, like Denmark, get an opt-out
arrangement on property acquisition. But the EU is becoming impatient with
members making such requests. In effect, it is telling applicants for
membership: 'If you want to join, you know the rules.'
With some of Austria's neighbours having serious problems, you might think
people would not want to buy a holiday home there. But they do. Travel agent
Thomas Cook says Austria has been its number one destination for skiing
holidays this year.
Austria is divided into provinces, and each applies the law in its own way -
so property regulations vary from area to area. One British woman involved
in selling Austrian property says: 'It is a strange country. They arrange
the rules as they go along.
'I am not saying there are no ways around the rules, but they try to control
their area and do not want huge units. They are very insular and protective
of their country. But they are charming people.'
For a foreigner thinking of buying an Austrian property, what might you get
at the upper level?
Peter Marschall, of E. & M. Chalupa in Vienna, says: 'In the eastern part of
Austria, particularly Vienna, it is no problem for foreigners to buy
property. But in the western part, especially the Tyrol and other skiing and
holiday areas, it is very difficult.'
Marschall suggests three properties available to non-Austrians offered by
his agency in association with Sotheby's International Realty. One is Villa
am Gallitzinberg, in a popular residential district 15 minutes from Vienna
city centre. It is a 1960s house, modernised extensively, with 10 reception
rooms and five bedrooms.
There is accommodation for staff plus a colourful indoor swimming pool and
garaging for 10 cars. For the summer, there is an outdoor pool, too. Price:
Pounds 2m.
On the outskirts of Salzburg, and also built in the 1960s (for an assistant
to Herbert von Karajan, the conductor) is Landsitz Prinzessin von Preussen.
It follows local style, blends with the countryside and has views of the
mountains and Lake Fuschi.
The main house has three reception rooms and four bedrooms, plus a staff
flat and basement party room. Guest accommodation, in the form of a
fortified tower, includes three bedrooms.
The two properties are connected by a building which houses a swimming pool
and garages, and there is a chapel in the grounds. Facilities for golf,
riding and tennis are nearby. Price: Pounds 1.7m.
Then there is the Landhaus im Ausseerland, which is being built in a country
setting an hour from Salzburg. This is a five-bedroom villa that combines
modern architecture with the regional style.
Built in four sections, the main and secondary building and garage are
connected by a glass winter garden. The guest accommodation is separate.
To the south lies Grundslee, one of Austria's most beautiful lakes. The
property, priced at Pounds 900,000, should be completed by the summer and
John Prince, of Sotheby's in London, says non-nationals should have no legal
problems acquiring it.
Maria Holinski, of Wika, an agency with offices in Austria and Munich, says:
'The law about buying in Austria is the same all over, but how it is applied
is up to the province and the community.' Like other agents she complains,
wearily, that 'regulations have been changed yet again'.
In certain parts, she added, there were holiday areas which had been set
aside for second homes and could be sold to non-Austrians. But potential
foreign buyers were looking for something more individual.
Her agency has several apartments available to foreign purchasers, including
one at Badaussee, costing from Pounds 100,000 to Pounds 260,000. But there
is a semi-detached house for Pounds 85,000.
Some of Wika's properties are in the province of Styria, which Holinski
calls the Lake District of Austria; they include a pied a terre at Pounds
25,000. Allow for buying costs of 10 to 12 per cent.
Leonard Anthony & Colin Essex is a British agency that specialises in
Austrian properties. It also favours Styria, where it has a branch.
'It is the second-largest and probably the most attractive province, much of
it covered with forests,' says the agency's Tony Mansfield. 'Foreigners are
allowed to buy certain types of property there.' He has homes in designated
holiday areas around the old village of Bad Mitterndorf, about an hour from
Salzburg airport.
Mansfield can offer around 40 furnished re-sale bungalows, chalets and
apartments, or apartments in small, new developments. Prices range from
Pounds 28,000 for a studio to Pounds 125,000 for a new, two-bedroom
apartment with balcony. One group of flats is in a school that is being
converted.
He says his agency sells only properties that are available to foreigners,
although everyone has to apply for permission to own. And while there is no
trouble getting a mortgage, Mansfield adds that potential British buyers
probably would get a better rate if they took out their loan in the UK.
Further information: E& M. Chalupa, Vienna, tel. 43 1 533 95 45; Sotheby's,
London, 071-408 5196; Wika, Munich (this office is English-speaking), 149 63
13; Leonard Anthony, UK office, 0708-473 182.

The Financial Times


Survey PRO Page 2

940312

