FT944-10952

FT  08 NOV 94 / London Stock Exchange: Equities weakened by UK/US interest
rate fears - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


A thoroughly depressed UK stock market succumbed to a worldwide mood of
negativity yesterday, as international investors looked ahead to the
possibility of a further rise in US interest rates within the next two
weeks.
London was additionally unsettled by the latest economic data released by
the authorities, in the form of industrial production and manufacturing for
September, both of which were much higher than had been expected, and were
interpreted by some dealers as accelerating the chances of another increase
in UK interest rates.
At the close of one of the dullest trading sessions for many months, the
FT-SE 100 Index looked to have given up the chase, at least in the short
term, to launch another determined assault on the 3,100 level, and ended
31.8, or one percentage point, down at 3,065.
But in a clear demonstration of the thinness of trading in the UK equity
market, the second line issues put up a much more resilient performance,
although they too closed well down on the day, with the FT-SE Mid 250 Index
finally 14.5, or half of one percentage point, lower at 3,520.1.
Turnover figures released by the Stock Exchange showed that activity in
non-FT-SE 100 stocks accounted for 252.7m shares, more than 63 per cent of
the total volume of business in London, which reached a paltry 398.8m, among
the lowest turnovers recorded this year.
The rationale behind the market's weakness was apparent before marketmakers
began to input their opening prices: Wall Street's near 39-point fall on
Friday, after a closer examination of that day's batch of economic news,
rekindled fears that inflation could begin to ignite in the US.
Those concerns, mixed in with fears that the congressional mid-term
elections in the US could see President Clinton's standing given a thumbs
down by the electorate, put increasing pressure on US Treasury bonds in
London throughout the day and saw Wall Street give ground. The Dow Jones
Industrial Average was more than 10 points lower as London closed.
Senior traders at a number of City broking houses expect the value of
customer business transacted in London yesterday to have fallen below the
Pounds 1bn mark, a worrying prospect for big integrated trading houses which
support large dealing teams.
The FT-SE 100 made a poor start to the day, opening more than 20 points
lower and meeting minor waves of selling pressure thereafter. What disturbed
dealers was an almost total absence of support for the leaders.
'There were few in the City expecting the market to hold up after Wall
Street's performance on Friday but, equally, there were not many
marketmakers expecting to see London down 1 per cent,' said one of the
leading marketmakers at a UK securities house. He added: 'There is a good
chance of the Fed tightening some time next week, and that will keep the
market tight for the rest of this week.' There was the merest hint in the
market that the Bundesbank could ease monetary policy following its
fortnightly meeting, scheduled for this Thursday, but most traders dismissed
the story as unlikely.
Regional electricity stocks, stimulated recently by the prospect of bumper
dividends and a windfall from the sell-off of the National Grid, provided
the FT-SE 100's best performer in Southern Electric. BAA, on the other hand,
suffered as the market shrugged off the excellent figures and concentrated
on the stock's outperformance in recent months.
There was considerable nervousness in British Airways ahead of this
morning's interim figures, while Kleinwort Benson was said to have been
responsible for weakness in property shares. Oils were upset by renewed
selling by US investors.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

941108

