FT942-14890

FT  18 APR 94 / Bangladesh to be urged to spend more pledged aid


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   DHAKA


Bangladesh is this week expected to secure about Dollars 2.1bn in pledges of
foreign aid from its donors at its annual aid consortium meeting in Paris.
The funds, in loans and grants for the year starting in July 1994, will help
pay for food and the development of infrastructure and social services in
Bangladesh, one of the world's poorest countries. The promised funds will be
about the same as in the past two years.
However, officials from donor governments and organisations led by the World
Bank are likely to press Bangladesh to use more of the aid it is pledged.
The Bangladeshi government has consistently failed to absorb all the
promised aid and has allowed a backlog of some Dollars 5.5bn in unspent
pledges to accumulate.
Aid dispersement has been held up mainly because government officials have
been unable to implement rapidly the construction and other projects to
which much aid is dedicated. Despite efforts to accelerate public
investment, there will be little progress in this regard in 1993-94. The
government's annual development programme budget has already been cut from
Tk97.5bn to Tk85bn (Dollars 2.16bn) because of delays.
Mrs Khaleda Zia, the prime minister, said in an interview that she was
trying to accelerate public investment. 'Steps are under way to remove
procedural bottlenecks and speed up both public investment and aid
utilisation.'
The World Bank sees the lack of public investment as a drag on economic
growth. In the year to the end of June 1994, bank officials expect to see
GDP growth to be a modest 5 per cent or less. The country is unlikely to
improve rapidly the lot of its poor unless it achieves growth of 6-7 per
cent, say bank officials.
This growth rate can be reached, they add, only if investment rises from
last year's level of 13 per cent of economic output to 18-20 per cent.
Government officials accept this argument and are trying to raise the ratio
to 14.5 per cent this year and 15.5 per cent in 1994-95 by increasing public
investment. The public works programme should get a boost from the start of
construction on a Dollars 700m bridge across the Jamuna river in central
Bangladesh - the country's largest investment scheme.
To stimulate private investment, the government is extending the
liberalisation of foreign trade and investment it has carried out since
taking power in 1990. Last year the taka was made fully convertible on the
current account. Exports, led by garments, are forecast to grow by nearly 20
per cent this year and next, extending recent rapid rises.

The Financial Times


Frankfurt Page 3

940418

