FT943-12728

FT  23 JUL 94 / Japanese PM seeks to allay Seoul fears


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Tomiichi Murayama, Japan's new left-wing prime minister, will today visit
Seoul to try to reassure South Korea that it can still count on his
country's support.
Mr Murayama's Social Democratic party has closer links to North Korea than
any other political group in the democratic world and formally refuses to
recognise South Korea as a sovereign state.
His tacit recognition of South Korea marks the latest step in the SDP
leadership's abandonment of most of its traditional policies, in evolving
over the past year from a party of opposition to one of government.
That process came to a climax last month when Mr Murayama became Japan's
first Socialist prime minister for 47 years.
The South Korean visit, the first since the new government took power at the
end of June, is the opening stage of a tour of five south-east Asian
countries over the next week.
Mr Murayama will be accompanied by Foreign Minister Yohei Kono, president of
the conservative Liberal Democratic party which is the dominant party in the
three-member coalition. The trip includes Vietnam - the first official visit
there by a Japanese prime minister for 21 years - Singapore and the
Philippines.
Mr Murayama would explain to South Korean President Kim Young Sam the
complexities of Japan's new coalition government and would seek to assuage
fears about his new regime, a Japanese Foreign Ministry official said.
Japan's Asian policies were unchanged and Tokyo would continue to press for
a negotiated settlement of the dispute over whether or not North Korea was
illicitly making nuclear weapons, the official added.
Mr Murayama will continue Japan's policy of apologising for its war record
in mainland Asia and is expected to tell President Kim of a plan to spend
Y100bn (Pounds 653.59m) over the next decade on academic studies of war
history and youth exchange.
Mr Murayama's Asian visit comes as the yen's recent strength has increased
pressure on Japanese companies to shift more production capacity to cheap
locations in neighbouring countries.
Japanese investments in the rest of Asia rose three-fold in the seven years
to 1993, so that the region's share of Japanese foreign investment will
reach 37.5 per cent this year, according to government figures. This has
been accompanied by a sharp growth in trade, so that Japan's trade surplus
with Asia last year surpassed the gap with the US for the first time.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940723

