FT942-14483

FT  20 APR 94 / Leading Article: Hope for South Africa


Once again, South Africa's leaders peered into the abyss and stepped back
from the brink. The collective sigh of relief at yesterday's agreement
between the National party, the African National Congress and the Inkatha
Freedom party, allowing the latter to participate in next week's elections,
was almost audible. Provided the spirit as well as the letter of the accord
is respected by all parties, it will rank as a milestone on South Africa's
bumpy road to democracy.
The country's deep-rooted political violence will certainly not end, but it
can now at least be curbed. Notwithstanding the prospect of a tense campaign
in Natal, the intolerant atmosphere in parts of the eastern Cape, and the
hostility of many white farmers to campaigners from the ANC, South Africa
now has a reasonable chance of conducting an election which will reflect the
wishes of most of its citizens.
Since Mr Nelson Mandela's release from prison in February 1990, tragic and
violent events have repeatedly come close to derailing the transition to
democracy. None of them, however, posed quite the same destabilising threat
as that of Chief Mangosuthu's Buthelezi's stand over the status and powers
of KwaZulu-Natal. The mayhem in central Johannesburg three weeks ago, the
imposition of a state of emergency on Natal and the subsequent collapse of
the financial rand threatened a disastrous start to the new South Africa.
Yesterday's agreement offers a real chance of defusing this conflict, so
long as all three parties draw appropriate lessons from it. The most obvious
is that the fundamental constitutional issue at the heart of the crisis can
not now be brushed aside. Chief Buthelezi may have made almost all the
concessions to achieve yesterday's deal, but that does not mean he did not
have a point in demanding a greater measure of devolution than is provided
for under the constitutional principles agreed thus far.
The powers of Natal and the eight other provincial assemblies, and the
extent to which these powers can be overidden by central government, will
continue to be a critical factor in South African politics. It will be for
the National Assembly elected next week to find a more satisfactory way of
squaring this circle when it draws up the final constitution.
Second, there are at least some grounds for hope that a healthier political
climate can now develop, in which the ANC, rather than indulging in
winner-takes-all triumphalism, will face real electoral competition - not
least in Natal. If the result is more substantial political checks and
balances than hitherto appeared likely, that will be all to the good.
Third, yesterday's agreement - due in part to the good offices of a Kenyan
negotiator - showed the potential worth of international mediation. It may
well be needed again after the election to assist with the constitutional
problem. South Africa's political crisis has been defused, but not yet
resolved.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940420

