FT942-12346

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (3): A well run
equity pool will retain its value - A regular income 1 / Collective funds /
Many new unit and investment trusts have been designed for income-seekers


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Those who enter the stock market through investment or unit trusts do not
lack for choice when it comes to income. Mindful of the needs of investors,
both types of fund have in recent years designed products specifically for
income-seekers.
Some pay monthly income but most do not, which means that you may need to
act as your own portfolio manager by structuring your investments to pick up
quarterly dividends in a more regular flow. Alternatively, some stockbrokers
will be able to provide this facility.
The attraction of equity-based investments is that, over the long term, your
capital will keep up with inflation; and, if you are in a well-managed fund,
the returns should outstrip those offered by deposits or gilts.
However, the recession has cut the level of dividends paid out by companies
to their shareholders, and the yield on the FT-SE-A All-Share now hovers at
a disappointingly low 3.6 per cent, although some companies, such as
utilities, are able to paying larger dividends.
Investment trusts
Income-seekers are catered for in the investment trust industry with the
formation of the split-level trust.
This divides its shares into at least two classes: income shares, which take
all the income of the trust; and capital shares, which reap all the capital
growth. However, the income shares are many and various, and it is essential
to take sound investment advice before succumbing to the lure of a high
yield on an income share. Some income shares are similar to annuities and
become virtually worthless when the trust's assets are wound up.
Paradoxically, Nigel Sidebottom, of the stockbroker, Gerard Vivian Gray,
says that he does not necessarily favour income shares or UK income growth
investment trusts when he manages a client's investment trust portfolio for
income.
'The trouble with UK income growth trusts is that, because they are popular
vehicles for income, they tend to trade on a premium which has the effect of
diluting the yield. I prefer to buy a conventional trust with an
above-average yield trading at a discount in order to get an enhanced
yield.'
For those who need regular income, Gerrard Vivian Gray has a monthly income
facility with a bank account into which dividends from the investment trusts
are paid. A fixed amount of 'income' is then paid by standing order into the
client's bank account each month. There is no charge if the income account
is 'overdrawn', while balances will attract a small amount of interest.
'Doing it this way means that I do not have to buy trusts simply because of
the date on which they pay dividends,' says Sidebottom.
The level of monthly income depends on market conditions. Sidebottom says
that he is happy to aim for a yield which is one and a half times that of
the All-Share index but that anything above this means a sacrifice, either
in terms of capital or increased risk.
Charges for the service are the company's standard portfolio management
initial charge of 3 per cent plus VAT and 1.25 per cent plus VAT annual
management fee, with a further Pounds 50 a year (plus VAT) for the monthly
income facility.
Unit trusts
Hypo F&C has been extremely successful with its Higher Income Plan, a unit
trust in a personal equity plan (Pep) wrapper, paying 10 per cent a year on
a monthly basis. This will fall to 9 per cent from June. Morgan Grenfell
also has a High Income Trust paying 10 per cent a year, but the income is
paid quarterly.
James Capel's Generator Pep and Newton's Distributor fund allow the investor
to choose the annual level of income they withdraw up to a maximum of 9 per
cent (Newton) and 7.5 per cent (Capel). Both aim to replace the capital
withdrawn but cannot guarantee to do so. By investing through a Pep, the
investor does not face capital gains or income tax. The initial and annual
charges are 5.25 per cent and 1 per cent (Capel) and 6 per cent and 1.5 per
cent (Newton).
The advantage of these Peps is that, theoretically, the investor is in
control, so that, if the stock market falls, he can stop taking income in
order to minimise capital erosion. However, the danger is that this is not
made clear to him or that he becomes dependent on the income stream.
Murray Johnstone has recently launched a variant on the idea by marrying two
of its investment trusts (Murray International trust and Murray Income
trust) with a unit trust (Murray Equity Income fund) to pay monthly income
at a level decided by the investor of up to 9 per cent annually.
However, as the company's literature states, 'Rates of 'income' selected
that are higher than the underlying yield on the portfolio could lead to
capital erosion.'
The product is available only through independent financial advisers and
charges are an initial 3.55 per cent and an annual 1.54 per cent (including
VAT). You should satisfy yourself that you are happy with the performance of
the funds before investing.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940429

