FT943-13033

FT  21 JUL 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Game of sponsorship
 -A look at the business of sport and its value to companies


   By NORMA COHEN


Sport is not just a game. It is a business. Anyone who doubts this need only
consider the sponsorship contract signed this week between Mercury Asset
Management, the UK's biggest fund management group, and cricketer Brian
Lara.
The sponsorship deal, valued by Lara's agent at Pounds 500,000 - but which
MAM insists is actually Pounds 100,000 - illustrates the value which a
financial services firm, whose products have nothing to do with cricket,
places on sport.
Among financial services companies MAM, which is considering further sports
sponsorship deals aimed at encouraging junior competitors in a wide variety
of sports, is hardly alone. National Westminster Bank, sponsors since 1981
of the one-day NatWest Cricket Trophy, spent Pounds 450,000 on
sports-related promotion last year. Scottish Provident signed a contract
worth Pounds 600,000 with ITV to sponsor the last British Lions rugby tour.
Cornhill Insurance sponsors a cricket series and Britannic Assurance
sponsors county cricket championships. London Global Securities, which
specialises in international securities lending, sponsored Eamonn Martin,
winner of the 1993 London Marathon.
In the UK, according to Mintel, the market research group, corporate
sponsorship covers a range of sports from swimming to darts. Sports
sponsorship deals in 1993 were valued at Pounds 242m and is forecast to grow
to Pounds 250m this year.
But what does an advertiser gain from sports sponsorship, particularly when
the product is unrelated to sport?
MAM said this week that it wishes to draw a connection between the
excellence at sport demonstrated by Lara - who holds two world cricket
batting records - with its fund management skills.
Significantly, the Mintel research showed that four of the eight leading
corporate sponsors of cricket in 1993 were in the financial services
industry. Among so-called AB television viewers whose incomes and
educational levels are the highest in the country, cricket ranked number
five of all sports watched, with 31.7 per cent of that socio-economic group
choosing to watch it.
Mike Bloxham, director of The Bloxham Group, a company which helps corporate
clients devise long-term sponsorship strategies, says that sport may be a
way for a financial services firm to reach a much broader audience than
other forms of advertising.
'People who could be buyers of their products may not encounter their name
in everyday life. It's not like Heinz,' he says. For a company such as MAM,
which opted for individual sportsman sponsorship instead of team or event
sponsorship, there can be a specific marketing goal. 'One approach to
sponsoring individuals is that they can be seen to encapsulate certain
values with which the sponsor wishes to associate himself.'
The downside with individual sportsman sponsorship, he says, is that 'you
cannot legislate for aspects of an individual's behaviour'. Sportsmen and
women periodically engage in activities which corporate sponsors feel will
tarnish their brand image. 'OJ Simpson is no longer a good person to be
associated with,' Bloxham said.
Martin Loat, a spokesman for ITV's sponsorship arrangements, notes that
there is also a 'chairman' factor in selecting individuals for sponsorship.
'It may also be a chairman's wife factor,' he says.
Moreover, sponsorship allows companies to offer corporate hospitality to
their clients and contacts, an aim which ranks high in NatWest's decision to
sponsor the one-day cricket matches. Sponsoring an individual may allow a
company to introduce him personally to clients, an experience likely to
reinforce warm feelings about the sponsor.
And, for a firm such as MAM, sponsorship means the opportunity for Lara to
don a MAM cap immediately after leaving the field of triumph, just in time
to be interviewed on national television.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940721

