FT942-12254

FT  30 APR 94 / A debtor's calculated gamble: Iran, accused of planning to
arm the IRA, is using its economic weakness as a weapon


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


Britain's accusations that Iran has been collaborating with the IRA are
unlikely to dent its smiling defiance, for the simple reason that the
government in Tehran thinks it has the measure of the industrialised world.
It is an assumption based on the calculation that, whatever Iran may say,
and perhaps do, the commercial self-interest of competing nations will
ultimately work in Tehran's favour.
On the face of it, Iran has little to smile about. It is heavily in debt,
oil revenues are sharply down, inflation is rising and the economy
contracting. But it has succeeded in at least postponing the economic crisis
by persuading Germany, Japan and other trading partners to reschedule an
important slice of its short-term debt. Its defiance remains directed
primarily at the US, which unsuccessfully sought to persuade those countries
against offering Iran any relief from its worsening economic problems.
'We always knew the importance of our market to the west and have now
learned the power of owing billions of dollars, rather than just a few
hundred million,' said one official in Tehran recently. 'By halting debt
payments in December we were able to concentrate the minds of our creditors
on achieving favourable agreements.'
Iran offered nothing political in return for the rescheduling and, in
particular, has not moderated its ambition to export the message of
revolutionary Islam to the world's 1bn Moslems. Senior officials are
generally encouraged by events in Algeria, Sudan and Egypt, where they sense
that the popular political tide is swinging ever more in their direction.
For the US, the British allegations that Iran was preparing to supply
finance, weaponry and training to the IRA were particularly timely, as they
appeared to lend weight to its assertion that Iran is one of the main
sponsors of international terrorism, and justify the American policy of
seeking to isolate Tehran economically. However, the US may also reflect
that its efforts to limit Iran's economic prospects have proved less
effective than the self-inflicted damage caused by the government in Tehran.
Since the end of the eight-year war with Iraq in 1988, Iran has squandered
the one solid achievement to have emerged intact from that appalling
conflict: its international financial reputation.
Iran escaped from the war almost without debts and a reputation for meeting
its obligations on time. But the combination of the government's desire to
compensate people for their suffering, and the central bank's failure to
control letters of credit, proved calamitous.
Imports surged out of control, and today Iran's total outstanding debt is
about Dollars 25bn. The country is 14 months behind in meeting payments on
letters of credit, and its access to urgently needed long-term international
funding is almost nil. It also has to cope with a population which has
doubled to more than 60m since the 1979 revolution, an infrastructure
damaged by war and neglect, and the probability of continued oil price
weakness causing a sustained loss of government revenues.
Iran's leaders blame anyone but themselves for their troubles, but as the
country's economic plight continues to deepen, so domestic tensions are
likely to grow. The government has bought itself a financial breathing space
through the debt rescheduling now being finalised, but the respite is
limited, both in time and in the immediate effect on Iran's hard-pressed
finances.
The country's short-term debt is estimated at about Dollars 14bn, including
some amounts rescheduled last year. Of this, current arrears are put at
Dollars 9bn with some Dollars 6bn-Dollars 7bn covered by export credit
agencies. Another Dollars 7bn is thought to be due for repayment during the
rest of this year.
The German package covers arrears of about Dollars 2.5bn. It allows for a
two-year grace period and repayments to be made in equal tranches over the
subsequent four years up to the end of 1999. Similar bilateral deals are
being finalised with Japan, (up to Dollars 2.3bn), Switzerland and Austria
(another Dollars 1bn each). Government officials claim that, together with
reschedulings involving Italy, France, and other European nations, this will
provide relief on nearly Dollars 8bn of debt arrears.
The US may hope that the British revelations will push the creditor nations
into reconsidering the rescheduling arrangements, but whatever the outcome
Tehran is still firmly caught on the financial hook. With about 85 per cent
of government revenues deriving from oil, the shortage of hard currency to
fund all but the most essential imports will remain acute.
But, in a new year message last month, President Ali Akbar Hashemi
Rafsanjani saw not a cloud on the horizon, a view likely to have been
received with scepticism by the Iranian parliament, which has taken a more
critical view of the economy. During the budget debate earlier this year
members forced the government to slash its oil revenue estimates for the
year beginning March 21 from Dollars 14bn to just over Dollars 10bn.
Although imports have fallen by more than 40 per cent in the financial year
which ended last month, visitors to Iran's main ports report quaysides
stacked with consumer goods. Shops in Tehran are still well supplied with
western fashions, perfumes, and electronic equipment, while caviar can be
bought at just Dollars 50 a kilo, somewhat less than the price of a bottle
of smuggled vodka.
Indications that this situation cannot persist for long are beginning to
emerge. Inflation, officially running at 23 per cent, may be closer to 50
per cent, with some items having doubled in price during the past year.
Government efforts to unify the exchange rate are faltering as demand for
dollars increases, with the rial recently trading at about 2,500 to the
dollar on the free market compared with the official rate of 1,780.
One political consequence has been the steady erosion in President
Rafsanjani's authority. Parliament has turned increasingly against him.
First, it refused to endorse the renomination of Mr Mohsen Nourbash as
economics minister, and then in January this year displaced Mr Rafsanjani's
brother from the key role as head of television and broadcasting. And when
the president proposed a doubling of petrol prices, from the ludicrously low
equivalent of 2 US cents a litre, parliament refused.
While President Rafsanjani's fortunes have declined, those of less pragmatic
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the spiritual leader and successor to Ayatollah
Khomeini, have strengthened. Few Iranians doubt Ayatollah Khamenei is an
ambitious man, but opinion is divided over whether he ultimately regards Mr
Rafsanjani as a political ally or a disposable rival. Ayatollah Khamenei
also has his own problems, particularly with the Shia clerical establishment
in Qom, which is ill-disposed to recognise him as the senior religious
authority following the death in December of Grand Ayatollah Mohammad Reza
Golpayegani.
With so many competing centres of authority, the prospect for a single,
coherent approach to the country's economic difficulties and foreign
relations appears remote. Ministers act independently of each other, the
president cannot impose his will on parliament, leaders of wealthy religious
foundations cannot be stopped from dabbling in international politics, and
the clergy is disunited, leaving only the old slogans of the revolution as a
common point of reference.
This, of course, is not the Iran that its leaders see and cherish. They mock
western doubts about the regime's durability and place any current
difficulties in the historical context of Iran's revolution. This, they
remind visitors, is the revolution which overthrew the Shah, survived the
war against Iraq, faced down 15 years of hostility from the US, and routed
all domestic opposition.
But what the revolution has not yet demonstrated is an ability to create
economic growth, reduce unemployment, narrow the vast gap between rich and
poor, and manage the nation's considerable resources intelligently. On those
issues, the Iranian public will eventually make their views felt.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940430

