FT943-12790

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: HK bank results disappoint


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


Bank of East Asia, Hong Kong's third largest listed bank, has reported
disappointing growth in first-half earnings, with profits for the six months
to June only 12 per cent ahead of the interim stage last year, at HKDollars
222.2m (USDollars 28.76m).
The result, struck after a secret transfer to inner reserves, were lower
than analysts had expected. The market was looking for growth in the region
of 18 per cent to 20 per cent. The directors declared an interim dividend of
27.5 cents, up 25 per cent on the interim payout last year.
The results were seen as the harbinger of a lacklustre reporting season for
the rest of Hong Kong's banks.
Analysts said that other listed banks in Hong Kong usually take their lead
from Bank of East Asia in deciding the tone of their own profits
announcements.
In keeping with Bank of East Asia's past practice, however, it provided no
details of its operations. A review by Mr David Li, chief executive, did
say, however, that a residential and commercial property development the
bank is undertaking had got off to a good start.
Analysts said they thought the sale of apartments from this development
could contribute up to HKDollars 400m to the bank's earnings in the second
half of the year.
They noted that the bank booked about 80 per cent of its total net earnings
for 1993 in the second half of the year and that a similar pattern may
repeat itself this year.
The report, however, which has most interested banking analysts was the one
produced by Merrill Lynch, the US securities house, for Bank of East Asia's
recent HKDollars 1bn bond offering. This gives the first breakdown for
analysts of the bank's financial position.
It shows that residential mortgages accounted for 44 per cent of the the
bank's total loans in 1993. This is above the level recommended by the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority, the colony's central bank. Mortgages have, however,
declined as a share of loans since 1991 when they accounted for 47 per cent
of lending.
The report also gives figures for the bank's bad and doubtful debts. Bank of
East Asia has HKDollars 542m of loan loss provisions on total loans of
HKDollars 32.3bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940722

