FT942-12476

FT  29 APR 94 / Property: The empty quarter - James Harding on converting
vacant offices into houses


   By JAMES HARDING


Britain has nearly 900,000 vacant homes and some 35m sq ft of empty office
space, enough to accommodate more than 1m people, equivalent to the
population of Birmingham.
In an attempt to galvanise property developers into filling 'the empty
space', Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, last week told a housing
conference in London that 'empty homes are wasted homes'. The private
sector, with more than 760,000 vacant houses, must be 'the main engine of
growth in tackling empty homes', he added.
At the conference, organised by the Empty Homes Agency, a housing charity,
and the Association of District Councils, Mr Gummer said local authorities
must make landlords more aware of the opportunities of short-term leases
which, under the assured shorthold tenancy provision of the 1988 Housing
Act, allow them 'to regain possession of their property easily'.
Beyond these exhortations, the government has been responding to growing
criticism of the rising number of empty properties with pump-priming
measures designed to assist landlords to fill long-standing vacant space.
These include:
The government's short-life housing programme;
The Housing Corporation's approved development programme;
housing association grants.
These schemes all provide funds for renovations on condition that the
property will be leased to a housing association for a period of between two
and 15 years.
In addition, for landlords reluctant to deal directly with private tenants,
the government has established the Housing Association as Managing Agents
scheme, which establishes an institutional middle-man - a housing
association - to manage the property.
The government initiative most widely praised by landlords, housing
associations and tenants alike has been the 'Flats over Shops' scheme, in
which the Department of Environment has invested Pounds 25m over three years
to return an estimated 90,000 potential homes to use.
The West Country Housing Association, for instance, converted a Torquay
property into four flats. Photofirst, the retail tenant, said that the
repairs carried out by the housing association under the scheme saved it
about Pounds 40,000. The property's value has risen by 10 per cent since
completion.
However, even supporters of the 'Flats over Shops' scheme believe that,
collectively, the DoE initiatives only scratch the surface. Mr Roland Buck
of estate agents Chestertons said that the 'Flats over Shops' scheme should
be extended beyond 1995 because as it stands 'it is only nibbling at the
edges'. 'Investors still shy away from conversions,' he said.
In contrast, investor interest in commercial property is strong. In spite of
the fact that the equivalent office space of 25 Canary Wharfs is currently
standing empty, planning consents for a further 54m sq ft of new offices are
already in the planning process.
A surplus of office space and rising demand for housing provides commercial
property owners with a compelling reason for converting more offices to
residential use. According to a Home Office report published last year, the
average annual cost of maintaining a 20,000 sq ft office block is Pounds
15,000, with a further Pounds 70,000 for security and Pounds 200,000 on
rates. Converting such a property to residential use would make financial
sense, says the report.
However, even for office blocks built more than 25 years ago in prime
residential locations, the dual obstacles of local authority opposition and
the high value added tax on conversions and residential lettings continue to
deter deve-lopers.
Mr Malcolm Beckett, a director of MBE Homes, which specialises in
conversions, believes that local authority decisions are based on an
outdated view of viable commercial space. Mr Beckett, writing in Planning in
London magazine, argues that changes in working practices - particularly the
onset of computer-based offices - are leaving old-style offices permanently
empty and that local authority decision-making on conversions should reflect
this change.
The onerous 17.5 per cent VAT forces property developers to seek, often
unrealistically, a high return to make their investment worthwhile. All too
often, however, owners let their their property fall into disrepair ahead of
a reconstruction on which they can reclaim VAT.
Mr Gummer is rightly proud of the 25 per cent fall in the number of empty
local authority homes over the past seven years. To build on this success,
he is placing the onus on private-sector initiatives.
But private-sector developers remain dependent on the public purse to
initiate conversions. They are only likely to take up Mr Gummer's challenge
if they believe that profits can be made free of subsidy. And that, say
developers, will occur only when local authorities relax planning
restrictions and the government eases the tax burden on conversions.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940429

