FT944-6096

FT  30 NOV 94 / London Stock Exchange: Shares make modest progress ahead of
Budget - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


The London market, in good form throughout yesterday's trading session, was
virtually unaltered throughout the chancellor's Budget speech, and settled a
net 14.0 higher at 3,061.1. Immediately prior to the speech the index was
standing some 16.4 up. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index was 0.8 off at 3,489.2.
'Shockingly boring,' was the initial response from one senior marketmaker,
'at first glance, there is really nothing for the equity market to get its
teeth into.'
And the head of trading at one of the UK securities houses said he expected
the continued gyrations on Wall Street to play a much greater part in
determining trends in the market after the UK Budget.
'There were no changes to ACT, the market got its gilts repo story, and the
public sector borrowing requirement has been taken as good news by the debt
products people, so there does not seem to be much in the way of bad news,'
he added.
Gilt-edged stocks, which were marginally firmer ahead of the Budget, began
to fall away in the middle of the afternoon, under the influence of US bonds
and German bunds. The key US long bond saw keen selling pressure during the
afternoon following a much higher than expected US Confidence Index, which
burst through the 100 level to reach 101-plus per cent, against last month's
87.6 per cent.
That figure put the skids under US equity and bond markets and reignited
fears that a rapidly expanding US economy may need another interest rate
increase to cool inflationary pressures.
Wall Street, up some 31 points on Monday, opened under pressure yesterday in
the wake of the consumer index news, and was showing a fall of more than 20
points at one point, before staging a good rally and moving into positive
territory two hours after London closed.
Equity market strategists put on a brave face in view of the general lack of
enthusiasm towards the Budget. Mr Richard Jeffrey, equity market strategist
and head of research at Charterhouse Tilney, the stockbroker, said the
chancellor's Budget held out 'a positive promise for next year'. Mr Jeffrey
said the Budget 'provides a good background for the gilts market which,
longer term, will help the equity market'.
Answering the question as to whether the Budget was disappointing, he
continued: 'Who would want a Budget injecting more vigour into an economy
expanding at 4 per cent per annum?'
Mr Edmond Warner, head of strategy at Kleinwort Benson Securities, said:
'Financial markets must now focus on the next UK interest rate increase; the
chancellor's punchy inflation target will need higher base rates.' He added
that the gilt-edged market may be disappointed by the Budget and said he was
recommending a switch out of gilts and into equities, pointing out that
gilts have outperformed equities by 10 per cent in the last three months.
At Strauss Turnbull, economist and market strategist Mr Ian Harnett
described the chancellor's proposals as 'a Budget for the future', and said
that by reducing the public sector borrowing requirement Mr Clarke would
achieve two main things: 'He frees cash for the institutions to invest
outside of gilts, and provides scope for tax cuts in the years ahead. You
could say we needed more for the corporate sector, but it was pleasing that
the chancellor did not introduce any headline grabbing measures.'
The Budget brought a subdued ending to an uninspiring session. Earlier,
dealers reported a barrage of bed and breakfast, or tax-related, trades
estimated at around 100m shares and accounting for more than 16 per cent of
the day's turnover. This was 609.5m shares, an encouraging figure for Budget
Day. Turnover in non-Footsie stocks was about 400m. Customer business on
Monday was worth some Pounds 1.11bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 68

941130

