FT942-14741

FT  19 APR 94 / Leading Article: Fed up


Much ink will be spilled in the attempt to rationalise the US Federal
Reserve's decision to signal a third successive increase in short-term
interest rates in less than two months; and much of the spillage will be in
vain. Not even Fed chairman Mr Alan Greenspan can fine tune monetary policy
on a month-to-month basis in response to the latest data on the economy -
least of all when the first quarter has been subject to freakish weather
conditions and a Californian earthquake. What is clear is that the Fed is
seeking to shift monetary policy to a more neutral stance as quickly as it
can manage without destabilising markets further. The question is still what
constitutes neutrality.
The Fed's concern is with the real federal funds rate after allowing for
inflation. On most reckonings, this was around zero before the first nominal
rate increase in February. Since 1979, the real federal funds rate has
averaged some 3 3/4 per cent. Yet to take as a yardstick a period in which
successive Fed chairmen were seeking to squeeze inflation out of the system
after the shocks of the 1970s would be perverse, in the present less
inflationary climate.
Moreover, past comparisons are dangerously misleading in another sense. The
shape and composition of the balance sheet of the personal sector has
changed dramatically as a result of demographic change and the debt build-up
of the 1980s. The elderly and the rich, who borrow little, now account for a
larger share of the population's total income, so the debt servicing burden
is falling on a narrower proportion of the population's income. At the same
time, the increasing share of tax privileged forms of investment in
household assets means that savings are less liquid and that the less rich
and the less old have a smaller margin of safety in their financial
arrangements.
These structural changes may not be having a significant short-run effect on
the economic growth rate, which remains exceptionally robust. But they do
suggest that consumers may be more sensitive to any given change in interest
rates than in previous economic cycles. Against the background of a run down
in the household savings rate to 4 per cent or less, and the possibility
that inflation may be more subdued than the bond market assumes, this might
point to a relatively cautious Fed view of what constitutes a neutral policy
stance in today's circumstances - a federal funds rate nearer 4 1/2, say,
than 5 per cent. But it also underlines the inherent problems in reading the
US economy. US short rates still have further to rise. The longer-run
question is whether a tougher than neutral stance will be needed.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940419

