FT942-12661

FT  28 APR 94 / UK Company News: Sainsbury converts three stores to test
format for town centres


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


J Sainsbury, the UK's largest grocery retailer, is launching a new
town-centre format called Sainsbury's Central, designed to provide for the
convenience and 'top-up' shopping market.
The move follows the success of the Metro format launched by Tesco,
Sainsbury's biggest rival, now trading in five locations.
Sainsbury is converting three existing town-centre stores in Chelmsford,
Exeter and Epsom to the new format, and if these are successful will start
converting others. The company said it would decide later this year whether
to build new outlets in the format.
'Although firmly retaining Sainsbury's tradition of quality, convenience and
value for money, the new-style shop will provide a service more geared to
the needs of town-centre shoppers,' the company said.
The stores would serve three needs:
'Pop-in' shopping, for items such as newspapers, confectionery and snacks.
'Top-up' shopping, for customers making last-minute or forgotten purchases.
Main shopping trips.
The shops will be refitted, and the product range slimmed down and tailored
to meet these needs, as well as to make space for new delicatessen, fresh
hot foods and meat counters.
The refitted Chelmsford store - which, at just over 12,000 sq ft, is about
half the size of an out-of-town superstore - will reopen on June 14. Exeter
will follow in mid-July and Epsom in early August.
Conversion time to the new format will be about four weeks, but Sainsbury
refused to reveal the expected cost.
Since the early 1980s Sainsbury, like Tesco, has been closing smaller
town-centre stores and opening new out-of-town superstores. But it said
yesterday more than 100 of its 340 stores were still small high-street
outlets.
The big grocery retailers have been forced to rethink their expansion
programmes by increasing market saturation, tougher planning restrictions on
out-of-town stores, and competition from discount stores.
Tesco opened its first Metro in London's Covent Garden last year, and
followed it with stores in Hammersmith, Oxford Street, Bristol and
Liverpool.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940428

