FT944-2496

FT  16 DEC 94 / India's PM plans cabinet purge


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   NEW DELHI


Mr P V Narasimha Rao, the Indian prime minister, last night seemed to be
preparing a cabinet reshuffle in an effort to win back public confidence
following the ruling Congress (I) party's defeat in state elections last
week.
Large numbers of ministers offered to resign yesterday in order to give Mr
Narasimha Rao a free hand in rebuilding his government.
The offers came amid persistent opposition attacks on alleged corruption and
incompetence in the government, especially in its handling of the 1992
Bombay stock market scandal and of a sugar shortage earlier this year.
The turmoil was compounded by arguments over the resignation on Wednesday
night of Mr A K Antony, the civil supplies minister, who quit unexpectedly
after he was named in a government note on the sugar affair presented to
parliament earlier in the day.
The note, deliberately written in a low-key way to avoid giving offence,
levelled vague criticisms at several officials and ministers. Mr Antony, who
is known for his honesty, reacted strongly at being tarred with the same
brush as others he believes guilty of incompetence in the affair.
While his resignation is unconnected with yesterday's offers, it increases
the pressure on ministers tainted by corruption allegations.
These include Mr Romeshwar Thakur, the minister of state for finance, and Mr
B Shankaranand, the health minister, who were both named in a parliamentary
inquiry into the Rs40bn (Pounds 820m) securities scandal, in which money was
illegally siphoned out of banks. Mr Thakur was accused in the report of
delaying an official probe into the affair.
Mr Shankaranand was accused of having authorised illegal money transfers
when oil minister and head of the state-owned Oil Industry Development
Board. Separately, Mr Kalpnath Rai, the food minister, has been criticised
in parliament for allegedly mismanaging emergency imports of sugar.
Mr Narasimha Rao has become concerned about allegations of incompetence and
corruption because these issues figured prominently in the recent state
elections in which Congress was defeated. Although voters were more
concerned with their local state administrations than the government in
Delhi, Mr Narasimha Rao seems to believe that the party needs to project a
cleaner image nationally.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941216

