FT942-14368

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (14): Heavy toll of deregulation - US
airlines wage a cut-throat price war


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


Bad news for the US airline industry means good news for the business
traveller: or so it would seem from reports about the effects of the price
war being fought in America's skies.
Hardly a day passes without news of yet another US airline slashing fares in
an attempt to preserve its market share against competition from lower-cost
carriers - or alternatively, news of yet another airline reporting heavy
losses because of its inability to make money at the new fare levels.
The state of the US domestic market has become mythologised as one in which
air travel is now so cheap that airlines will practically pay you to fly
with them. But perhaps not surprisingly, low-cost travel in the US domestic
market is not quite as simple as all that.
That the market is competitive, there is no doubt. The US airline industry
has been deregulated since 1978, allowing operators to fly any routes they
like at whatever fares they care to set. Entrepreneurs seeking to enter the
market need only satisfy the authorities as to their competence.
As a result, industry giants such as United Airlines, American Airlines and
Delta Air Lines nowadays face competition from dozens of smaller newcomers
including Valujet *something in here (HP) *
Airlines, Republic Air or UltrAir, all of them trying to grab a share of the
market by undercutting the big carriers' fares.
The small airlines are able to operate at a fraction of the big carriers'
costs because they run intensive shuttle services on busy short-haul routes,
minimising turnaround times and maximising productivity. They also pare
costs to the bone by cutting out frills such as baggage transfers, in-flight
meals, free newspapers and first-class or business class accommodation.
The low-cost carrier that serves as a model for the industry is Southwest
Airlines, the Texas-based operator that is now the most profitable airline
in the US.
With operating costs per available seat mile some 22 per cent below the
average for the big carriers, it is trouncing the competition. Spreading
across the south from its home territory, where it is easily the dominant
carrier, it has become the biggest operator of flights within California and
has driven American Airlines out of the short-haul market in the south-west.
Taking a flight by Southwest Airlines is a novel experience for business
travellers accustomed to elaborate check-in rituals, fawning service and
endless parades of drinks and meals. Southwest has deliberately trivialised
the event, making it more like catching a bus. There is no first class or
business class. The in-flight meal is a bag of peanuts and a glass of orange
squash. Seats are not allocated: passengers just turn up and get on, and if
they miss the aircraft, it doesn't matter, because there'll be another one
along in a minute.
Southwest's fares are a fraction of those offered by other airlines for
comparable distances - a feature that has proved highly addictive to
cost-conscious US companies. Business travellers are not only deserting
other airlines to fly by Southwest: they are also choosing to fly with the
airline rather than drive, or to undertake journeys that their budgets would
not previously have allowed them to make.
Southwest's formula has been so persuasive that it is being imitated by
existing carriers as well as new entrants to the industry. Continental
Airlines has set up a low-cost operation nicknamed CALite, offering
so-called Peanut Fares on 875 of its routes. United Airlines, the biggest
carrier in the US, has won agreement from its labour unions to set up a
low-cost airline-within-an-airline, provisionally dubbed U2. Delta Air Lines
is studying the possibility of doing the same, and others are expected to
follow.
The result is that domestic air travel in the US, at least in the short haul
market, is being transformed into a no-frills commodity business - low-cost,
high volume, and with little added value.
Increasingly, the demarcations between business travellers and the rest are
disappearing. Value for money is maximised by treating everyone the same.
But the puzzle is: if domestic air travel in the US is succumbing to this
trend, why do business air fares show so few signs of coming down? Figures
from American Express, which has set up an airfare management unit to track
domestic and international fares, show that the average business fare for a
one-way trip hardly changed during 1993, sticking at around the Dollars
340-Dollars 350 level all year.
According to Mr Robert Harrell, vice president of American Express's airfare
management unit, the answer is simple. The impact of the low-cost carriers
on the US air travel market has been blown out of all proportion, he says.
Taken together, low-cost carriers still account for only about 4 per cent of
total domestic traffic. All the rest is carried by airlines with more
traditional cost structures.
Even so, things are changing. Up till now, most of the low-fare action in
the US has been in the west and south-west. Astonishingly, average fares on
short-haul routes in the east are now approximately double those in the west
 -partly because costs in the east tend to be driven up by bad weather, air
traffic control delays and heavily unionised workforces.
Recently, however - too recently to show up in the American Express index -
the fare war has started to penetrate the east, too. At the end of last year
Southwest Airlines began an assault on the market by offering flights on the
Baltimore-Chicago and Baltimore-Cleveland routes at fares up to 85 per cent
lower than those available from existing operators.
In January, Continental Airlines announced that it was introducing its
Peanut Fares to the east.
In February USAir, one of the biggest east coast operators, was forced to
respond by slashing its fares by up to 50 per cent.
The significance of these fare cuts is that they are not special offers
requiring advance booking and Saturday night stays: they are indefinite cuts
applying across the board. Business travellers could therefore emerge as the
main beneficiaries - provided, of course, they are happy to swap their
comfortable seat and in-flight meal for a cheap ticket and a bag of nuts.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940420

