FT941-4239

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (2): Investors have returned in
strength - In some parts of the market, a gradual recovery of business
confidence is already resulting in increased take-up / Britain


   By VANESSA HOULDER


After three years of severe recession, the UK property market is in the
throes of a spectacular recovery. Investors have returned to the property
market in strength, creating one of the most buoyant market for good quality
property since the 1970s.
The resurgence of the UK property market can be attributed to two factors:
the strength of the government bond market, and the anticipation of a
recovery in rental values.
The most powerful of these stimuli was the sharp fall in bond yields in
1993, when long gilt yields fell from 8.8 per cent to 6.4 per cent. As
equity and bond yields plummeted, the relatively high yields available on
property became increasingly attractive to investors.
More money became available for property from several sources. Institutions
increased their allocations to the sector, property companies earmarked new
funds for investment from the Pounds 2.39bn they raised from rights issues
and foreign investors increased their investment in UK property from Pounds
1.3bn in 1992 to nearly Pounds 2.2bn in 1993.
The weight of demand for property sharply drove down property yields. On
average, they fell by 0.8 per cent to 8.2 per cent in the second half of
1993, which is the largest fall over any six-month period since 1977,
according to Hillier Parker, chartered surveyors.
The uplift has benefited all sectors of the market, but has been
particularly marked in the retail sector, where yields on some high street
shops and retail warehouse parks have fallen to record lows.
The London office market, which was for several years shunned by investors,
has also staged a remarkable recovery. It registered a record annual decline
in yields last year, when they fell by 1.8 percentage points to 8.3 per
cent.
Property yields are expected to continue to move downwards, in the view of
UBS, the brokers. It cites the rapid fall of gilt yields, which has outpaced
the fall in property yields; the weight of money available for investment
and the likely resumption of rental growth as reasons for expecting average
yields to fall throughout 1994, even if gilt yields rise significantly
during this period.
So far, the occupational market has made a relatively small contribution to
the turnaround in the performance of the property sector. Although the fall
in rental values slowed in the final quarter of 1993, rents continued to
decline in December, at a rate varying from 2 per cent in the rental market
to 10 per cent in the office market, according to the Investment Property
Databank, a research group.
However, the health of the occupational market is improving, particularly in
cities outside London, which suffered less severely from the recession than
London and are not burdened with such a large oversupply of space.
In some parts of the market, a gradual recovery of business confidence is
already resulting in increased take-up. An upturn in tenant demand last year
pushed the availability of offices in central London down by more than a
fifth to stand at 14 per cent of the total stock, according to DTZ Debenham
Thorpe.
Savills, a firm of property advisers, believes that rents on top quality
London offices are poised for a revival. Over the next three years, it
predicts a 15 per cent annual increase in rates for top-grade space in the
City of London to an average of Pounds 46 per square foot. In the West End,
it predicts a 12 per cent annual rise to an average of Pounds 51 per sq ft.
The retail sector is already showing signs of an upturn, despite the patchy
nature of the recovery in the retail sector. The balance between supply and
demand has improved as a result of a modest improvement in take-up, together
with a decline in development activity which has fallen since reaching a
peak in 1990.
These factors have resulted in a fall in shopping centre vacancy rates from
33 per cent to 26 per cent over the past year.
The industrial property sector is also beginning to improve, having
registered the first fall in available floorspace since May 1989. King
Sturge, a firm of chartered surveyors, believes that the amount of available
industrial space dropped by 1 per cent to 180.5m sq ft in the last four
months of 1993.
A revival in the occupational market will help the recovery of the
investment market become more broadly-based.
So far, the type of property being sought by investors has been
predominantly high quality, institutional-grade property, with secure
incomes paid by financially-strong tenants. But as concern about tenant
bankruptcies diminishes, investors are placing less emphasis on security and
more on the potential for rental growth.
The extent of the revival of the property market will also depend on the
attitude of the banks, which are largely responsible for financing
second-tier properties which do not play a part in institutional portfolios.
As the rental market improves and the banks' willingness to lend to the
sector increases, the improvement in property values will spread more widely
throughout the market.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940311

