FT941-3347

FT  16 MAR 94 / Markets Report: Dollar steady on mixed data


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Economic data released in the US yesterday revealed hints of inflation but
had little impact on the dollar, which has already factored in further
Federal Reserve tightening, writes Philip Gawith.
The US currency failed to make a sustained break through the key technical
level of DM1.6975 and finished in London at DM1.6963, up from DM1.6898 on
Monday.
Boosted by a fall in Japan's bilateral trade surplus with the US in
February, the dollar was also firmer against the yen, closing at Y106.150
from Y105.880. New York trading ended with the dollar at DM1.6960 and
Y106.05.
In Europe the recovery from recent interest rate pessimism continued, with
both sterling and Euromark futures rising across the yield curve. Market
speculation is that the Bundesbank will today announce a more generous cut
in its repo rate than the three basis points of the last two weeks.
The dollar weakened initially after the release of fairly modest inflation
data which appeared to postpone the need for higher US interest rates.
Although the headline figure showed February producer prices up by 0.5 per
cent, this fell to 0.1 per cent when the volatile food and energy sectors
were excluded. Cold weather in February pushed fuel bills to exceptional
levels.
The industrial production numbers released a little later, however, lent
support to the US currency. February industrial production rose 0.4 per
cent, against expectations of no change, while capacity use was 83.4 per
cent, against an 83 per cent forecast.
Mr David Cocker, currency analyst at Chemical Bank, said the capacity
utilisation measure had caused concern. 'We are almost at the level at which
in the past we have seen inflation pressure build in the US.'
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief currency strategist at Citibank, endorsed this
view, saying 'inflation pressures are bubbling below the surface' and that
there was nothing in the data to prevent the Fed from tightening if it
wishes.
Mr Cocker said the muted response of the dollar was explained by the market
already having factored in a rise in US interest rates. Mr MacKinnon said
the figures contained nothing new for dollar bulls. He predicted that the
dollar 'will find it very difficult to make progress against the D-Mark from
now on'.
Japan's February trade figures offered some solace for dollar bulls, showing
an unadjusted 0.9 per cent decline in the February surplus with the US from
a year earlier.
This positive note was promptly offset by comments from Mr Mickey Kantor,
the US trade representative, showing that the US would continue to play
tough over the trade talks. 'Our trade and economic relationship, a key
priority of the Clinton administration, is in serious disrepair,' he said.
The D-Mark was mixed in European trading ahead of today's repo announcement.
It was unchanged in London against the Belgian and French francs at BFr20.60
and FFr3.398 respectively. It was weaker against the Italian lira, at L985.4
from L988.1, and firmer against the Spanish peseta, finishing at Pta82.02
from Pta81.94.
Increased optimism about the pace of monetary easing was evident in the
Euromark futures. The June contract firmed four basis points to 94.60 and
the December contract 10 points to 95.06.
Analysts said German call money, in the 5.85 to 5.90 per cent range was also
helping, in that it indicated the market could accept a 6 to 7 basis-point
cut without difficulty.
Call money is now below the repo rate, which is 5.94 per cent. The
Bundesbank yesterday announced that it would be implementing another
variable rate repo.
Some observers were more aggressive in their forecasts, with Citibank's Mr
MacKinnon saying he 'would not be surprised' if the repo fell to 5.75 per
cent. 'The strength of the D-Mark gives the Bundesbank a chance to put
through quite a handsome repo cut.'
One factor likely to have a bearing on the size of the cut is the reportedly
easy liquidity position of the banks, which may have encouraged lower bids.
Sterling showed little reaction to the CBI's distributive trades survey
which showed a slow-down in retail sales growth. It eased slightly against
the dollar to Dollars 1.4915 from Dollars 1.4945, but was firmer against the
D-Mark, closing at DM2.53 from DM2.5254.
The CBI survey did have an impact in the futures market, with the June
sterling contract rising six basis points to 94.90 and the December contract
eight points to 94.60.
In the discount market the overnight rate maintained its firm tone of late,
trading around 6 per cent. Mr Philip Shaw, group economist at Union
Discount, said the Bank of England was continuing to have difficulty in
clearing the shortage. He said this reflected a shortage of bills rather
than pressure from the Bank.
Yesterday the Bank provided Pounds 550m of late assistance after earlier
putting Pounds 658m of liquidity into the system. This compared with a
revised forecast of a Pounds 1.25bn shortage.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940316

