FT944-5806

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Management Buy-Outs (9): Franchises will limit
profits - British Rail / Nearly 100 businesses will be offered for sale


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


The privatisation of British Rail represents a challenge for the management
buy-out specialists among the financial community and also for BR's
managers.
Traditionally, venture and development capitalists have put equity into a
new business in the hope of making a sizeable capital gain when they sell
out after a few years.
But the franchising of BR's 25 train operating companies will not require
large injections of equity because most of their assets will be rented or
leased. Managers will be 'bidding for a series of inter-related contractual
rights and obligations rather than hard assets', comments Richard Price, a
partner in the law firm McKenna & Co.
The limited franchise period - probably between seven and 15 years - will
mean that managers and their backers will not be able to profit from the
goodwill they have built up in the business by selling their shares or
floating the company on the stock exchange.
Unless management is successful in bidding for an extension of its
franchise, another owner will take over the business. In reality, the
incumbent management team will be well placed to win a second franchise
period.
Despite this unpromising climate for buy-outs, the government is setting its
hopes on managers winning a substantial share of the franchises on offer.
Sceptics say this is because the rail franchises are unlikely to attract
many outside bidders although conversations with BR's managers reveal an
enthusiasm on the part of many to bid.
Management and employee buy-outs have figured prominently in previous
privatisations of publicly-owned transport undertakings such as the trust
ports, the bus companies and the National Freight Corporation. But the need
to continue subsidising large parts of the railway network even after it
moves into the private sector has forced the government to adopt a different
approach with BR.
It is breaking the company up into nearly 100 separate businesses most of
which will be sold to trade buyers or management buy-out teams. Prominent
among these businesses are the train operating companies ranging in size
from the Cardiff Valley lines with fare revenues of Pounds 7m to the west
coast main line with revenues of Pounds 239m. A management bid has also been
made for Freightliner, the container arm of BR
Other businesses to be sold include three newly-created rolling stock
leasing companies; the Red Star parcels service; and track maintenance and
renewal companies with annual contracts worth more than Pounds 1bn.
Railtrack, the new owner of BR's track, stations and signalling, will be
floated on the stock exchange.
The structure chosen for the railway is for Railtrack to levy access charges
on the passenger and freight train operators for the use of the lines. The
level of charges will depend on the number of trains run, the types of train
 -freight wagons which inflict heavy punishment on the track or lighter
commuter trains, and whether the train operator wants 'slots' at peak times.
Railtrack's charges have been set to give it an acceptable return on capital
and to allow it to finance investments. The Treasury has agreed to match
these charges by a continuing subsidy to the train operators. The point of
this arrangement is that it makes apparent the cost of keeping open
individual lines and running specific services. Once the biggest loss-makers
have been identified then, in theory, a rational decision can be taken on
whether they should be kept open.
The result of this arrangement is that the train operators own very few
assets. Their track and signalling is rented from Railtrack while their
locomotives and carriages are leased from one of the three rolling stock
companies. On the one hand this helps management teams because their capital
requirements are small. On the other it makes life difficult for the
financiers who normally back buy-outs because there is little requirement
for their funds.
'It is a mixed blessing for the venture capitalists,' comments Chris
Beresford, head of buy-outs at accountants KPMG Peat Marwick. 'They want to
lay down a lot of money to achieve their internal rates of return of 50 per
cent but this arrangement does not allow them to get their funds invested.'
Traditional loan finance also has a problem with this way of working because
there are practically no assets on which to secure a loan. And, if a
franchisee defaults, his creditors will have very little in the way of
assets to call upon. With few assets available financial backers will be
doubly vigilant to ensure that they pick a competent management team.
Although they will not need to finance much by way of assets, managers will
need working capital and will probably also have to provide performance
bonds. These would be called in by the franchising director, responsible for
finding buyers for the train operating franchises, if the company defaulted.
Managers may have to make their loan proposals on the basis of cash flow
forecasts although the tight regulation of the railway industry which will
continue after privatisation may make some lenders nervous. Train operators
will not be able to shut down unprofitable services to stem losses because
their contracts with the franchising director will require them to maintain
a certain level of service.
One advantage enjoyed by managers bidding for parts of BR is a government
commitment to meet part of the costs of making a bid, though the successful
team would have to repay the advance. Managers can recoup 85 per cent of the
first Pounds 10,000 and 75 per cent of the rest up to a total of Pounds
100,000. Unlike some other privatisations, however, management bids will not
be allowed a 5 per cent 'discount' against other bidders.
An important concern of the government is that employees and not just
managers should be involved in bidding and proposals which include them will
be given preference.
The favoured position enjoyed by management teams and the keenness shown by
many of them suggests that most of the early franchise sales will be by way
of buy-outs, says Mr Beresford. But the government wants to achieve a broad
mix of ownership and will not allow buy-outs to dominate the entire
privatisation.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941201

