FT942-15609

FT  14 APR 94 / Ask my bank, said Schneider, before the fall: David Waller
tells how one of Germany's property empires has come close to collapse


   By DAVID WALLER


In February Mr Jurgen Schneider, the entrepreneur whose property empire is
on the verge of collapse, granted an interview in which he sought to calm
fears about the finances of the group bearing his name.
'My projects are sound and profitable,' he told the Frankfurter Allgemeine
newspaper, bragging that he had never sold a property at a loss. If anybody
had doubts about this, they should ask his bank, he said defiantly.
Today 'his' bank - he did not name the institution but it is probably
Deutsche Bank which is owed more than DM1bn - will meet more than 40 other
creditors to work out whether the group has a future. With debts estimated
at DM9bn (Pounds 3.6bn), his ventures have turned out to be far from 'sound
and profitable'.
Mr Schneider, 59, a self-made man with a passion for restoring old
buildings, will not be at the meeting. He and his wife disappeared on
Friday, leaving fellow board members with a fax saying that he had been
advised by doctors to play no further part in the group's affairs. He has
not been heard of since.
A controversial figure, with a reputation for meanness in paying suppliers,
Mr Schneider was rumoured yesterday to be in Switzerland. Wherever he is,
the repercussions of his disappearance will be profound for the German
business community.
Still reeling from the near collapse of Metallgesellschaft, the mining,
metals and industrial group, bankers and businessmen are facing the
implosion of one of Germany's largest privately owned property empires. The
group has more than 80 large properties in Germany alone and employs more
than 2,000.
The affair signals the end of Germany's immunity to the property crashes
which have been a feature of business life in other leading economies. When
German property developers eyed the problems of prominent foreign property
groups, there was tendency to think that 'this sort of think can't happen
here'. The Schneider case has punctured that complacency.
'This is absolutely typical for this stage of a recession, however untypical
for Germany,' commented Mr Adolf Rosenstock, chief economist at the
International Bank of Japan's German arm. 'Schneider was always very
aggressive and very speculative, and now the bubble has burst.'
In the absence of concrete information, it is difficult to say exactly what
has happened. But property experts said yesterday that it appeared to be a
classic case of over-expansion, financed by gullible banks. 'For two years
we've been asking ourselves: how on earth does he do it?' said one
developer. 'His organisation has always paid 20 to 30 per cent over the
odds. His valuations always seemed overly optimistic and he never seemed to
sell anything. It does not surprise me that it has come to this.'
Critics say that it is only by overpaying that he has managed to assemble
his portfolio of properties. Most of these are prestigious commercial
developments in the heart of German cities. Schneider owns the Bernheimer
Palace in Munich, the Hotel Rose in Wiesbaden, and important retail sites in
Frankfurt, Berlin and Leipzig. The group's headquarters is itself a castle,
in Konigstein near Frankfurt.
The desirability of many of the properties is likely to limit the immediate
impact of Schneider's problems on the German property market. Consultants
said there would be buyers for most of the portfolio if the group were to be
liquidated.
But the affair will hit German banks, already suffering mounting bad debts
from their exposure to industrial companies. Analysts suggest that many of
the bigger banks will have already provided for their exposure to Schneider
in their 1993 figures. Shares in Deutsche Bank and other leading German
banks nevertheless dropped sharply this week, reflecting fears about a sharp
deterioration in the quality of their loan books.
Over time, the impact on bankers' confidence is likely to depress the German
property market, where rental income has fallen substantially from 1991-92
highs. More immediate will be the impact on the numerous small businesses
owed money by the group, a fact recognised by Chancellor Helmut Kohl
yesterday when he urged banks to be mindful of their responsibility to the
community. Trade creditors are believed to be owed DM3bn of the debt total.
In Leipzig alone, where Schneider owns street after street of buildings in
the historic city centre, some 3,000 construction jobs are said to be at
risk.
As in the Metallgesellschaft affair, it will be asked: how could it happen?
Probably Mr Schneider is the only one with the full answer. In his absence,
the question will be directed at the Frankfurt banking community which has
once again been surprised by the dire problems of a company on its very
doorstep.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940414

