FT944-5964

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Rueful companies decipher chancellor's rates
decision - Simon London, Ian Hamilton Fazey and Paul Cheeseright on the
Budget's business cashflow effects for north and south


   By SIMON LONDON, IAN HAMILTON FAZEY and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


The chancellor's announcement on business rates will have a greater direct
impact on the cashflow of British business next year than any other element
of the Budget.
The amount companies pay under the uniform business rate system, introduced
in 1990, depends on a national rate in the pound set by government and on
the rental value of individual properties, revalued every five years.
The rate in the pound announced on Tuesday is not controversial. In England,
the uniform business rate for 1995-96 will be 43.2p, only a slight increase
from 42.3p this year.
Fluctuations in property values since the last revaluation should, however,
have led to a huge shift in the rates burden from the south of the country
to the north and the Midlands.
The chancellor decided to prevent this shift by capping rates rises in the
north and limiting reductions in the south. That decision drew fierce
criticism.
Mr Richard Lay, chairman of the commercial property panel of the Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors, said: 'The transitional arrangements are
unjust and will damage the competitiveness of central London in the European
context.'
Even winners in the north felt that the arrangements were too harsh on those
in the south of the country.
Mr David Wilkinson, director of Bradford chamber of commerce, said: 'Our
view has been consistent for five years. Losers should be cushioned against
increases, paid for by the Treasury. Gainers should get all of the benefit
now.'
Property values in London and the south-east have plummeted since 1988, when
the last rating revaluation was carried out, so occupiers in these areas
should, in theory, see their rates fall by up to 60 per cent.
Yet in central Birmingham, which has the biggest concentration of offices in
the Midlands, there was a surge in values between 1988 and 1993, when office
rents rose from Pounds 10 a sq ft to slightly less than Pounds 20. In
theory, rates should double.
The chancellor clearly felt that companies should not be saddled with big
one-off increases. Rate rises for occupiers of large properties - with
rateable values of more than Pounds 10,000 outside London - will therefore
be limited to 10 per cent next year in real terms.
This 'phasing' of increases will be paid for partly by the Treasury - which
is providing Pounds 605m next year to keep rate rises low - and partly by
companies which will not be allowed the rate reductions they expected.
For big buildings rates reductions are being restricted to 5 per cent in
real terms. Occupiers of smaller buildings will be allowed maximum
reductions of 10 per cent in real terms.
Most occupiers and property advisers expected the government to introduce
some form of phasing, as it did when the uniform business rate was
introduced.
Gainers in the north and Midlands were allowed only a 10.5 per cent
reduction in 1990-91, 13 per cent the next year, 22 per cent in 1993-94, and
the rest this year.
But the extremely slow phasing of rate reductions announced in the Budget
prompted property professionals to question why the government had bothered
to revalue buildings at all.
Mr Mark Henderson, rating director at DTZ Debenham Thorpe, the surveyors,
said: 'The details of the transitional relief system undermine the whole
purpose of the revaluation.'
Companies located in and around London will certainly be paying more next
year than expected.
The average central London office occupier currently pays business rates of
about Pounds 16 per sq ft. Based on property values at April this year, that
liability should have fallen by about 58 per cent to Pounds 6.75 per sq ft.
Under the transitional arrangements outlined in the Budget, however,
occupiers will still be paying Pounds 15.55 per sq ft next year - a saving
of only 45p.
The wider question is whether central London occupiers paying more than they
expected in rates next year will be less able to pay high rents.
If so, the property market in the capital, which was devastated by
recession, will recover much more slowly than expected.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941201

