FT941-17159

FT  06 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Risk-taking wins a cheer at Eximbank


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


Mr Kenneth Brody, chairman of the US Export-Import Bank, after his first
year in office, is demonstrating that risk-takers from Wall Street can
settle comfortably in the orbit of the 'pro-active' Clinton White House.
A chief player in the development of the administration's aggressive export
promotion strategy, former investment banker is now focusing on Eximbank's
role within that policy.
Where the agency can make a difference, he has concluded, is on ventures
which businesses cannot afford themselves and which commercial banks will
not touch without US government backing.
Many of these risks will be directed towards the former Soviet Union, where
Eximbank recently concluded a long-awaited Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.35bn) Oil
and Gas Framework to boost rehabilitation of existing production facilities.
To supplement the pact, Mr Brody and his counterparts signed a Project
Incentive Agreement to provide financing for new energy projects as well as
loans in sectors such as mining and forest products.
Not deterred by the recent Russian election results, Mr Brody, in fact,
looks on the bright side. That President Boris Yeltsin did not sack his
reformers or halt privatisation efforts is deemed 'interesting' and, in any
case, designing 'appropriate safety nets' for Russians caught up in the
transition to a market economy is considered desirable.
Eximbank this year has no loan limit and Congress has authorised almost
Dollars 1bn - including Dollars 300m for the former Soviet republics - to
pay the costs of financing. This means the bank could leverage up to Dollars
18bn for guarantees, insurance and direct loans. But the chairman seems less
concerned by the quantity of loans than the challenge of designing loans for
shrewd deals which others might sidestep.
He is boosting project finance, exports of environmental goods and services
and small business exports. He has established a special group for aircraft
finance.
Much effort is going in a shift on customer services. Preliminary financing
commitments, which once took an average of six weeks to issue, are turning
around more swiftly; half the applicants are getting answers in 7 1/2 days.
Eximbank has Dollars 150m this year to counter the tied aid deals - mingling
commercial credits with government aid - offered by US competitors. Just a
few have been offered so far (including one 'substantial' deal for China),
but last year the use of tied aid fell dramatically - from Dollars 15bn in
1991 to Dollars 6bn. Mr Brody expects to compete aggressively in the world's
emerging markets, where the greatest growth is expected. He envisions more
tied aid activity, project finance and substantially more product activity
in China.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940106

