FT942-14271

FT  21 APR 94 / Lautro to vet sales by life insurers: Undercover clients to
be used


   By ALISON SMITH


Life insurance customers are to be recruited by Lautro to act as undercover
'mystery shoppers' in providing the industry's self-regulating organisation
with information about how life insurers really treat their clients.
The first step in this enterprise will be a pilot project to be carried out
with the voluntary assistance of three or four life companies.
Lautro hopes to have carried out a trial project involving some 50 'mystery
shoppers' before the end of June. Diagnostics, a consultancy, is advising it
on recruiting the potential customers.
Mr Kit Jebens, Lautro chief executive, said the project would be very
different from the approaches used by some investigative television
programmes. People involved would be 'genuine prospects', and so the process
could be followed all the way through to the sale.
The 'mystery shoppers' would be trained before they approached life
companies and would be interviewed after they had experienced the sales
process.
Mr Jebens said he hoped that if the results provided reliable information,
then the Personal Investment Authority, which is due to become the regulator
for retail financial services from July, would also pursue the idea. The new
watchdog had already expressed some interest in it, he said.
Lautro sees the project as part of developing a 'customer care index'. This
would be critical in devising a system including incentives to encourage
life companies to adopt high standards of behaviour, alongside the existing
penalties for those companies that do not meet regulators' requirements.
Lautro has been examining this area for more than a year and believes there
is scope for loosening the regulatory reins for companies that score highly
on the customer care index, enabling them to make substantial savings from
not being bound by the detailed provisions set out in regulators' rules.
Mr Jebens was very cool, however, on the role of individual registration of
sales agents in effective regulation - a practice likely to be urged on the
PIA by the committee of MPs examining financial regulation.
He argued that Lautro did not need to have a contractual relationship with
individual sales agents and that it was better not to undermine the
companies' clear responsibility for those it employed.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940421

