FT941-5669

FT  05 MAR 94 / Yeltsin tries to steer a middle course


   By JOHN LLOYD and MARTIN WOLF


   MOSCOW


President Boris Yeltsin of Russia yesterday called for 'stability, order and
co-operation' in an attempt to calm growing tension in the country. His call
signalled that radical economic reform was even more unlikely in the
immediate future.
His speech to government, party and regional leaders, and a later one by Mr
Victor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, proposed a strategy balanced
between macroeconomic controls and industrial support to try to stem falling
production and avoid 'reform at any price'.
The two men ended up, however, calling for quite different year-end
inflation targets - with Mr Yeltsin insisting that the former target of 5
per cent a month by the end of 1994 still stood, and Mr Chernomyrdin
proposing a much looser 7-9 per cent.
The International Monetary Fund, whose team returns next week for further
talks on releasing a further tranche of Dollars 1.5bn, has insisted on 5 per
cent. Finance ministers of the Group of Seven industrialised countries
meeting in Frankfurt last weekend backed strict IMF conditionality - a move
which appears to make remote any further IMF assistance in the near future.
The annual budget, passed in principle by the government on Thursday,
envisages a deficit of Rbs61,000bn, or 10.2 per cent of GNP - compared with
a claimed deficit in 1993 of 10.7 per cent of GNP. Though hailed by western
financial observers in Moscow yesterday as relatively brave, it is also
being greeted as merely an opening salvo in a process of bargaining over
credits which has already begun with large sums being demanded by the
agricultural sector.
Mr Yeltsin, who referred to the amnesty of the parliamentary rebels - former
vice-president Mr Alexander Rutskoi and parliamentary speaker Mr Ruslan
Khasbulatov - as a decision which 'seriously violated the constitution, the
law and moral standards', nevertheless proposed to the parliamentarians a
'memorandum for civic peace'. He views this as a document which would bind
the parties to 'responsibility' for their actions - though in what way is as
yet unclear.
In their speeches, both Mr Yeltsin and Mr Chernomyrdin preserved many
reformist elements - and the prime minister even allowed himself to shout at
Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the central bank chairman and an ally, for weakening
the state by handing out credits with too liberal a hand.
'Future Russian generations will never forgive us if we leave them with a
weak country,' he retorted to Mr Gerashchenko's contention that inflation
was a lesser evil than mass unemployment.
Mr Gerashchenko said that choosing to fight inflation meant mass
redundancies - while support for industry meant higher inflation.
Mr Sergei Dubinin, the acting finance minister, however, said that inflation
had come down from 22 per cent in January to 13-15 per cent this month - and
that the government would now follow a centrist course, avoiding shocks and
pushing enterprises 'gradually' to the market.
Mr Chernomyrdin said that a law on bankruptcies would have to be adopted and
said that his government would tread on a 'razor's edge' between rising
inflation and falling production. However, the substance of his speech was
to commend moderate reform - and was greeted by Mr Sergei Glaziev, a former
trade minister and strong critic of the radical reformers, as laying the
basis for consensus between the government and the parliamentary majority.
Mr Yegor Gaidar, the former first deputy prime minister and leader of the
liberal Russia's Choice political party, said Mr Chernomyrdin's journey
along the razor's edge was unnecessary. 'There is no such dilemma. Economic
decline is by and large caused by our failure to adhere to tough monetary
policies.'
Martin Wolf adds: Boris Fyodorov, Russia's tough former finance minister,
said in London that if the west were to start pouring money into Russia now,
it would be a great mistake. 'Money must be given not on promises, but on
deeds,' he insisted.
The IMF and finance ministers of the Group of Seven leading industrial
countries should wait to see first what budget was adopted and then whether
the government managed at least three months of sound financial policies.
Mr Fyodorov admitted that the government's financial policy had been more
restrictive than previously, but only because it had demonstrated 'total
inaction in the last two months'. Meanwhile, the central bank 'had become
much more monetarist', since his departure from the ministry. This was
mainly because Mr Gerashchenko did not want to take responsibility for
credit expansion, but wished to be commanded by government.
This inaction would not last, argued Mr Fyodorov. 'Inflation may accelerate
to 30 per cent a month by the autumn,' he forecast, far above the targeted
level of 10 per cent. At that point, he argued, Mr Yeltsin, who was trying
to distance himself at present, would feel obliged to intervene.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940305

