FT944-14534

FT  22 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Step by step in Ulster


Another day, another step towards lasting peace in Northern Ireland. Just
eight weeks ago it would have been prudent to avoid the expression of such
optimism, however guardedly. Now, as each 24 hours passes since the IRA
declared a ceasefire on August 31, it is possible to argue that the tortuous
process of constructing a settlement to which all assent may, against
expectations, eventually end in success.
The obstacles are well-known. Past IRA ceasefires have been short-lived. The
'loyalist' terrorists, who laid down their arms only a couple of weeks ago,
may not be able to maintain discipline. Critically, each side expects
ultimate victory. Sinn Fein is allowing its followers to suppose that
entering the peace process will lead to a united Ireland. The unionists vow
that Ulster will never leave the ambit of the United Kingdom.
Seemingly undaunted, the prime ministers of Britain and Ireland have pursued
the peace process they initiated when they signed a joint declaration in
Downing Street last December. That committed both governments to acceptance
of the will of the Ulster electorate, an undertaking reinforced by a
subsequent promise of a referendum on any new negotiated deal. It also
invited the terrorists on both sides to abandon violence and take their
chances with the democratic process.
In Dublin Mr Albert Reynolds has addressed himself primarily to a
nationalist audience; in London and, yesterday, Belfast, Mr John Major has
sought to allay unionist suspicions. Both have demonstrated skill and
courage. The Taoiseach is convening his forum for national peace and
reconciliation, which one unionist party may attend. Mr Major has moved at a
tactically deliberate pace. He intimated yesterday that the cease-fire
declared on August 31 will henceforth be regarded as genuine, although the
IRA refuses to declare it 'permanent'.
Verbal camouflage
The two prime ministers meet at Chequers on Monday. Talks with the IRA/Sinn
Fein should begin in a few weeks. There are many items on the agenda. Some
will be matters of intricate negotiation, designed to persuade the
perpetrators of violence to hand over their explosives as a prelude to
surrendering their guns. Some will involve verbal camouflage, such as a
refusal to grant an amnesty to convicted terrorists, combined with an
assurance that paroles will be easier when there is no threat of a
repetition of the original offence.
This delicate horse-trading could break down at any stage. Yet the climate
of local opinion is a form of insurance against a resurgence of violence.
Yesterday Mr Major called for all Ulster inhabitants to speak out for peace.
He lifted the ban on Sinn Fein leaders entering the British mainland, opened
cross-border roads, and indicated that the number of troops on the streets
would progressively be reduced. By so doing he recognised some nationalist
aspirations. The business community was offered a pre-Christmas conference
on investment in the six counties.
Changes afoot
The unionists have something of greater immediate value - an unbreakable
assurance that there will be no change in the constitution without their
consent. Yet changes are afoot. Sooner or later the political framework
being designed in Dublin, London and Belfast will have to be put on the
table for debate. Mr Major has promised publication, which is essential if
suspicions are to be kept to a minimum.
Ulster will be offered its own legislature, elected by proportional
representation to guarantee a share of power to parties representing the
Catholic minority. New institutions, answerable to both London and Dublin,
would operate in both parts of the island. These might cover matters such as
tourism and the environment.
The structural example often cited is that of Nato, whose member states
retain their national sovereignty while pooling military resources. To set
the seal on the package, the Dublin government would seek to amend the
articles in the Irish constitution that lay claim to Ulster, while Britain
would make an equivalent change in its own law.
When all the documents have been signed, the deal will be put before the
Irish electorates, north and south. Some British ministers expect the
negotiations to take two years. Barring accidents, there may be a denouement
before that.
The unionists are being asked to pay for peace by accepting that if they are
outnumbered they may be outvoted in a future referendum. Republicans, and
the IRA in particular, are expected to acquiesce in the postponement of that
day of reckoning for perhaps another 25 years, and possibly forever. They
are given encouragement by Dublin's words about how in due course the south
will seem a more inviting place to northern Protestants. For Sinn Fein,
after 25 years of violence during which they made no progress towards their
goal, it is the only option that makes sense.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941022

