FT942-12167

FT  30 APR 94 / Fishing: The challenge of a new river


   By TOM FORT


A new age has dawned in my angling career. I do not expect it to be golden -
a tarnished, mottled silver will do. The first omens, I am relieved to
report, have been reasonably propitious. But I remain a trifle fearful, for
a change of river at my time of life is a momentous thing.
I have swapped Berkshire for Hampshire, and forsaken the broad waters of the
middle Kennet for the limpid Itchen. To give it an educational parallel, it
is as if I had left the familiar surroundings of school, and was peering in
to some college of higher learning. There is a fear of being found
deficient; and with it a sense of challenge.
This is not to denigrate the Kennet, where I have had several happy years -
and even the occasional triumph over a trout. But the Itchen is a different
kettle of fish. My new refuge is the Abbots Barton water on the outskirts of
Winchester - hallowed in fly fishing's traditions because it was here that
the immortal Skues studied trout, and refined to the point of revolution the
way we fish for them.
The idea that I or anyone else could follow in his footsteps is laughable.
But his shadow - as well as a sturdy commemorative seat - are there, along
with the memories of his encounters with trout. So I felt a touch daunted as
I made my debut.
The season on the Itchen opens at the start of April. Now I have always had
my doubts about April trout fishing. Forget about Chaucer and his 'shoures
soote' - the problem these days is winter hanging around to flay hopeful
spring-seekers with Arctic blasts, hailstorms, snow flurries and the like.
So it was for the first half of this April. I cowered indoors until the
forecaster assured me that a gentle breeze was blowing from the south-west.
The countryside was caught between seasons; the river appeared chill and
lifeless.
I wandered hither and thither for a couple of hours before lunch, searching
vainly for any sign of meaningful activity on the main river, or on the
network of feeder streams which cut through the meadows. As I ate my bread
and cheese, I pondered sceptically - and a little resentfully - on the
reports I had read about the infallible appearance on April days of an
insect called the Large Dark Olive, and the guarantee this offered of sport
with trout.
I was resigned to failure when, suddenly and miraculously, they did begin to
hatch. Down they floated, dark smudges against the sheen of the surface. And
up came the trout to snatch them.
I had two hours of utterly absorbing fishing. Being stocked fish, they were
none too faddy, and took a hackled Greenwell readily enough. By
mid-afternoon I had caught and returned three or four which did not quite
make the 14in size limit, and kept one handsome two-pounder.
By the fishing hut I met the keeper, a big, affable pipe-smoker named Mike.
We ex-changed pleasantries, and I moved upstream for a final flurry. The
hatch persisted, and I spotted two fish sucking away merrily on a bend. I
caught one, then the other, each heavily spotted with golden tummies, each
just over two pounds. I was shamingly pleased with myself.
The keeper took the pipe out of his mouth as I approached. That was very
efficiently done, he commented approvingly. Help, I thought. He thinks I'm a
proper fisherman. Wait until next time.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940430

