FT942-12196

FT  30 APR 94 / Long View: Expensive promises


   By BARRY RILEY


Bournemouth's renowned Golden Mile of deposit-taking building society
branches may need to prepare for leaner times. The country may become less
ready to support pensioners in the style to which they think they should be
accustomed.
Certainly, times are bad for the personal pensions industry, which staggers
under the impact of the misselling scandals, and faces yet another inquiry
by the Securities and Investments Board, this time into the advice given to
people who opted out of occupational schemes.
Yet the occupational schemes themselves are becoming nervous about their
long-term position. This week the National Association of Pension Funds
announced that it was sponsoring an independent 18-month inquiry into the
long-term adequacy of incomes in retirement, apparently in an attempt to
wrestle the troubled pensions agenda away from the bungling politicians.
For many years retirement incomes have been provided in the UK through a
compromise between the public and private sectors. But the government is
determined that state provision will dwindle: the basic state pension is
already worth only 21 per cent of the average wage, and being linked to
prices rather than earnings, it will steadily shrink further in importance.
 -perhaps to 10 per cent within 30 years. The state earnings-related scheme,
Serps, is meanwhile threatened by adverse demographic trends in the early
part of the 21st century.
However, the government's strategy to head off this future crisis by
diverting people into personal pension plans, which have in fact been bought
by some 6m people, has run into a whirlpool of misselling, excessive costs
and disappointed expectations.
The occupational schemes look comfortable and prosperous by comparison,
fattened up as they have been by three years of high investment returns. But
their membership coverage has never been much more than about half the
working population and they may be about to shrink quite significantly.
The whole concept of a paternalistic, lifelong savings plan run by the
employer is looking increasingly out of date in an insecure age of high
mobility and part-time working. Moreover the government is picking off the
technical dodges that made company schemes relatively cheap and attractive
to run.
For instance, the deferred pensions of leavers can no longer be frozen
regardless of inflation, a legislative change which has raised transfer
values sharply. The 'cap' on qualifying salaries, now Pounds 76,800, will
progressively reduce the ability of the highly-paid bosses to raid the
company funds when awarding themselves big, pensionable salary rises late in
their careers.
The company funds are agonising over the approach of a minimum solvency
standard. Until now companies have been able to adopt a high risk, high
return investment strategy, sharply reducing their contribution rates, but
posing the possibility that in a stock market crisis there might not be
enough in the pot to meet claims. A government white paper, due this summer,
is likely to argue that in the wake of the Maxwell scandals, and to permit a
compensation scheme to be introduced, companies must provide better backing
for worst case conditions.
In the circumstances, the dominant type of occupational scheme, in which
benefits are defined in terms of pay on leaving or at retirement, is coming
under threat. Such schemes effectively depend upon a promise by the
employer; this minimum solvency crisis is brewing because companies will at
last be required to back up that promise ultimately with hard cash rather
than with a pension fund invested in relatively speculative and volatile
assets.
An opinion survey published this week by the pensions actuaries R Watson has
suggested that half of the leading UK companies believe that they will be
offering much more flexible pensions packages in 10 years. The final
salary-linked element will be scaled down, and perhaps revised to a revalued
career average basis. More of the investment risks will be shifted to the
employees by scaling back the extent of the pensions promise and giving them
direct stakes in the funds. Old schemes will be closed to new members and
replacement plans introduced.
This is already happening in the US where direct investment plans,
originally designed to supplement the defined benefit plans, are beginning
to replace them. In the UK the future may lie in expanded mechanisms for
additional voluntary contributions, the add-on savings plans designed to
enable people to top up their pensions, rather than with basic schemes.
Why should employers be involved anyway? You would think that specialist
savings institutions should be able to provide pensions more efficiently,
but it is expensive for them to reach ordinary individuals. The traditional
paternalist argument, that people will not save for their old age unless
pressurised to do so, still holds good.
In this area, however, the drift of the government towards means-tested
benefits is worrying. This applies not just to the cut in the real value of
the basic state pension but also to the switch of long-term health care of
the elderly from the National Health Service (free) to the social security
budget (means-tested). Universal handouts may seem wasteful but, if this
switch goes too far, people earning around average incomes, and perhaps
above, may conclude that saving for their old age will leave them no better
off than those who live the life of Riley.
Bournemouth is under no immediate threat. It is probably unwise to worry
about possible future demographic imbalances which will generate their own
solutions: people will work a few years longer, and many will be perfectly
happy to do so. The recent government proposal to raise the women's state
pension retirement age to 65 has generated very little protest.
But the pensions industry is getting ready for changes.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940430

