FT941-5479

FT  05 MAR 94 / US trade law move on Japan sparks fears


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS and MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


The US decision to reactivate its Super 301 trade law provision, opening the
way for sanctions against Japan, was greeted with concern in Asia and Europe
yesterday.
It sparked anxiety in South Korea and Australia, both of which feared a
setback to free trade. The revival of Super 301 was 'regrettable at a time
when countries are expected to engage in more liberal trade', said a Seoul
government spokesman. He said trade disputes should be settled under the
World Trade Organisation, to be set up as the successor to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, not by the 'domestic legal procedures of one
nation'.
Mr Bob McMullan, the Australian trade minister, warned: 'We don't support
the US opening up the Japanese market in a unilateral and retaliatory way.'
Mr Jeffrey Garten, US undersecretary of commerce for international trade,
who has just taken a two-week trip through the region, told Asian leaders US
problems with Japan 'were quite unique'.
In Japan, Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary, said unilateral
trade action against another country would be contrary to WTO rules. But
Tokyo recognised 'the need for a restrained response', he said. Japan would
continue to work on plans to open markets. Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime
minister, promised to redouble efforts to cut regulatory trade barriers.
In Europe Sir Leon Brittan, European Union chief trade negotiator, was
disappointed at the renewal of the provision allowing the US to single out
countries for sanctions. 'The European Union will be examining the import of
these measures very carefully,' he said.
However Mr David Woods, spokesman for Gatt, the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade said yesterday that the reinstatement of Super 301 should be
viewed with 'a sense of proportion'. It should not be assumed that a trade
war was bound to would follow.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940305

