FT941-4263

FT  11 MAR 94 / International Company News: Profits fall prompts warning at
Cathay


   By LOUISE LUCAS


   HONG KONG


Cathay Pacific Airways, Swire Pacific's Hong Kong-based international
airline, yesterday unveiled a 23.8 per cent drop in profits, to HKDollars
2.29bn (USDollars 296.2m) for calendar 1993, against HKDollars 3.01bn the
previous year. It warned that this year was going to be just as tough.
Mr Peter Sutch, chairman, said: 'In the short-term, we will continue to see
overcapacity on the major routes. We will continue to have high inflation in
Hong Kong and, as a result, frankly I don't see the results of 1994 being
much better or very different from those of 1993.'
Cathay is under increasing pressure on its prime routes, particularly with
the introduction of a Virgin Atlantic service between Hong Kong and the UK.
Mr Sutch said the fall in earnings - which was slightly less steep than
analysts had expected, partially due to contained costs - reflected a
downturn in demand in key markets, spiralling operating costs driven by the
colony's high inflation, and the flight attendants' strike at the start of
the financial year.
The industrial action, precipitated by the dismissal of three air hostesses
after they refused to temporarily fill junior positions during staff
shortages, cost the company an estimated HKDollars 240m in extra costs and
lost revenue.
Total yield was 8.2 per cent lower than the previous year, and the revenue
load factor also dropped, down 1.5 per cent to 68.9 per cent as continued
recession in key markets depressed ticket sales.
However, directors are proposing to hold the final dividend at 31.5 cents,
in line with last year's payout. Earnings per share slipped to 80 cents,
down from HKDollars 1.05.
'It was a difficult year, not just for our company but for the airline
industry as a whole. The overall performance was a great deal better than
most other airlines in the world, but we take little comfort from that given
the industry as a whole is in a pretty torrid state,' said Mr Sutch.
Where Cathay was at a sharper disadvantage to its competitors was the
inflationary environment in the colony, he said. Cathay has already sought
to mitigate the damage by transferring its accounts division across the
border to Guangzhou, establishing a computer centre in Sydney, and
stationing flight crews in other parts of the region.
Despite these and other moves to enhance competitiveness and efficiency
profit margins slumped further, to 9.6 per cent, down from 12.9 per cent in
1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940311

