FT941-4234

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (7): Back to life after
near-death experience - Things are picking up as institutional investors
start to buy properties again / Ireland


   By ANGELA LONG


The investment property scene in Ireland is coming back to life after a
prolonged near-death experience in 1993.
Britain's withdrawal from the ERM in September 1992, and the devaluation of
the Irish punt which inevitably followed - despite Dublin's best efforts to
stave it off - in January last year, gave a sharp shock to the market which
was already heading for the doldrums because of the international recession.
As interest rates soared on cash deposits, property looked less and less
attractive. Now, however, rates have plummeted and stabilised. A reasonable
commercial investment in Dublin should see a return of around 10 per cent,
and so things are picking up as institutional investors start to buy
properties again.
In the domestic sector, the signs of revival which estate agents have been
predicting for a year are at last peeping through. However, the hottest
potato in this sector at present is the lowering of the value threshold at
which private residences become liable for residential property tax. In the
January budget, the threshold of liability for this tax, to be paid
annually, fell from a house value of Pounds 91,000 to Pounds 75,000.
There is less contention in the recovering commercial sector. Commercial
property investments appear promising and could rise by 10 per cent over the
next six months, according to Property Outlook, produced by the agency
Hamilton Osborne King. HOK, reflecting that 60 per cent of the Pounds 60m of
prime investment properties which changed hands in 1993 were sold in the
last three months of the year, saw this as an indication that momentum was
gathering in this area.
Quality retail space is being sought eagerly. Mr Bill Phelan, principal in
leading property consultant The Phelan Partnership, says a number of British
retailers are 'desperate' to find space in Grafton Street, Dublin's
up-market shopping precinct and the associated pedestrianised area that
leads from Trinity College up to the business end of Dublin around the
charming park called St Stephen's Green.
Rents there have been around Pounds 140-Pounds 150 a sq ft, but Gunne, one
of the Republic's big four estate agencies, reported recently that it had
let 32 Grafton Street on a 35-year lease at a rate of Pounds 165 a sq ft,
indicating the clear supremacy of this location over other prime shopping
streets such as Henry Street and Mary Street, a few minutes' walk away on
the north side of the River Liffey.
Mr Phelan is not overly impressed by glossy new office developments such as
George's Quay on the reclaimed stretch of quayside by the River Liffey,
opposite the International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) complex. 'They
are, and always will be, secondary locations,' he says.
Mr Des Lennon is a partner at Jones Lang Wootton, which employs 65 people in
Dublin, its only Irish office. He agrees that, after the dire straits of
1992-1993, the main problem the Irish market has to handle now is a lack of
good property for the cash-rich investor.
However, about 1.4m sq ft of vacant space indicates that the office market
is depressed. The figure represents about 11 per cent of the entire space
available in Dublin and is a historically high figure, says Mr Lennon.
'Three or four years ago, the comparable figure would have been 5 per cent.
Still, it is not bad in the European context when you consider London had a
vacancy rate of 20 per cent last year.'
Much of the recent development of property in older parts of Dublin, and
some selected sites in other cities, was undertaken to take advantage of tax
incentives introduced in the late 1980s with Section 23 of the Finance Act.
These are for residential buildings in so-called Urban Renewal Development
Areas and include: no property taxes (rates) for 10 years; a double rent
allowance for landlords; and a capital allowance, whereby an investor or
occupier can offset the entire purchase of a building against profits.
These inducements were originally due to expire in February 1993 but there
was so much activity that the government extended the deadline several
times. For special exceptions such as the Customs House area, down-river
from O'Connell Bridge, the cut-off is not until 1997. Since 1988, when this
round of Section 23 tax breaks was introduced, Pounds 966m of private sector
investment has been generated by the urban renewal schemes.
A host of developers is building inner city apartments in Dublin, and these
have been selling rapidly. Temple Bar, only a few minutes' walk from Grafton
Street, has seen much activity in the 1990s and is earmarked for Pounds 334m
in further spending from the government and European Union funds.
Retail is strong in the Republic's secondary cities, with Longford town,
Galway and Cork all seeing new supermarkets and shopping complexes opening
or under construction. Cruises Street, in the heart of Limerick, has been a
big success as a regeneration project, with a quaint 'olde' look and a
number of strong retailers.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940311

