FT942-14550

FT  20 APR 94 / Dedicated followers of factions: The confusing array of
candidates in Liverpool's elections


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


Politics is rarely straight-forward in Liverpool and next month's local
election contest will be no exception. What ought to be a simple
head-to-head fight next month between Labour and the Liberal Democrats for
control of the city council is instead a confusing melee.
Including independents and Greens, there appear to be 11 parties involved -
but even then some with one appellation are disowned by others with the same
name.
The outgoing council's composition is the best starting point for analysis.
Labour holds 39 seats of which 13 are being contested. The Liberal Democrats
have 38 and are defending seven. But there is another bloc of 17 councillors
who call themselves 'Liverpool Labour'. The 11 seats up for election in this
latter group hold the key to who will win control on May 5.
The 99-seat council also has two other minority parties: the Conservatives,
who have two seats and have to defend one, and the Liberals, who hold one.
Two seats are vacant, one formerly Labour, the other Liberal Democrat.
Most of the 17 Liverpool Labour councillors started off in the Labour party,
but fell out after Mr Harry Rimmer, the council leader, embarked on a
programme of redundancies and cuts in services to balance Liverpool's
budget.
The city's finances had been in yearly crisis since the mid-1980s, when
Militant Tendency, a Trotskyist grouping, had accumulated enough influence
to push the city into damaging confrontation with the Thatcher government.
Militant ringleaders were expelled from the party and 47 councillors were
disqualified in 1987, but their legacy lived on: deliberately induced budget
deficits had been bridged with foreign borrowings, making successive budget
crises worse as loans fell due years later.
'Official' Labour is being challenged in 13 out of 33 wards by candidates
calling themselves variously Ward Labour, Ward Independent Labour, Militant
Labour, and Broad Left Labour. For good measure, Ward Labour and Ward
Independent Labour candidates are also fighting each other in two seats.
Some of these have the backing of the 17 Liverpool Labour councillors - four
of 11 who have to defend their seats have been endorsed as acceptable. They
are the 'official' Ward Labour candidates. But 'the other two Ward Labour
candidates are nothing to do with us,' says Mr Tony Jennings, leader of the
Liverpool Labour councillors.
Most of the other retiring Liverpool Labour councillors are dropping out. An
exception is Ms Cathy Wilson, a former Labour member who was once among
those trying to deselect Mr Frank Field as MP for Birkenhead. She is
switching to an inner-city ward and standing for Militant.
Another Militant candidate is Ms Lesley Mahmood, who also stood for Militant
in the Walton parliamentary by-election nearly three years ago after the
death of Mr Eric Heffer. Mr Heffer was one of the last senior Labour figures
to believe that ultra-left factions could be retained in the party.
Meanwhile, Mr John Hamilton - the moderate Christian socialist who was the
notional leader of the council in the Militant era although the effective
leaders were Mr Derek Hatton and Mr Tony Mulhearn - is seeking election
again after serving his five-year disqualification.
The Liberal Democrats believe they have most to gain from the confusion.
Labour has imposed the biggest council tax rise in Britain and,
theoretically, did too well in 1990 to gain more seats now. Split Labour
votes could let the Liberal Democrats through the middle in several wards.
But Labour may regain some Liverpool Labour seats because they are being
defended by unknown leftwing candidates with no record of office. And, for
good measure, there are 15 'Liberal' candidates with potential to split
Liberal Democrat votes.
Mr Jennings thinks the Liberal Democrats will end up as the biggest party
but that Labour will do a deal with the remaining six Liverpool Labour
councillors and any of the four 'official' Ward Labour candidates who get
back.
This might keep Labour in control. The price, however, might well be the
readmission of the rebels into the party - too high, perhaps, for Labour's
national executive to accept.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940420

