FT944-10980

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (2): Funds pour into
equities - Globalisation


   By NORMA COHEN


If there is any trend which has characterised the fund management industry
in the past year, it is the extent to which investors of many nations are
prepared to invest money abroad.
'There are five major pension markets in the world,' said David Salisbury,
chief executive of Schroder Capital Management International. 'They are
Japan, the US, the UK, Canada and Australia. Perhaps with the exception of
Japan, all are seeing an increase in international investment.'
Personal investors buying mutual funds have also shown great enthusiasm for
faraway markets. European investors have long been international in their
approach, but the past two or three years have seen an unprecedented wave of
buying by US investors of international specialist mutual funds, often with
an emerging markets bias.
All of these investment flows are heavily tilted in favour of equities, a
trend which is having a profound effect on the business flowing through
stock exchanges around the world.
'One of the single most important trends for the UK securities industry is
the willingness of US fund managers to invest abroad,' said Alan Yarrow,
managing director at Kleinwort Benson Securities.
According to InterSec Research Corp, a US-based investment consulting firm,
US pension funds sharply increased their international holdings to 7.4 per
cent of all assets by the end of 1993, up from 4.7 per cent the year before.
Overall, the value of US pension assets invested outside the country rose 69
per cent to Dollars 260bn by the end of 1993 and a further Dollars 22bn was
invested abroad in the first half of 1994.
The biggest beneficiaries of this trend may well be UK-based fund managers
who have been investing up to 25 per cent of the average UK balanced pension
fund portfolio in foreign equities. US fund managers have been slow to
develop the expertise to meet the newfound interest of schemes based there.
According to InterSec, at the start of 1993, out of 15,000 US fund managers,
only 200 had any significant expertise in international investment.
Significantly, 80 per cent of the outflow in the first half of this year has
been into equities, a switch from the initial US diversification abroad
which led fund managers largely into bonds.
Meanwhile, the flow of foreign money into the London markets, the worldwide
centre for international share trading, is having a profound effect on the
way intermediaries do business. Earlier this year, the Securities and
Investments Board, the City's chief regulatory watchdog, issued a discussion
paper asking whether there is a need for a greater level of pre- and
post-trade transparency. In particular, the SIB asked whether rules allowing
delays in publication of large blocks of shares were fair to investors. In
the US, rules require immediate post-trade transparency and American
investors have become accustomed to this.
US securities firms are said to have been among the prime supporters for the
discussion document, and even the London firms which have traditionally
dominated the market say that changes are inevitable.
'We have US clients who tell us they do not want us to book their trade in
London when they are buying French shares. They want it booked in Paris so
they can see that we are not doing them in.'
Also, the penchant of US investors to move large blocks of shares in a
single deal has been one of the forces spurring the European bourses to
reform their own systems to make block trading easier and cheaper. London
has dominated international share trading - data from Lee Schwartz
Associates, a consulting firm, show that about a quarter of all the world's
equity trades are booked in London, compared with about 20 per cent in New
York - partly because of the facility for block trading on the London Stock
Exchange's SEAQ International system.
Meanwhile, the explosion in cross-border investment has opened opportunities
for fund managers. In particular, a handful of UK fund managers, notably a
few Scottish houses, have made great strides in selling their international
investment expertise in the US.
'I heard a story about a Scottish fund manager who made a presentation to a
US pension fund while wearing a kilt,' recalled one pension consultant. 'He
got the mandate.' Several managers such as Edinburgh-based Ivory and Sime,
Baillie Gifford and Martin Currie all report significant US pensions
business.
However, InterSec notes, US fund managers are closing the expertise gap
quickly.
'Because of information technology, it is no longer necessary for a US-based
fund manager to have offices all over the world,' said Alexe Nowakowski,
associate consultant at InterSec.
The growing demand for an international fund management capacity has posed
an interesting question for fund managers: is it better to make worldwide
investment choices from a central office in London, or should one develop a
network of research offices in key markets?
At PDFM, the London fund management arm of Union Bank of Switzerland, the
centrist view is taken. 'We've made a very strong case for the one-office
route,' an official explained. 'We believe there is merit in having a single
culture, a single philosophy.' Multiple centres can lead to conflicts
between fund managers about the merits of specific markets or stocks, he
said.
Kenneth Inglis, chairman of Fleming Investment Management, the fund
management arm of Robert Fleming Group, says his firm has a similar
philosophy. 'If you are running a balanced fund around the world, you like
to be able to take the pulse of all markets,' he said. If a manager decides
to reduce exposure in one market in favour of another, it could be difficult
if there is a local office resisting a diminution of their asset allocation.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941108

