FT944-14532

FT  22 OCT 94 / Serious game of mud-slinging: Election campaigns for
governor and senator in California are proving bitter and expensive


   By JUREK MARTIN


One statewide candidate, pockets deep with oil money and driven by a
ruthless wife, wants a government that 'does nothing'. Another reveals on
television that her daughter has been raped and her son mugged. Both major
incumbents have the charisma of meat loaf. All throw mud at each other like
confetti. The state itself, a magnet for immigrants for 150 years, seems on
the verge of denying social services to those illegally inside its borders.
This is 1994, the supposed year of the Great Political Discontent, and the
state, naturally, is California which, in the realms of the bizarre, has
always taken some beating. And it may buck national trends again on November
8 by returning to the governor's mansion in Sacramento and to the US Senate
in Washington a pair of extremely professional incumbent politicians, a
species widely believed to be in extreme danger.
They are the dogged duo of Pete Wilson, Republican governor, and Dianne
Feinstein, Democratic senator. Both have opponents notionally more in tune
with the times.
Kathleen Brown, the Democratic state treasurer up against Mr Wilson, is not
merely the third member of California's great dynastic political family to
seek the governorship but appears the very model of the articulate,
telegenic modern woman candidate. Congressman Michael Huffington, the
Republican trying to unseat Ms Feinstein, is cast in the mould of Ross
Perot, a political neophyte willing to spend a large chunk of a personal
fortune in the pursuit of elective office.
With less than three weeks to go, the bitter and expensive campaigns - with
Dollars 27m spent on the Senate race alone by the end of last month - seem
to have settled into a pattern. Mr Wilson, 20 points down this spring, has
pulled into a 10-13 point lead over Ms Brown by hitting the 'hot button'
issues of crime and illegal immigration.
Ms Feinstein, 20 points ahead as late as this summer, seems to have
weathered the storm of Mr Huffington's unprecedented negative advertising
that had brought him to parity last month and now holds a 7-9 point margin.
But this has been mostly because of the torrent of critical media attention
that has descended on the heads of Mr Huffington and his wife.
It is often dangerously easy to poke fun at Californian politics. After all,
in the last 30 years, the state has elected a retired B-movie actor (Ronald
Reagan), an ageing song-and-dance man (George Murphy), a very odd fish
(Jerry Brown) and a distinguished but eccentric professor of linguistics (S
I Hayakawa).
Its ballot papers are always littered with populist referendums, to the
point, it sometimes seems, of democracy run riot. Sam Popkin, of the
University of California at San Diego, notes that in the past four years the
voters of San Diego County have been asked to pass judgment on no less than
690 candidates and propositions. ('What do you have in England?' he asks
rhetorically. 'Three - the Commons, the European parliament and local
councils.')
Yet some have been harbingers for the nation, such as the tax-cutting
initiative that passed in 1978, or the environmental one ('big green') which
failed in 1990.
This year's eye-catcher would deny education and non-emergency healthcare to
illegal immigrants - and it will probably pass, if only to be challenged
immediately in court. Another would repeal all local anti-smoking ordinances
in favour of a more lenient statewide standard, while a third seeks approval
for a state-funded (or 'single payer') healthcare system.
Reading California right is a prerequisite for any politician with national
ambition, especially now that the 1996 state presidential primary, which
traditionally wound up the election season, has been brought forward to
early March.
This century only three Democrats have become president without carrying
California - Wilson in 1912, Kennedy in 1960 and Carter in 1976. No
Republican ever has, which is why George Bush's abandonment of the state in
the final months of the 1992 campaign is still subject to endless second
guessing. Two of the last five elected presidents - Nixon and Reagan - have
called California their home.
There are serious Republicans on the east coast who believe that, if Mr
Wilson wins, he becomes the automatic front-runner for the party's
presidential nomination in 1996. Californians, who know him well as mayor of
San Diego, senator and governor, suspect he is more interested in the
vice-presidency. Certainly his often tongue-tied and mean-spirited
performance in last week's televised debate with Ms Brown was devoid of the
charisma expected at the head of a national ticket. In the debate, he also
half-promised to serve a full four years if returned - not that such a
commitment has deterred other politicians from changing their minds.
But at the very least, as the man who could deliver California and its 52
electoral college votes, he would become a major player in a national
Republican party whose divided factions, in the opinion of Professor Popkin,
leave it with no apparent kingmaker. His policy record, if not his campaign,
is in the moderate mainstream and includes support for abortion and a
willingness to increase taxes under duress. Neither conforms to the
Reaganite conservative orthodoxy that again is trying to rule the Republican
roost.
National hopes on the Democratic side were also held out for Kathleen Brown,
glowingly portrayed as more down to earth than her ex-governor brother,
Jerry, and more articulate than her revered ex-governor father, Pat. But her
campaign had been without passion or definition - until a crisp performance
in the TV debate, during which she disclosed what had happened to her son
and daughter as a means of rebutting Mr Wilson's charge that she was
indifferent to the victims of crime.
Even Willie Brown, legendary Democratic speaker of the California House, had
begun to despair that she could persuade the state that she would govern
very differently from Mr Wilson. Their confrontations, mostly conducted
through a series of negative TV advertisements, tended to play to his
populist issues not hers. California's economic recovery rendered her
65-page reform plan less relevant beyond her turning conventional political
rhetoric on its head by charging that he was 'just another tax and spend
Republican'.
As for the extraordinary Senate race, a shorthand version would go something
like this. Michael Huffington moves from Texas and in 1992 becomes the
congressman for Santa Barbara by spending the most money ever (over Dollars
5m) in an election for the House. Ten months later, after a record
conspicuous for total invisibility, he announces that he will spend what it
takes to defeat Ms Feinstein. Willie Brown recalls that, on learning how
much (upwards of Dollars 20m), he phoned the senator and said 'Dianne,
you've got a problem'.
He is proved right as the Feinstein lead dwindles in the face of an
advertising onslaught with one central theme: 'Feinstein - a career
politician who'll say or do anything to stay in office.' Mr Huffington does
not appear to stand for anything beyond a vague conviction that the
volunteer spirit will enable the country to do away with welfare. He rarely
gives interviews or, until this week, appears much in public, but the polls
show that Californians are unconcerned if this is how a rich man wants to
spend his money - it is his, after all, and Ms Feinstein is not exactly
poor.
But, bit by bit, the local and national media unearth the Huffington
problem, which is partly his own history of under-achievement, spiced by
suggestions that he has evaded California income tax, but mostly concerns
his wife. She is the former Arianna Stassinopoulos, well known in social and
literary circles in her Cambridge and London days.
Not only is her husband seen as her puppet (the 'host body' for her own
ambitions, as the Los Angeles Times put it), but it also comes out she is,
or was, a devotee of a New Age guru by the name of John-Roger, who recovered
from a bout with kidney stones and pronounced himself more powerful than
Jesus Christ. She holds strange orchestrated salons in Washington, in which
guests find their thoughts recorded on tape. She fires campaign aides at
will, or they leave in protest at her control. She claims to do charity work
at charities which say they have hardly ever seen her.
All this and much more has been gleefully reported in the media and by
cartoonists like Garry Trudeau, creator of the Doonesbury strip. In Willie
Brown's opinion, Doonesbury's 'empty suit' - which is how Mr Huffington is
drawn - has instantly fixed all the real problems of a disorganised and
depressed Feinstein campaign.
Like Governor Wilson, she would rather not run on personality, which is a
bit dour and short-tempered, but on a record which is distinctly
respectable, both as mayor of San Francisco and in the Senate. Her finest
legislative hour came in the destructive final hours of Congress two weeks
ago, when she single-handedly rescued a bill protecting Californian deserts.
Still, she has been forced into negative advertising of her own and to
devote many hours to private fund-raising, rather than public campaigning.
But she is not home and free yet. Voter turn-out will be low, which favours
the more energised Republicans. The lack of enthusiasm for Kathleen Brown,
unless reversed in the final weeks, could drag down Democratic candidates
state-wide.
So may disaffection with President Bill Clinton, though polls find his
standing in California higher than in most states. However, the national
Republican leadership has not rallied to Mr Huffington, as it has to Oliver
North in Virginia, preferring to concentrate efforts in California
congressional races, where at least five Democratic incumbents are seriously
up against it.
One final element of perspective must be noted. For all the ubiquity of
election advertising, the political campaigns are still only the second
biggest story in California, behind the OJ Simpson trial and its
extraordinary out-of-court activities. Only if Judge Lance Ito were to lock
away both jury and media would the politicians have the stage to themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941022

