FT942-12720

FT  28 APR 94 / Arts: Lively new cast for Figaro revival - Opera


   By DAVID MURRAY


At the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden Johannes Schaaf has again revived
his 1987 production of Mozart's Le nozze di Figaro, this time with a largely
new cast. It makes a rewarding evening: as a whole, a creditable Figaro
rather than a red-letter one, but with enough very good things to give
substantial pleasure.
Among those things are most of the comic and expressive touches that Schaaf
has lavished upon the action, with eager compliance from his actors. He
began his career as a straight theatre director, and it shows. The Act 2
bedroom-scene is stuffed with bright, characterful detail; some might think
that lily-gilding, but it is a long time since I saw this act so
sympathetically milked for its comic potential.
Schaaf does however succumb to an illusion rife among modern producers,
which is that you can stretch Mozart's rapid-fire recitatives indefinitely,
and even leave silent gaps in them to accommodate funny stage business. That
is wrong, as Schaaf's Act 1 proves; he leaves so many holes in the musical
texture that the 'real' music begins to sound like interpolations. There is
no reason to doubt that Mozart expected most of his recitative passages to
run fast, and to inflate them is to spoil his music-theatre proportions.
This four-hour evening would gain greatly by losing 10 or 15 minutes,
compressing Schaaf's clever trouvailles into Mozart's real-time score.
A vulgar reason for hastening to this Figaro - vulgar in the sense that it
is a bit stupid to go to Figaro, an ensemble-piece par excellence, for the
sake of one star performance - is that in the name-part young Bryn Terfel is
memorably good. Though he looks like a friendly, dishevelled bear, in the
style of Gerard Depardieu, his reactions and furies are quickly transparent:
venomous relish in 'Se vuol ballare', fine comic timing, his full-blooded
romantic baritone cannily reserved for the right places later.
Plenty of feeling too, and vital diction, and he is nifty on his pins
(Romayne Grigorova's choreography is a model of pretty tact). But sociable
Figaro cannot exist in a void; fortunately, Terfel has a sharp match in
Jeffrey Black's first-rate Count - lots of sexy panache and preening style,
underpinned by a healthy vein of loutishness.
The women are trickier. The best Susannas seem to control the action from
start to finish, but Sylvia McNair's is too cultivated and shy to do that;
crucially she lacks Susanna's spirit, though she sings a melting 'Deh
vieni'. Similarly, Monica Bacelli - whose youthful reputation has preceded
her first appearance here - is a Cherubino whose fetching 'Voi che sapete'
comes too late to compensate for her watery, over-subtle 'Non so piu': we
miss the honestly wracked adolescent.
As the unhappy Countess, McNair's younger American colleague Christine
Brewer cuts a maternal figure and delivers her arias in diva-style. Schaaf
gives her a nasty hangover for her first appearance, and a continuing
alcoholic thirst. In principle, his emphasis upon her guilty attraction to
young Cherubino - which Mozart's librettist da Ponte chose to play down,
against the original Beaumarchais text - is plausibly right, but with Miss
Bacelli's bantam-sized, sexless Cherubino stretched upon Miss Brewer's ample
nightgowned rack it becomes too inappropriately Freudian for belief.
Della Jones is a sparky Marcellina who justifies her extraneous Act 4 aria,
unlike Philip Doghan's Don Basilio with his, though elsewhere his slimy,
whey-faced blandness is irreproachable. Gwynne Howell, John Dobson, Deborah
York and the veteran Federico Davia (as a very crusty son-of-the-soil
gardener, Antonio) are fine. Conductor Hartmut Haenchen keeps sound tempi,
points up Mozart's cleverest orchestral details and is generously attentive
to his singers, stopping just short of full, long-sighted authority.
Xenia Hausner's surprising sets - everything happens under a painted,
symbolical Baroque canopy-ceiling - are handsome. The surtitles are mingy,
and seem to suppose that every opera-goer has enough ground-level Italian to
do without any translations at all in some places: not true, of course. Yet
none of those failings matters much; this Figaro will serve very well as a
first-draft introduction to a miraculous, inexhaustible opera, or as a fresh
reading for older hands. Mozart was 30 when he wrote it.
Sponsored (1987) by Citibank; in repertoire until May 25

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940428

