FT942-12158

FT  30 APR 94 / Food & Drink: Bargains for under Pounds 3 a bottle - Jancis
Robinson finds some pleasant surprises among a new crop of wines for
skinflints


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


The difference in quality between the world's cheapest and most expensive
wines is narrowing as the wine world shrinks and winemaking techniques and
technology are no longer geographically segregated.
It is still impossible to find truly exciting wine for under Pounds 3 a
bottle, but relatively easy to find a bargain, particularly in today's
cut-throat high street wine market - and especially at this time of year
when last year's crop is tasting freshest. Independents cannot beat the
supermarkets and chains for snips such as these light, but fault-free wines.
Wines marked WF are available only in selected stores during Safeway's
five-week wine fair from Monday.
Readers close to a branch of Kwiksave supermarkets should also try to
benefit from the chain's conversion to wine quality.
APERITIF: Waitrose Pale Dry Montilla. Pounds 2.99. Beautifully labelled,
ludicrously-underpriced, soft, fresh, relation to Fino sherry.
DRY WHITES: Magyar Vineyards. 1993. Pounds 2.19. WF. All the fire of
Hungary's own grape varieties, stoked by the flying winemaking skills of the
Hugh Ryman brigade.
Vin de Pays du Jardin de la France 1993. Pounds 2.39. WF. Particularly
successful bottling of Loire Chenin Blanc given pizzazz by skin contact and
malolactic fermentation, bottled by an enterprising Muscadet merchant.
Vino de la Tierra Blanco. Pounds 2.59. Sainsbury's. Scented, lively Spanish
riposte to Vin de Pays made by Australian Peter Bright.
Sicilian Bianco. Pounds 2.69. Asda. Apple-fresh, (July-picked?)
quintessentially party wine from the well-equipped winery which used to
provide Seagram's Tonino brand.
Sainsbury's Argentine Torrontes. Pounds 2.85. Reduced from Pounds 3.49,
because the name, and possibly style, of this perfumed yet racy grape
variety is so unfamiliar.
Van Riebeeck Cape Dry White. 1993. Pounds 2.99. Waitrose. One feels this
should be a 1994 Nouveau in honour of the birth of the new South Africa, but
this blend is full-bodied, creditable, with a slightly hot finish.
Country Cellars Tuscan Dry White. 1993. Pounds 2.99. WF. Fizzy but much
fruitier than Trebbianos made by Italians rather than an antipodean like Kym
Milne.
Bulgarian Chardonnay. Pounds 2.99. Sainsbury's. Kym Milne again, fashioning
a thoroughly modern, crisp, if reasonably insubstantial wine for those who
must have Chardonnay.
Bordeaux Sauvignon. 1993. Pounds 2.99. Waitrose. Powerful, spritzy, not
aggressively aromatic. Good value from Calvet.
REDS: Valhondo. 1993. Pounds 1.99. Safeway. Lively, peppery, insubstantial
but impressively scented. Could easily be chilled. The white version is also
worthwhile, especially at this price.
Hungarian Cabernet Sauvignon. 1993. Pounds 2.69. Ripe, soft,
red-that-happens-to-be-called Cabernet.
Vino de la Tierra Tinto. Pounds 2.75. Sainsbury's. Lively, chewy, light,
chillable red version of the Blanco above.
Domaine de Beaufort Minervois. 1992. Pounds 2.99. Tesco. A year-old French
appellation controlee wine for under Pounds 3? Not one of the country's
greatest glories, but a respectable claret-like red.
Uvas del Sol Argentinian (sic) Red. Pounds 2.99. Tesco. Another Argentine
bargain, reduced to sell. Big, full-blown wine from an obviously hot
climate.
Asda Leon. 1986. Pounds 2.99. Ridiculous price for a mature wine aged in
small oak barrels. Spicy, full bodied and long. Not for the faint hearted.
SWEET WHITE: Glenloth Late Harvest Muscat. 1992. Pounds 2.99. Oddbins.
Unashamed of its heady sweetness, this Australian cries out to be chilled.
                          *      *      *
A High Court ruling last week signals a new and more secure era for fine
wine collectors. An action group of customers of the defunct wine merchant
Ellis, Son & Vidler has managed to wrest its fine wine reserves from the
receivers, even though, contrary to the demands of a previous ruling
concerning the London Wine Company, individual cases of wine were not marked
with their owner's name. The key, according to solicitors acting on behalf
of the wine buyers, was that customers' reserves were stored (physically)
separately from the trading stock, and the reserves, and owner, were
correctly identified in the merchant's records. Oxbridge colleges were among
the more significant immediate beneficiaries of this ruling, affecting about
1,200 cases of fine wine, but I can think of hundreds of wine enthusiasts
who should sleep a little easier now.
                          *      *      *
Oddbins is offering some extremely fine burgundies from the lauded 1992
vintage for whites and the underrated 1991 reds. It is a sign of the times
that the likes of Louis Carillon, of Puligny-Montrachet, Domaine de l'Arlot,
of Nuits-St-Georges and Jean-Marc Boillot, of Pommard, are keen to sell to a
British high street chain (the first two also sell to the Thresher group).
Stars at a recent tasting included two Albert Morey 1992 premier cru
Chassagnes at Pounds 15.99 and Pounds 17.99; the entire 1992 Carillon range
at Pounds 14.99 to Pounds 19.99; Domaine de l'Arlot Nuits-St Georges 1991 at
Pounds 11.99; and Boillot's premier cru Volnay Carelle at Pounds 19.99 from
the great 1990 vintage.
                          *      *      *
At about the same time as Britain's wine merchants were reading spoof
information in the wine trade weekly about my latest book, the Dow's Port
Scratch 'n' Sniff Tasting Book (its best joke was to describe me as 'one of
the most respected names in the Port Wine Trade'), I was being taken in by
another April fool: Farr Vintners' offer of an entirely mythical white wine
made at Ch Latour, mentioned in last Weekend's FT. How could I be so
gullible?
My feeble defence is that just such a scheme was apparently given serious
consideration during the administrative reign of Allied's man, David Orr.
Since the British brewer sold this Bordeaux first-growth back into French
hands, Orr has moved on to Ch Rausan-Segla, originally considered finest of
the second-growths and recently acquired by independent couture house
Chanel, which was beaten to Latour only at the last minute by Francois
Pinault, owner of Printemps stores and much else.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940430

