FT941-4064

FT  12 MAR 94 / Books: Questions of reality


   By AC GRAYLING


MODERN PHILOSOPHY by Roger Scruton Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 25, 611 pages
Philosophy is the attempt to clarify, and if possible to answer, questions
about reality, knowledge, reason, truth and value. It is a highly
consequential enterprise; it gave birth to the natural sciences, among them
physics and biology, and the social sciences, among them sociology and
psychology. It is the wellspring of enquiry, and the forum for discussion of
all the ultimate questions; but it is also an intellectual hospice for our
currently unsolvable problems, whether of practice or theory.
Isaiah Berlin once remarked that the philosopher in his study can change the
course of history within a generation. He had in mind Locke and Rousseau,
whose writings are quoted verbatim in the documents of the American and
French revolutions, and Marx, whose shadow lies long across our age. But he
might easily have mentioned many other philosophers whose ideas have shaped
science, art, and all other spheres of human endeavour, both for good and
ill.
Roger Scruton's aim is to introduce us to modern philosophy thus conceived.
He accordingly explains the nature and purpose of discussion in all its main
areas: the theory of knowledge, logic, metaphysics, ethics, the philosophy
of language, and much besides, starting from Rene Descartes in the 17th
century and bringing us up to date with contemporary debates. Scruton is a
masterly writer; his book is a paradigm of lucidity, written with a crisp
elegance that proves, by example, the justice of his attack on the jargon
and obscurantism which infects much present-day philosophy and prevents its
wider appreciation.
A study of philosophy, Scruton says, is a study of arguments and ideas. The
questions that generate them have a particular character: they are abstract,
in that they concern the most general kinds or categories of things, and
they are ultimate, in that they concern the fundamental reasons and causes
of things. For example: the question, 'Why did she fall?' relates to a
particular concrete event. 'Why do things fall?', although more general, is
still a scientific, not a philosophical, question. 'What kind of thing is a
fall?' - inviting the answer, 'an event', and therefore a discussion of
whether events are basic constituents of the universe - is an entirely
general question, and shows what kind of understanding philosophy seeks.
The ultimacy point arises from our need for explanations. If B is the
explanation for A, and if B is in turn explained by C, we will hope that
there is some terminus D or even Z which gives the final explanation for A,
because if the chain of reasons or causes continues ad infinitum we will
have no explanation for A after all. Can the ultimate grounds of anything -
even of the world as a whole - be discovered? Philosophy tries to find out.
Another defining feature of philosophy is its quest for truth. Not all human
endeavour aims at truth; some aims at convenience, some at persuasion, some
trades in fictions. But philosophy is the endeavour to find out how things
really are. The sciences try to do this in their own particular spheres; but
philosophy attempts the overview, in the hope of devising a framework for
understanding ourselves and the world.
Scruton systematically tackles the abstract and ultimate questions which
have most exercised philosophers from the 17th century until now. His
discussion is based on introductory lectures delivered at Birkbeck College
in the University of London, and is therefore aimed at beginners. The result
is bracing, entertaining and informative. Anyone wishing to learn about
philosophy will find it an excellent place to start.
There are, however, caveats. Scruton is notorious for holding disagreeable
right-wing views, which would not matter if he could stop himself making
irrelevant allusions to them, with neither explanation nor justification.
But he cannot so resist. For example, in the middle of describing Logical
Positivism's 'verification' theory he suddenly and without further
discussion remarks that it is 'part of the 'culture of repudiation' whereby
central Europe threw away its inheritance and committed moral suicide.' No
opportunity for a dig at the Left or Modernism is missed; and although the
result is often enough amusing, it also injects too polemical and unargued a
note into what is meant to be an introduction to the enterprise of reason
itself, for which dispassion is an ideal.
There are also odd mistakes. Bishop Berkeley did not deny the existence of
the physical world, as Scruton claims, thereby perpetuating an old
misunderstanding; nor is empiricism a 'metaphysical' theory, that is, a
theory about reality; it is an epistemological theory, that is, a theory
about the nature and sources of knowledge. But when Scruton is not grinding
axes or hurrying too fast, he is a highly readable guide. Especially
praiseworthy are his chapters on aesthetics and ethics, and his robust
criticism of aspects of contemporary French thought. Scruton sees philosophy
as an integral part of general education; caveats aside, his book
marvellously shows why that is right.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940312

