FT944-14433

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: At the heart of Catholicism - The sacred may be
politicised, but not profaned


   By CRISTINA ODONE


THE SIGN OF THE CROSS: TRAVELS IN CATHOLIC EUROPE by Colm Toibin Jonathan
Cape Pounds 16.99, 296 pages
JOHN PAUL II by Michael Walsh HarperCollins Pounds 20, 320 pages
A few years ago a Moslem friend exploded on reading VS Naipaul's Amongst the
Believers: how could Naipaul dismiss Islam in this way? In his depiction of
a handful of Moslem countries, the unbeliever paraded his prejudices by
profiling only intransigent imams and authoritarian ayatollahs, and by
caricaturing spiritual codes.
I had little sympathy at the time. Religions, after all, have borne the
scrutiny of inveterate infidels for millennia. But after reading a similar
undertaking, a peregrination through Catholic Europe by the Irish novelist
Colm Toibin, I find myself echoing my friend: the sacred may be politicised,
but it should not be profaned.
Disenchanted with the religion of his childhood, Toibin seems bent not so
much on a journey of discovery, but on a quest to diminish the divine, to
view Catholicism as mere 'consolation' akin to 'listening to music after a
long day's work; it was pure theatre'.
Politicisation of the church is inherent in its teaching - the gospel, after
all, was interpreted by Christ's contemporaries as a revolutionary message,
for which he was duly crucified. But the centuries have wrought a political
permutation to the Church of Rome - its accumulation of capital and power
has placed it squarely at the heart of the Establishment, and its emphasis
on the authority of the Magisterium (the church's teaching) has lost it many
allies in an age when authority has become synonymous with authoritarianism.
It is this view of the church that fuels Toibin's journey. He marshalls
events, characters and rituals in order to vindicate a pre-determined
ideological position: Catholicism prepares the ground for the seeds of
authoritarian regimes. By imparting its message of obedience to spiritual
authority, the church serves as a factory that mass produces disciples for
the latest despot.
The theory has been around for some time, but fails to account for a number
of historical incidents and political strains. Although Toibin allows that
the 'first open demonstration in Slovakia against the regime was organised
through the Catholic Church' in 1988, and he does recognise the Jesuits'
anti-Mafia campaign in southern Italy, he chooses to belittle a number of
other instances when European Catholicism allied itself to the right cause,
not the Right camp, and helped pave the way for democracy, not dictatorship.
Toibin seeks to limit Catholicism to an aesthetic canon - he offers us
vivid, lyrical impressions of Spanish religious processions, of Polish
churches and Slav pilgrimage sites - and to a socio-cultural influence that
shapes and colours temporal occupations and aspirations. Certainly, in a
number of the countries he visits (particularly Poland, Italy, Ireland and
Spain) the Church does permeate national identity by influencing everything
from divorce laws to the sanctification of the fatherland.
But the ultimate legacy of the Catholic Church is a spiritual one. It is in
its message of hope, and of the importance of even the most marginalised
members of society, that Catholicism has proved such a powerful influence on
this generation of Europeans. To underestimate this legacy is to
misunderstand an important part of 20th century history - and to
underestimate, too, the role played by the remarkable man who has led the
church through the past 16 years, John Paul II.
In his biography of Karol Wojtyla, the first non-Italian pope since the 16th
century, Michael Walsh lays down his cards at the outset: he had
reservations about the cardinal from Cracow when he was elected to the See
of St Peter, and 'as the years have gone by I have seen no reason to change
my original judgment'.
Walsh, a former Jesuit, is a liberal Catholic who sees the church as
guardian of the gospel message in its social context - love, solidarity and
helping the poor and dispossessed. He does not, however, long for the
certainty of spiritual absolutes which Karol Wojtyla delivers. Where some
more traditionalist Catholics applaud the present pope for dusting off the
sacred system of correspondences between heaven and earth, Walsh sees this
shepherd as bent on keeping his flock in an uncomfortably tight pen.
Walsh carefully charts the papacy, analysing both failures (in particular
the financial scandal of the Banco Ambrosiano) and successes (the behind-the
scenes work in helping Lech Walesa set up Solidarnosc and then toppling the
Communist regime, the campaigns against right-wing dictators from Chile's
Pinochet to Haiti's Baby Doc). And he analyses, too, the writings of the
prolific pontiff - from his first encyclical, Redemptor Hominis to what must
surely be regarded as his spiritual testament, the hard-hitting 1993
encyclical, Veritatis Splendor, with its fulminations against subjective
morality and the a la carte Catholicism favoured by the majority of
Catholics in the west.
Though Walsh finds it difficult to feel sympathy with the theological hard
line towed by the Polish pontiff, even he cannot detract from the undoubted
achievement of a pope who dragged the Catholic Church from the sidelines to
the centre of the world political arena.
Cristina Odone is editor of the Catholic Herald

The Financial Times


London Page XI

941022

