FT942-12253

FT  30 APR 94 / Con artists or cost-cutters: Do Whitehall's outside
consultants provide value for money? John Willman examines their role


   By JOHN WILLMAN


Management consultants are the people who borrow your watch to tell you what
time it is and then walk off with it, in the famous judgment of Mr Robert
Townsend, the former chairman of Avis.
His 1971 opinion is still widely held in business. A survey of company
directors in Scotland last year rated management consultants lowest of any
profession for their contribution to business, ability to grasp company
requirements and value for money.
Now dissatisfaction has surfaced in the public sector, with an unpublished
government report on the use of external consultants by the civil service.
The UK Cabinet Office efficiency unit could find savings of just Pounds 10m
from expenditure on consultancy of more than Pounds 500m a year - less than
2 per cent of the cost.
By contrast, Pounds 78m was spent on internal consultancy in 1992-93 saving
Pounds 18m, 23 per cent of the cost.
The findings of the report, revealed in the Financial Times on Tuesday,
unleashed a political storm over the waste of resources. But the
commissioning of the report indicates that ministers have become
increasingly uneasy over the enormous growth in the use of external
management consultants in Whitehall. A series of reports by the National
Audit Office, the public expenditure watchdog, have already criticised the
waste of money on consultants by the civil service and the health service.
One highly placed civil servant, referring to use of consultants, said:
'Some of these reports cost an arm and a leg and tell you nothing you didn't
know already.'
The explosion in consultancy use and other outside advisers by the public
sector has been relatively recent. In 1985, public sector work brought in
Pounds 34.5m for members of the Management Consultancies Association (it
covers about half the consultancy market). By 1993 this had increased to
Pounds 209m.
Privatisation was one important area enabling merchant banks, accountants,
City lawyers and PR consultants to rake in lucrative fees for selling off
utilities such as BT, gas, water and electricity.
Another opportunity was provided by the computerisation of civil service
work such as tax collection, which created some of the largest IT projects
in western Europe. The computerisation of the Department of Social Security
involved at its peak 250 staff from Andersen Consulting, the world's largest
consultancy.
The growing pace of Whitehall reform gave a further boost to consultancy in
the late 1980s. Consultants were called in to advise on the creation of more
than 90 executive agencies to improve the delivery of central government
services, such as the Benefits Agency which pays social security benefits.
The Citizen's Charter required marketing and customer-handling skills that
the civil service lacked. Consultants advised civil service departments on
market-testing, and their staff on how to win contracts. And the latest move
to privatise executive agencies will mean more lucrative work for City
advisers.
By 1992-93, civil service expenditure on all forms of external consultancy
had reached Pounds 565m a year, the efficiency unit estimated. A sample of
quangos - non-civil service bodies financed by government - suggested they
were spending a further Pounds 124m a year on consultants.
Around half the money being spent is used to help implement government
programmes. Consultants help design roads and defence equipment, advise
foreign governments as part of the foreign aid programme and devise training
strategies.
Nearly a third of the total, Pounds 160m, is spent on IT advice. Most of the
remaining Pounds 130m is to help improve the management and structure of the
civil service.
Consultants are quick to point out that the figure of Pounds 10m for the
savings from this expenditure is not an accurate reflection of the benefits.
'Benefits aren't just about savings, they're about achievement,' says Mr
Nick Rawlings, head of the public sector practice at PA, one of the largest
UK consultancies.
Mr Brian O'Rorke, director of the Management Consultancies Association, says
that even where there are savings, the civil service often fails to quantify
them. 'Businesses are much more accustomed to estimating the savings from a
project in advance and then checking on the actual savings afterwards,' he
says.
Mr Keith Burgess, managing partner of Andersen Consulting in the UK, says
that neglecting to calculate the benefits is a consequence of the civil
service obsession with controlling costs.
'Civil servants emphasise process in buying consultancy, ticking boxes to
show that every check has been made so that the result cannot be challenged
by the National Audit Office,' he says. 'In business, there is a far greater
emphasis on individual responsibility, with a senior manager in charge of
commissioning consultancy and seeing it through until the benefits can be
released.'
Much of the efficiency unit report is devoted to improving the process of
buying consultancy. Essential to this is the development of policies for
using consultants.
'There is a common feeling, rightly or wrongly, that for significant
projects some ministers will not be persuaded by advice from civil servants
alone,' the report says. 'There needs to be a report from consultants,
preferably one of the large consultancy firms, to give proposals
credibility.'
In many cases, the report says, consultants are used in a reactive fashion,
to deal with particular problems. Projects are commissioned by relatively
junior staff, which are then not implemented because the staff lack
sufficient authority to carry the projects forward. Communication between
departments on similar consultancy work, which would prevent duplication and
reduce costs, is limited.
Mr O'Rorke says that Whitehall departments need to take consultancy more
seriously. Project specifications should identify expected benefits and be
finalised in a dialogue between the department and consultancy. Mr Burgess
says: 'The best consultancy delivers benefits to the stakeholders in an
organisation by creating a partnership between the consultants and the
clients.'
The report goes further, and questions whether some consultancy is needed at
all. To avoid duplication it suggests a government-wide database of
completed consultancy work.
And some management improvements could be better achieved by adopting
benchmarking techniques used in business. These involve identifying best
practice in other organisations and copying successful techniques.
The consultancy industry is outwardly sanguine about the fall-out from the
report. 'More intelligent buying will mean that the money is spent better -
and the government has plenty of scope for improvement,' says Mr Burgess.
And Mr O'Rorke sees no sign of a collapse in the market.
They may be right. But one thing is certain: the glory days for consultancy
in central government are over. After the embarrassment of this week's
report ministers will make sure that future projects are more rigorously
justified.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940430

