FT943-992

FT  27 SEP 94 / Rabin lifts ban on West Bank settler homes


   By DAVID HOROVITZ


The Israeli government is lifting the freeze it imposed two years ago on
building new housing for Jewish settlers in the occupied territories.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has approved plans for the construction of
almost 1,000 housing units at the settlement of Alfei Menashe, just inside
the West Bank, adjacent to the narrow strip of central Israel where the
country is just five miles wide. Building is set to begin in about six
months.
Housing Ministry officials are said to be drawing up a list of several other
settlements where they plan to construct new housing.
Mr Marwan Kanafani, a spokesman for the PLO chairman, Mr Yassir Arafat,
called the expansion plans a violation 'in letter and spirit' of all
Israeli-PLO peace accords.
He said Palestinian negotiators, due to meet the Israelis in Cairo next week
to discuss the next phases of the autonomy process, would lodge an official
protest.
Mr Oded Ben-Ami, a spokesman for Mr Rabin, defended the move, noting that
Alfei Menashe lies only just across the 'seam' that separates the West Bank
from sovereign Israel.
About 130,000 Jews live in 140 settlements dotted across the West Bank and
Gaza Strip.
Mr Rabin has little regard for what he calls the 'ideological settlements',
located close to Palestinian population centres. But he does value the
security buffer provided by settlements around Jerusalem, on the Jordan
border, and along the western edge of the West Bank where Israel is
narrowest.
Alfei Menashe falls into this last category, and the building plans suggest
Mr Rabin is keen to reinforce buffer settlements in advance of an Israeli
army withdrawal from much of the West Bank as the peace process moves
forward.
On taking office in July 1992, Mr Rabin froze new settlement building, and
approved the completion of fewer than half of the approximately 25,000 West
Bank Jewish housing units then in mid-construction. Those moves were crucial
to the success of Israel-PLO autonomy negotiations.
He must be hoping, too, that the issue will not derail a meeting in
Washington next week between Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and Jordan's
Crown Prince Hassan, hosted by President Bill Clinton, at which the two
reportedly plan to discuss the drafting of a full Israel-Jordan peace
treaty.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940927

