FT942-14810

FT  19 APR 94 / Virgin outlines scheme for County Hall hotel


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group is exploring with Japanese partners the
possibility of launching an international trade centre near the Houses of
Parliament in London.
The possibility emerged yesterday as Virgin Hotels and Shirayama Shokusan,
the Japanese property company, outlined plans to develop County Hall on the
south bank of the Thames into a hotel and entertainment complex.
Shirayama Shokusan bought the listed County Hall - seat of the London County
Council and its successor, the Greater London Council, for more than 60
years - and with Virgin will turn it into a hotel with 570 bedrooms. This
could later be extended to 1,250 bedrooms. There will also be a
virtual-reality entertainment centre, a large 'walk-through' aquarium and
sea-life centre, conference centres, full check-in facilities 'for Virgin
Atlantic and other selected airlines' and a wedding chapel and reception
facilities.
Shirayama Shokusan has now been offered a building adjacent to the County
Hall complex by the body carrying out residual services there for the
scrapped Greater London Council.
The more modern building, designed in the style of County Hall, does not
have a preservation order on it and could be demolished.
Mr Branson confirmed yesterday that the Japanese company is now considering
a proposal to buy the adjacent building and operate it with Virgin as an
international trade centre.
Shirayama Shokusan, a private property development company based in Osaka,
will spend around Pounds 150m in the purchase and development of the County
Hall complex.
Virgin will invest about Pounds 5m and be a 50 per cent shareholder in a new
company which will lease the centre from the owners for 30 years and manage
it on their behalf.
Mr Branson said yesterday there were plans to link County Hall - a national
competition is being launched to find a more appropriate name - by bridge to
the nearby Waterloo international rail centre where trains will depart for
the Channel tunnel.
To complete the link, Mr Branson is also interested in managing rail
services through the tunnel itself.
 ------------------------------------------
        BIGGEST HOTELS IN LONDON
          by number of bedrooms
 ------------------------------------------
Royal National, Bedford Way         1,271
Forum, Cromwell Road                  910
Regent Palace, Piccadilly Circus      891
Cumberland, Marble Arch               890
Excelsior, Bath Road                  839
Tower Thistle, St Kath'rine's Way     808
Copthorne Tara, Scarsdale Place       801
Strand Palace, The Strand             777
Metropole, Edgware Road               721
Mount Royal, Bryanston Street         691
County Hall                     570-1,250
 ------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940419

