FT942-15363

FT  15 APR 94 / Delta-Virgin pact may help UK revive 'open skies' talks


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


The UK government is expected to use Virgin Atlantic's deal with Delta Air
Lines as a lever to revive 'open skies' negotiations with the US.
The US walked away from the talks in January after rejecting UK proposals
for a gradual three-stage liberalisation of air services between the two
countries. Washington insisted on immediate access for all US carriers into
London's Heathrow air-port.
But the partnership announced this week by Virgin and Delta, the third
biggest US carrier which has been vigorously campaigning for access into
Heathrow, appears to have strengthened Britain's hand in bringing the US
back to the negotiating table.
Mr John MacGregor, UK transport secretary, is expected to hold preliminary
talks with Mr Federico Pena, his US counterpart, during the next 10 days to
discuss the Virgin-Delta deal. Both governments must approve the partnership
which would give the US carrier access to Heathrow through ticket
code-sharing and seats-sale agreements with Virgin.
The UK is likely to insist that its approval for the code-sharing will hinge
on resolving the broader issues in the stalled 'open skies' negotiations. Mr
MacGregor is also expected to make new proposals to the US in an effort to
resolve the deadlock.
The UK is seeking the relaxation of current US restrictions on foreign
ownership of US airlines as well as wider access into the US domestic
market. But it has so far not been prepared to open up immediately access to
all US carriers into Heathrow, which under the existing regime can only be
served by United Airlines and American Airlines.
Virgin said last night it had had contacts with the UK government before
announcing its deal with Delta, which in turn had discussions with Mr Pena.
'We feel very confident that the deal will be approved because it is in the
interest of consumers as well as for both the US and UK airline industries,'
Mr Richard Branson, Virgin chairman, said last night.
Discount air travel rules tightened, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940415

