FT942-12303

FT  30 APR 94 / Ministers set to reject proposed pensions safeguard


   By ROLAND RUDD and NORMA COHEN


The government plans to water down proposed reforms of occupational pension
law drawn up in the wake of the Maxwell scandal.
It intends to reject the recommendation by the Goode committee on pensions
regulation that scheme members should be allowed to appoint at least a third
of all scheme trustees.
Ministers fear that if the proposal were implemented it could seriously
undermine occupational pensions because management might question the value
of such schemes if they did not have absolute control of the trustees.
The government, which is to publish its white paper later this year, favours
a code of 'best practice', which would leave the composition of the board of
trustees to the management, as is now the case. 'Ministers are determined to
resist the temptation to over-regulate,' said a Whitehall official.
Mr Stuart James, a member of the committee, said: 'Although the committee
felt there should be no cherry picking (of its key recommendations) this is
what the government will do.'
Mr James, speaking at the annual conference of the National Association of
Pension Funds in Brighton, predicted the government would 'ditch some of our
less palatable recommen-dations'. The issue has caused a dispute among MPs
on the social security committee, which is due to publish its own report
within the next few weeks.
Conservative MPs are fiercely resisting attempts by Labour committee members
to recommend that at least a third of trustees be appointed by scheme
members. This was put forward by the Goode committee because employee
contributions make up a third of most schemes' assets.
The social security committee plans to take evidence from employers, many of
whom have expressed concern about having member-appointed trustees.
Ministers are confident the committee's final recommendations will be in
line with its thinking, but one or two Labour MPs may issue a minority
report. The government is also leaning towards a self-regulatory structure
in which the industry funds the regulator, contrary to the Goode committee's
recommendation that a new pensions regulator should be funded from general
revenues. 'I believe the regulator we will see will be a pale shadow of what
we recommended,' Mr James said.
Another senior Whitehall official said: 'Ministers committed to deregulation
have no intention of doing anything that would undermine occupational
pensions. We do not want a new pensions regulator setting down hundreds of
new rules.'
However, ministers are likely to face strong pressure to accept the Goode
committee's recommendations in full.
PIA chief's warning, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940430

