FT941-5609

FT  05 MAR 94 / Taking stock after a fright: Peter Montagnon examines the
storms spooking the world's financial markets


   By PETER MONTAGNON


There is something perverse about the way stock markets as well as bonds
plunged around the world on news that US growth surged to 7.5 per cent in
the final quarter of last year.
After all, companies are supposed to thrive in a growing economy. It boosts
their earnings, which ought to be good for share prices too. In other
circumstances news that the US was doing well - reinforced as it was on
Tuesday by a positive survey of industrial purchasing managers - might have
been sufficient to send a glow around the world.
That this time was different is a measure of how markets lost touch with
reality as they raced ahead late last year. Now, as the shock starts to
abate, two questions arise. Will the liquidity return that fuelled that
earlier, apparently effortless rise? And have markets fallen far enough to
reflect underlying economic reality once again?
The US Federal Reserve's decision to tighten monetary policy on February 3
was a turning point for equities. Since the end of January the US equity
market, measured by the Standard & Poors Composite index, has fallen 4 per
cent, but falls in Europe have been larger. The UK's FT-SE-A All-Share has
fallen 6 per cent. German shares are down 5 per cent, while French equities
have fallen by 7.
Warning signals had already appeared in bond markets in January. These
markets, too, had been driven up by cash-rich buyers - not just US mutual
fund investors seeking a higher return than available at home but by
large-scale professional investors using borrowed money to punt on
ever-growing capital gains.
Because they are so heavily leveraged, such investors, known colloquially as
hedge funds, cannot afford to let any losses mount. At the first sign of
trouble they must, often on the instructions of their bankers, cover their
positions. Once that process starts losses can snowball. Markets then find
themselves in a vicious downward spiral.
Insofar as this explains the problem, bond markets are not reflecting a
basic shift. Though yields have risen by over 1 percentage point in the UK
this year, nearly 1 point in France and Germany and half a point in the US,
there is no immediate sign of inflation returning. Indeed, it is likely to
fall further in Europe. Arguably, bonds now offer attractive real returns.
There is little chance hedge funds will return in a hurry, though. Nor did
yesterday's US unemployment data do much to allay fear that signs of the US
economy over-heating could prompt the Federal Reserve to tighten further.
Not only might that choke off the US recovery. Higher deposit rates would
reduce the incentive for US investors to put money in mutual funds. With
their Dollars 2,000bn assets, these funds have been large players in world
financial markets. They might invest less abroad and even repatriate
existing investments.
Opinions differ on where the markets go from here. 'The fundamentals aren't
bad,' says Mr David Hale of Kemper Financial Companies. 'It's really a
psychological shock.' He believes the speculative froth has merely been
blown off markets previously driven up by a surfeit of liquidity. 'This
situation is still very manageable. It's not something which can't be
corrected over time.'
Mr Nicholas Knight, London-based strategist of Nomura Securities, is less
sanguine. 'You haven't yet seen the culmination of this,' he says. 'The real
interest rate environment has changed. Period.'
A striking feature of market turbulence is that prices have been pushed
lower by selling of futures. The volume in cash markets has remained low,
suggesting many investors still hold more securities than they want. Mr
Knight, more pessimistic than most, fears their first inclination could be
to sell into any rally. Even further cuts in European short-term interest
rates would then fail to give a sustained boost to bonds or equities.
Perhaps these contrasting attitudes reflect the fact that the US seems less
threatened than Europe. Markets there have fallen less sharply. Economic
recovery has brought a rise in corporate profits which made the peak
price-earnings multiple of 26 on US equities look less stretched than those
in Europe.
It is still possible that, after acting early to combat inflation, the Fed
may have to tighten less this time than in previous cycles. That could
eventually mean a soft landing for bonds and equities as well as for the
economy. And if US investors become more risk averse, their first instinct
will be to drop more exotic investments abroad before familiar holdings at
home.
For Europe, still struggling to recover from recession, the malaise has been
ill-timed. Stock markets across the continent had been driven to record
levels by the presumption of recovery. That is now threatened by fears that
the Fed's move may delay cuts in European short-term interest rates and by
the rise in real long-term rates that has occurred in the bond markets.
'European equities are discounting high (economic) growth, which we don't
think will happen,' says Mr Richard Davidson of Morgan Stanley. Most
vulnerable to disappointment, he says, are the markets of southern Europe.
Corporate earnings prospects are better in the UK, Switzerland and the
Netherlands.
Another problem is that the withdrawal of hedge fund buying from the bond
markets has exposed the high borrowing needs of governments. Though the UK
covered this year's Pounds 50bn borrowing requirement easily, funding next
year's deficit may prove harder even if it drops to a forecast Pounds 38bn.
Higher real interest rates may be needed to woo buyers of government debt.
Savers would have less money over for equities, whose attraction would
diminish.
Even those who believe European bond markets have fallen to the point where
they offer value are uncertain when buying will return in force. 'No one in
the whole world would disagree these markets are cheap,' says Ms Alison
Cottrell of Midland Global Markets. 'People just think they'll get cheaper.
So far they've been right.'
Bond markets yesterday recovered some of their poise since their falls in
mid-week. Some say this could be the first sign of an end to the buyers'
strike; others that the rise is mainly technical. For a real change in
sentiment, investors must be persuaded that Europe can decouple from the US
trend, so that interest rates can fall again.
That requires decisive action by central banks, which may be difficult while
the Bundesbank remains spooked by 20 per cent growth in German money supply.
Without lower short-term interest rates, though, there is little chance of a
meaningful bond market recovery. European economies would also continue to
stagnate and budget deficits to grow. That is not a friendly climate for
equities.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940305

