FT942-16175

FT  12 APR 94 / Technology: Costly resistance to telecommuting - Technically
Speaking


   By TOM FOREMSKI


Advances in technology make it easier for many companies to convert some of
their office staff into telecommuters. They thereby gain a competitive
advantage through lower operating costs and more productive staff.
But while technology such as compact desktop computers, E-mail and fax
machines makes fitting telecommuters into the office network relatively easy
 -and cheap video conferencing systems are just around the corner -
management attitudes are still stuck in the past.
Jack Nilles, president of California-based management consultants Jalla
International and the person who coined the term telecommuter more than 20
years ago, says many managers do not know how to supervise staff unless they
can see them.
In telecommuting (or teleworking) employees come into the office one or two
days a week and spend the rest of their time working from home. For
companies, there are clear advantages. Supervision of staff is reduced and
savings can be made on overheads such as office space and parking space.
Happier staff means lower turnover and thus savings from reduced recruitment
and training costs. And teleworkers tend to work harder and longer hours
when at home. For staff working mainly from home, the benefits are obvious:
more productive time with less commuting; lower travelling costs; and
control over their own working time.
Companies that can learn to manage teleworkers are thus likely to achieve
greater flexibility in their operations. But teleworking should not be seen
as simply a more progressive way of working. Moving workers into the home
also means transferring the responsibilities of maintaining an office space
and certain management functions to the teleworker. Once teleworkers are
established, they are just one step nearer the status of independent
contractors.
By employing such contractors, companies transfer even more responsibilities
to the teleworker - tax payments and, more importantly in the US, individual
responsibility for health benefits, a major business cost. Companies also
gain greater flexibility in hiring and firing as many teleworking contracts
are limited to single projects. Already in the US, temporary workers and
independent contractors are the fastest-growing sector of the labour market.
While this growth is mostly in the blue-collar sector, telecommuting
technologies are now helping to turn many white-collar and professional
workers into independent contractors. Book publishers are an example of this
trend. Many now contract out most of their requirements such as editing,
book layout and design to a host of independent contractors.
As the US and Europe lay the foundations for electronic information
superhighways, many other companies in different sectors will be able to
convert staff roles into independent contractors. Initially, such
contractors will be able to earn higher incomes than their office-bound
colleagues tied to one employer. But the technology enabling them to work
from idyllic countryside locations will result in competition among
contractors - and from locations around the world.
In the US, there are several incentives for companies to increase their
teleworkers. The recent earthquake in southern California and the damage to
its motorways has led to a rise in teleworking in an area that already had a
high proportion to begin with.
The US Clean Air Act specifies that companies with more than 100 staff in 11
US states with high air pollution must seek ways of reducing employee car
use or face stiff fines. Many companies complain about the increased burden
of complying with such regulations. But those that view this as an
opportunity to employ more telecommuters will learn valuable lessons on how
to manage a mixed workforce. Rival European companies should keep a close
eye on what this does to US productivity.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940412

