FT941-3303

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (28): A
central link in the chain - Factory of the future / Most of Britain's
leading manufacturing companies expect to invest heavily in information
technology in the next five years, reports Andrew Baxter. The most popular
planned investments are manufacturing management systems


   By ANDREW BAXTER


After 20 years of dramatic developments in the information technology used
by manufacturers - from the earliest computer-aided design systems to modern
relational databases and shopfloor management systems  - there is no let-up
in the pace of change.
Information technology (IT) vendors still see plenty of opportunities to
fulfil the changing needs of manufacturing companies, while the customers
are reacting to the disappointments of the past by taking steps to ensure
their IT needs really are met in future.
It is partly because of past disappointments, and the fact that previous
investments are no longer compatible with newer technologies, that spending
on IT by manufacturers remains a high priority.
According to a MORI survey last month for the ASK Group, developers of
business software, and the accountants Coopers & Lybrand, 82 per cent of 100
companies picked at random from the UK's top 1,000 manufacturers expect to
invest heavily in IT in the next five years - and 60 per cent of managers
expect to spend more than Pounds 1m.
The most popular planned investments are manufacturing management systems,
where 73 per cent plan to spend money, and supply chain systems to improve
performance, where 62 per cent expect to invest.
This year's Computers in Manufacturing Show, at the National Exhibition
Centre, Birmingham, from November 22-24, will demonstrate some of the
state-of-the-art IT products seen by industry as a priority for their
broader business needs. Examples are virtual reality and rapid prototyping
tools to improve and accelerate product development, and just-in-time
software which allows manufacturers to operate lean production techniques.
These and other technology developments now becoming available provide some
clues as to what will be the IT needs of the factories of the future.
Mr Graham Williams, managing director of AT&T Istel's manufacturing
division, believes the next five years could be exciting because of the
products which IT vendors are offering industry in order to help to tackle
key manufacturing problems.
The need for manufacturers to get closer to consumers has spawned the
concept of the extended enterprise in which not only suppliers, but also
distribution, is included. For example, says Mr Williams, IT can be used by
brewers as a means of viewing the hop-grower and also the public house as
part of its enterprise.
Similarly, the generation of electronic point-of-sales data can produce a
works order, and in turn create all the orders for materials and
sub-assemblies. This would aid the lean production process, as manufacturers
would only be making what their customers were buying.
All the technology to do this exists, says Mr Williams. Indeed, it is
already happening to some extent in the food industry, and will start to
happen very quickly in the process industries.
Mr Cliff Shuker, managing director of AT&T Istel's Rover division, sees an
increasing need for IT applications that can be applied horizontally across
processes rather than simply used to improve the performance of individual
functions or departments.
Also, as customers increasingly dictate what happens in factories, they will
use IT to inject their requirements straight into manufacturers' production
schedules. Moreover,the development of massive databases provides the basis
for neural networks which can aid decision-making by tapping into past
experience.
IT users in manufacturing, too, have been thinking about the next steps in
their use of manufacturing technology. The most important initiative among
users is the AIT project - advanced information technology in design and
manufacturing - which is headed by Daimler-Benz and stems from users'
demands for more effective IT and better integration of systems at different
sites.
The pilot phase for the project, which comprises 16 aerospace and automotive
companies from six countries, began last November and the overall aim is to
strengthen the competitiveness of key European industries by three
consecutive action in three areas.
First, the initiative will seek to establish a consensus among European
industrial users of IT on their most important future requirements for
design and manufacturing.
Secondly, it will seek an agreement on these requirements with the IT
vendors, and, thirdly, an IT research and development initiative will be
launched to support the commonly-agreed requirements.
Significantly, the initiative's backers say they want it to become a
substantial user force recognised by the IT community, to ensure that future
products meet users' requirements.
Two other projects, combining users, vendors and universities, underline
further priorities for the development of IT in the factories of the future.
Just before Christmas, Crawley-based Reflex Manufacturing Systems, a
subsidiary of Rolls-Royce Aerospace, won approval from the European Union
for a project under the Esprit programme known as Discrete Cell Control.
Over the past five years, the adoption of manufacturing cells has grown
rapidly in industry because of their contribution to flexible manufacturing,
reducing work-in-progress and enhancing teamwork and multi-skilling.
Helped by an Ecu 1.3m Esprit grant, project leader Reflex and its partners
will, over the next 18 months, develop an open applications framework aimed
at providing a firm foundation for all cell control systems.
Reflex, a software house which specialises in manufacturing control and shop
floor scheduling systems, says the DCC will provide the means to design and
build systems, and empower autonomous cell operation, while enabling the
cell to co-operate with other production and engineering teams.
Mr Terry Jones, managing director of Reflex, says the aim is a standard cell
control environment which different IT suppliers can plug into efficiently.
Internal and external customers would also be able to view where their
products are in the cell.
The applicability of DCC will be evaluated through pilot projects at two of
Reflex' partners in the scheme, Intracom, the Greek electronics and telecoms
equipment company, and the Odense Shipyard in Denmark.
Odense, which has moved to cell manufacturing to produce super-tankers is
also involved in a project being carried out under the auspices of the
five-continent Intelligent Manufacturing Systems Initiative. This aims to
work out how concurrent engineering - interdisciplinary teamwork to
accelerate product development - can be carried out in a global
manufacturing context.
TransTec, the Birmingham-based specialist engineering group, is leading the
European side of the project. Like the Reflex project, it aims to design an
architecture - in this case of a CE system for global, multi-site
application.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940316

