FT941-3321

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (11):
Users pin hopes on ATM - Network capacity / Demand for space on computer
networks keeps exceeding supply


   By GEORGE BLACK


The present structures of local area networks of personal computers,
Ethernet and Token Ring, running at 10 megabits and 16 megabits per second
respectively, will soon be unable to cope with the growing volume of
traffic.
As users compete for communications channels, the actual speed of delivery
to each of them is often only a tenth of the network's theoretical capacity.
When more users come on to the network, its performance degrades.
Network managers have responded to the rising demand by exploiting existing
systems more efficiently. This is one of the main reasons for the enormous
growth in sales of devices such as intelligent hubs, bridges and routers in
the past couple of years. They have helped a lot, but it will not be enough.
Fibre Distributed Data Interface, running at 100MBps, has been regarded by
many as the probable solution, but it has so far proved too expensive. FDDI
and Fast Ethernet, also running at 100MBps, may be overtaken by ATM
(Asynchronous Transfer Mode).
Experts now agree that ATM is the only technology that can give the
necessary transmission speed for communicating image, voice and data
together in real time at an acceptable price. It can use existing wiring,
which will help keep down the cost. It may therefore be what is needed to
start the long- expected spread of multimedia applications.
Ethernet and Token Ring have suffered from a lack of standards, which has
meant a large amount of conversion of data from one format to another. The
move to ATM, which is rapidly becoming standardised, may be equivalent to
removing official frontier controls.
Unlike its predecessors, ATM uses a technology known as cell relay, which
takes advantage of the high speed transmission capacity of fibre optic
cables. It handles data in fixed length cells rather than variable length
packets, which is thought to be more efficient. This should push the speed
of transmission up to a maximum of around 2.4 gigabits per second.
For backbone systems in office and factory buildings, 155MBps is expected to
be the usual speed; 45MBps may be typical for combined data, voice and
video. ATM will not put upper or lower limits on the transmission speed but
use that which is appropriate to the application.
Other important advantages of ATM are that it is a much simpler system than
the older ones and can be used for both local area and wide area networks,
which should further reduce migration costs and ease the task of network
management.
ATM was invented to serve the needs of the public telephone companies, but
was soon taken over by the pioneering computer companies of California's
Silicon Valley.
The ATM Forum, which was set up by the computer companies in 1991 and now
has over 200 members, comes out with a new standard every couple of months
and is rapidly completing the set which is needed.
It is setting a pace which the telephone companies cannot match. Mr Tim
Ward, strategic marketing director for Network Equipment Technologies (NET),
a leading company in the forum, admits that there has been a lot of 'hype'
for ATM but argues that it was necessary.
'It has turned people's attention to ATM as a local area network
technology,' he says.
'ATM-ready' LAN products began to come on to the market in 1992. ATM on LANs
is forecast to prove a more cost-effective solution than on WANs or on the
public carriers' services. So it is likely to be adopted for LANs long
before the telephone companies have worked out the details of their
offerings.
The largest corporations will probably be the first to take up the
technology. Banks want it in their dealing rooms, where video and news
agency reports may be joined on a single fibre optic feed.
Users are only experimenting with it at the moment; live applications will
follow in a year or two. Many of the telephone companies worldwide will
introduce their first ATM services this year.
According to Mr Sean Phelan, principal analyst for market research firm
Yankee Group Europe, pricing presents them with a dilemma. 'If they price it
too low they risk cannibalising their current revenues, but if they price it
too high the uptake will be very small,' he says.
'The arrival of ATM therefore represents a big opportunity for new entrants
into the telecommunications business.' For most users the big question is
when they should try to move to ATM.
A report last year by the Ovum consultancy said that potential users of ATM,
especially in Europe, were cynical about it, partly because current ATM
products did not match their expectations. Ovum said that ATM provided far
more than enough bandwidth but added that this did not translate into the
functionality required.
One of the authors of the report, Mr Iain Stevenson, says that their
cynicism may be dispelled by a number of new products from hub and router
vendors which will be delivered this year. He notes the telephone companies
are worried that ATM may leave them 'holding the string' for users who have
equipment on their premises which is intelligent enough for them to manage
their own networks.
'The telephone companies have to get closer to their customers to find out
what services they really want,' he says.
One of the technical concerns about ATM has been that receiving devices may
not be able to cope with the throughput. Data cells could get lost in the
pipeline and need to be re- sent.
'With only a small disruption an encyclopedia could have gone by,' notes Mr
Jim Boyle, vice-president of wide area networking for IBM. IBM has stated
that ATM is one of its key technology strategies and it is investing heavily
in research into network congestion. The design of ATM networks will be
difficult, at least until flow control software matures.
Users may therefore be wise to hire systems integrators to build these
networks for them.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
EUROPEAN CONTRACTS FOR ASYNCHRONOUS TRANSFER MODE-BASED PUBLIC SWITCHES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Country                Operator        Domestic      International
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Belgium                Belgacom         Alcatel            Alcatel
Denmark            Tele Danmark         Alcatel            Siemens
Finland         Telecom Finland              ++            Netcomm
France           France Telecom         Alcatel            Alcatel
Germany        Deutsche Telekom        Ericsson            Alcatel
Ireland         Telecom Eireann              ++            Alcatel
Italy                      Sip+         Alcatel,                 -
                                       Ericsson
                        Iritel*             -              Alcatel
Netherlands         PTT Telecom            AT&T               AT&T
                    Netherlands
Norway        Norwegian Telecom              ++            Alcatel
Portugal                   TPL+         Alcatel                  -
Spain                Telefonica    AT&T Alcatel           Ericsson
Sweden                    Telia   AT&T Ericsson               AT&T
Switzerland   Swiss PTT Telecom         Siemens            Siemens
UK                           BT            AT&T            Alcatel
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Footnote: + indicates purely domestic operator; *purely international
operator; ++ contracts have yet to be awarded; listed international
contracts all involve switches for the pan-European ATM trial; source:
Financial Times Telecom Markets newsletter
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940316

