FT943-802

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (5): Missed
connections - Communications / Charles Batchelor pinpoints the flaws


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


Look at a map of Europe, and you will see that motorways or roads of near
motorway standard will carry you from Aberdeen in the north of Scotland to
Brindisi in southern Italy.
Purchase a European railway timetable, and you will discover trains which,
with the appropriate connections, will take you from Stockholm to Lisbon.
Massive motorway building programmes and, more recently, initiatives to
modernise the railway network, have transformed travel and multiplied the
options open to the manager seeking to locate a factory, an office or a
warehouse in Europe.
But for all the progress that has been made, the idea that Europe possesses
a transport network comparable with, for example, the US freeway system, is
an illusion. Road and rail links have been designed largely with national
needs in mind, and rarely with the aim of achieving rational cross-border
connections.
Rail planners must contend with different track and loading gauges (the
latter determines the height and width of bridges and tunnels) and with
incompatible power and signalling systems. The Eurostar trains which will
run through the Channel tunnel have been designed to draw power from three
different electricity systems and to respond to four different signallings
systems.
Even the airline network, designed primarily for the purpose of
international travel rather than journeys within national borders, reveals a
worrying fragmentation. The continent's 42 air traffic control centres
reflect cumbersome national considerations, and are ill-suited to meet the
needs of the airlines and their customers.
Concern that rising travel demands will lead to an increase in congestion
and damage to the environment has led the European Commission to devise an
integrated transport system, including road, rail, air and inland and
coastal shipping.
The commission is working on a Ecu220bn (Dollars 268bn) programme to create
a series of trans-European networks over the next 15 years. Even governments
traditionally hostile to the idea of integrated transport planning have been
persuaded to join in. The spur is the prospect of community funds to finance
domestic investment, although it is by no means clear how these ambitious
plans are to be paid for.
The aim is tie the countries on the edge of Europe, such as Portugal and
Greece, where transport networks are not highly developed, more closely to
the centre. At the same time the commission wants to reduce congestion on
busy routes in the heart of Europe, such as the Rhine-Rhone corridor and air
traffic paths over north-west Europe.
A third goal is to reduce the relative dependence on roads for the bulk of
passenger and freight transport. The building of fast, convenient motorway
links has led to a decline in the use of other networks, most notably rail.
Passenger travel has increased by 85 per cent over the past 20 years, mostly
in the shape of private car journeys, which account for 79 per cent of all
travel. Freight shipments, meanwhile, have increased by half, and road
transport accounts for 70 per cent of goods transported.
The trans-European network programme envisages spending 30 per cent of
available funds on roads, 60 per cent on rail and 5 per cent on canals and
ports. This contrasts with present spending by national governments, of
which 66 per cent goes on roads and 23 per cent on rail. A further 6 per
cent goes on airports, with 5 per cent reserved for canals and ports.
The main elements of the commission's programme are:
A rail network of 70,000 kilometres, including 23,000km of extensions and
new lines for high-speed trains and a similar length devoted to freight and
intermodal transport (waggons and trailers which can be carried both by road
and rail).
A road network of 58,000km, including 15,000 km of new or improved roads.
Roads would have to be of a minimum twin two-lane standard, but would not
have to be motorways.
Improvements to freight terminals and agreement on a uniform loading gauge
for intermodal rail shipments.
Plugging gaps in the international canal network and improving seaports to
encourage waterborne traffic.
Airport improvements and the upgrading of links between airports and the
road and rail systems. The creation of an integrated air traffic management
system.
The commission hopes that, by identifying these key networks, it will
encourage governments to target their national budgets to making
improvements and filling gaps. But it also intends to put community funds
towards this programme and attract investment from the European Investment
Bank and the private sector.
The trans-European networks programme has been drawn up with the aim
primarily of improving connections within the 12 members states of the
European Union, but links with eastern Europe have grown in significance
with the collapse of communism and the break-up of the Soviet Union.
Many of the transport links in eastern Europe were in a state of chronic
disrepair before the strengthening of economic ties with the west. As
traffic grows they threaten to clog up completely.
Several projects are currently being planned with the help of funds from the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. A new motorway is to be
built linking Budapest in Hungary with Vienna, Austria and Bratislava in the
Slovak Republic.
Much effort is being put into upgrading road and rail links between Berlin,
Warsaw, Minsk and Moscow. However, in Poland, Belarus and Russia further
work needs to be done on creating a legal framework which will allow the
participation of private investors. These could be repaid by being awarded
concessions to collect tolls.
Good transport links are an important consideration for managers deciding to
locate or relocate a business activity. If the commission's plans are
carried out, they should make such decisions easier.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940927

