FT942-14378

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (5): Loyalty gets its reward - Frequent
flyer programmes


   By PAUL TAYLOR


Frequent Flyer Programmes, invented in the early 1980s in the US in an
effort to create and maintain customer loyalty, have become an invaluable
marketing tool used by most airlines.
Most carriers' FFPs work by offering regular passengers 'points' or 'miles'
which can eventually be exchanged for free flights, seat upgrades or other
benefits. Membership of an FFP may also entitle the traveller to other
benefits such as additional excess baggage allowances, express check-in or
the guarantee of a seat when flights are fully booked.
In most cases, the cost of an FFP to the airlines - that of filling seats
that would otherwise be empty - is marginal and despite the early misgivings
of some airline industry executives, FFPs have proved tremendously popular
with travel-hungry airline customers and successful for the airlines
themselves.
According to Carlson Marketing Group, which has helped design a number of
FFPs on both sides of the Atlantic, the 32m frequent flyer members in the US
alone have already earned more than 620bn miles' worth of free travel,
enough to fill about 590,000 fully-loaded transatlantic Boeing 747 flights.
'Travel, and free travel in particular, appeals to everybody,' says Mr David
Perkins, managing director of Carlson Marketing in the UK. He believes that
part of the reason for the success of FFPs is that travel allowances provide
a flexible way to reward loyalty.
From the carriers' perspective FFPs have also proved to be effective in
capturing valued business traffic. For example, in a survey conducted last
autumn by the Official Airline Guide, 70 per cent of European business
travellers said that, given a choice of carriers on a route, they would
choose a carrier connected with their FFP.
However, European and Asian carriers in particular are relatively recent
converts to the FFP. Airlines outside North America initially viewed the
birth and subsequent rapid growth of FFPs during the 1980s with a mixture of
disapproval and trepidation. In the last few years these concerns have
subsided and most airlines outside the North American market have bowed to
commercial pressures and now operate or belong to an FFP.
In Europe British Airways launched its frequent flyer scheme in May 1991 and
all the other main European airlines have subsequently followed suit with
their own programmes, or have joined existing programmes run by their
marketing partners. Though European and Asian carriers were late entrants to
the FFP game, they have learned from the US experience. In particular,
unlike their US counterparts, they have generally limited their FFPs to
business travellers and changed the rules to limit the give-aways.
The objective of an FFP for any airline is to attract the regular business
passenger, not the price-sensitive leisure traveller who perhaps flies once
a year. Thus, while US carriers and other airlines which compete in the US
market have been forced by cut-throat competition into using the schemes to
compete even for discount ticket sales, in Europe and elsewhere FFPs
generally exclude discount fares.
Similarly, late arrivals in the FFP business such as BA, Air France and
Lufthansa have also improved on the US experience by imposing time limits on
cashing in accumulated points. This once again favours frequent travellers,
who fly often enough to earn free flights quickly, and enables the airline
to control the flow of free seats and minimise its future seat liabilities.
Airlines have also discovered another key reason for operating or belonging
to a frequent flyer programme - customer information. Less than 15 per cent
of travellers book their tickets directly with an airline, the remaining 85
per cent booking through a third party such as a travel agent, depriving the
airline of any means to capture valuable information about its customers.
By using the often detailed information generated by an FFP, airlines argue
that they can target-focus their marketing efforts more accurately as well
as serve their customer base more effectively.
In Europe Carlson Marketing has built FFP computer relational databases for
SAS of Scandinavia, Swissair and Austrian Airlines. FFP databases allow
airlines to find out who their passengers are and their patterns of travel.
They can then use direct mail to send sales and marketing information to
particular groups of customers. 'Customer knowledge can be a competitive
advantage,' says Mr Perkins.
Crucially, Carlson argues that loyalty marketing is much more cost-effective
than most broad scale advertising. As Lord Leverhulme once said: 'Fifty per
cent of my advertising is wasted, the trouble is I don't know which 50 per
cent.'
Detailed customer information has enabled some airlines to operate several
tiers of frequent flyer membership - depending on a passenger's spending
pattern. British Airways, for example, now has four levels of frequent flyer
membership with varying levels of benefits.
Smaller airlines can also make good use of FFP information, but naturally
suffer from having a much smaller database to start with. One increasingly
popular solution is the cross-airline allegiance. For example, Mr Richard
Branson's Virgin Atlantic has extended its Virgin Freeway FFP to include
British Midland, SAS and Air New Zealand. Similarly, Singapore Air Lines,
Swissair and Delta of the US have linked their FFPs across three continents.
Another distinct trend is the broadening of FFPs to include hotel chains,
car rental groups and other companies, for example credit card issuers.
These cross-company links enable airlines, big and small, to expand the
scope and attractiveness of their FFPs.
Armed with such linkages, FFPs have conquered the travel and leisure
industry in little more than a decade. There are, however, still a number of
unresolved issues.
Although more recent FFP conditions have been tightened, US airline
executives in particular acknowledge that accounting standards bodies are
questioning whether the financial liability of FFPs should be included in
company accounts as a contingent liability and some US airlines have already
blamed low passenger yields on FFP members exercising their rights to free
seats.
Tax authorities on both sides of the Atlantic are also looking at the value
of the give-aways for both the airlines and their customers. Any move to tax
FFP benefits could seriously affect their attractiveness. In addition,
companies, which are already scrutinising their travel budgets closely, may
press for better fare deals rather than racking-up frequent flyer points for
their staff.
Some critics have expressed the hope that once all airlines have FFPs, their
usefulness to distinguish one airline from another - and therefore their
value as a marketing tool - will diminish. So far, however, there is no sign
of that happening. Indeed, it has become increasingly difficult to imagine
an airline industry without frequent flyer programmes.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940420

