FT944-5856

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Company News: Hoechst cautious despite growth


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


Hoechst, the German chemicals group, wants to almost double the return on
capital from its core European industrial divisions, Mr Jurgen Dormann,
chairman, said yesterday.
Mr Dormann reported pre-tax profits up 83 per cent to DM1.69bn (Dollars
1.1bn) in the nine months to September 30, and forecast a further strong
earnings rise for 1995. However, he said further rationalisation was needed.
Restructuring costs and provisions this year would reduce earnings by about
DM1bn.
European industrial operations, which embrace all sectors except
pharmaceuticals and agricultural products, had returned to profit this year
after losing DM600m at the operating level in 1993 on sales of DM13.5bn.
'But we are still far away from acceptable return on equity. Our goal is to
get a net return of 15 per cent,' said Mr Dormann. In the meantime, the
company aimed to regain by 1996 the ground lost in the recession. According
to Mr Dormann, operating earnings from the industrial businesses shrank by
DM2bn between 1990 and 1993.
While stressing that the job cuts of the past few years were almost at an
end - the group has spent DM2bn on redundancy schemes and other provisions
to reduce its payroll by 17 per cent since 1991 - he said the group's cost
and structural problems were still not resolved.
Co-operative ventures such as the recent deal to merge the textile dyes
operations of Hoechst and Bayer were one way forward.
Mr Dormann, who recently said the aim of his restructuring project was to
double the group's stock market value by the end of the century, gave a
bullish view of current conditions.
The three-year decline in chemicals prices seemed to be over, and a rise in
Hoechst's average selling prices in the third quarter had cancelled out
declines in the first half.
Volume sales were also rising and had climbed 7 per cent in the three months
to the end of September, bringing to 5 per cent the aggregate for the
nine-month review period.
Turnover rose 8 per cent to DM36.4bn, with almost DM20bn coming from Europe.
In the US, where the chemicals industry was working at the limits of its
capacity, the Hoechst Celanese subsidiary had lifted turnover 15 per cent to
Dollars 5.5bn.
Total US turnover rose only 5 per cent, partly because of difficulties in
the pharmaceuticals market, including the expiry of Hoechst Roussel Pharma's
patent on its biggest seller, DiaBeta.
US operations have also been disrupted by the need to make provisions
against claims from householders whose water supplies have been disrupted by
defective pipes supplied by Hoechst Celanese.
Mr Dormann said claims for damages were also expected following the recall
of two drugs from the Copley generics business.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 30

941201

