FT941-4035

FT  12 MAR 94 / Sport: Concertina plays blues for Intrum - Sailing


   By KEITH WHEATLEY


Whitbread sailors call it 'the concertina', but its music has no charms.
When the fleet is stretched out in line, racing to the finish, a breeze that
dies from the leaders backwards will have the effect of bunching the yachts.
In the last two days this nautical torture has been inflicted on Intrum
Justitia as she set the pace towards the end of leg four in Punta del Este,
Uruguay.
On Wednesday night Intrum, skippered by British yachtsman Lawrie Smith, was
91 miles ahead of her closest rivals Tokio and Yamaha and seemed a certain
bet to take the Heineken trophy for the leg. By morning it was a different
story. The breeze was soft and right on the nose, behind them Tokio and
Yamaha had closed the gap to a mere 25 miles with only 445 miles left to the
finish.
'We're treating this stage like an inshore race in the English Channel,
sleeping on the rail instead of going down below,' said Pierre Maas,
Intrum's watchleader over the radio. 'But at least we've proved that we can
be fast in light airs as well as in the strong running conditions.'
Just prior to Cape Horn the yacht set another 24-hour record with a 428-mile
run.
Overall, Tokio holds a 17-hour lead from the rest of the highly competitive
W60 class. Three other yachts, Yamaha, Intrum and Galicia Pescanova, are
good enough to catch her but with the race two-thirds gone, time is running
out.
Yamaha left Southampton six months ago as the favourite. Since then she has
been dogged by misfortune, some of it self-inflicted with repeated changes
in the crucial navigator role. Now, she is making up ground on Intrum, and
could be second into Uruguay.
'The wind is forecast to head us and stay in the north for a day and a half.
It'll come down to who picks the weather best,' said skipper Ross Field.
Aboard Tokio, the young Kiwi Chris Dickson is frustrated. 'We had a
spinnaker on for the first time in seven days,' he told Punta via Inmarsat.
'It's unbelievable that in this downwind race we have been going upwind for
so damn long.
'It's tough on the boat, gear and the people. We were geared for spinnaker
work but we've had 90 per cent headwinds. It's like going skiing and getting
a five-minute run at the beginning of the day, before spending the next 48
hours struggling uphill into a blizzard with your skis on your back.'
Compared with the trauma aboard British entry Dolphin, lying eighth, Tokio
has the problems of a poor little rich kid.
'Since we left Auckland three weeks ago the primary winch has been ripped
from the deck, three keel bolts have sheared, the headfoil which holds the
jib in place has shattered and the mainsail has been shredded into pieces,'
said 23-year-old skipper Matt Humphries. 'The heavy No 1 genoa has been
transformed into a mainsail and brass hanks fitted to a spare jib so that we
can fly a foresail. But we are still about 60 sq m down on sail area and the
girls on Heineken are catching us fast.'
All 14 yachts had a relatively easy passage around Cape Horn, although the
week before they rounded the bleak headland was rough and uncomfortable,
with some of the strongest winds and most complex weather systems the
skippers have had to face.
Marcel van Triest, Intrum's navigator, said: 'During that second week in the
Southern Ocean there were so many low pressure centres, if we had got it
just slightly wrong we could have been down the drain like Winston.' (The US
entry took a gamble and ended up 150 miles behind the leaders in less than
day.)
The past week illustrates perfectly the complexity and richness of the
Whitbread. A week ago the crews were lucky to see so much as an albatross as
they shivered below deck in wet sleeping bags with the temperature only just
above freezing. On deck there was 50 knots of wind and a helmsman wearing a
full face mask and ski goggles.
Yesterday, reported New Zealand Endeavour, the red dust from the Argentinian
pampas was blown 250 miles offshore, dirtying the foredeck, and the crew was
sunbathing in shorts and T-shirts. At the helm it was a minute-by-minute
battle just to keep the 27 tonnes of maxi-ketch moving through the water.
Intrum was in sight just over two miles ahead.
'Light weather isn't perfect but it suits us. For the first time in days
we've been able to put time on every yacht in the fleet,' said skipper Grant
Dalton. His maxi is second on the water to Intrum but against the sluggish
maxi rivals Merit Cup and la Poste, his race is as good as won. The W60s
still have everything to play for.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940312

