FT943-744

FT  28 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Mazda ends Ford sales agreement -
Marketing cutback in US


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


Mazda, the Japanese car maker, is to cease selling recreational vehicles
manufactured by Ford in the US market.
Mazda said yesterday that it will not be receiving the 1995 model of Ford's
two-door recreational vehicle which Mazda has been marketing in the US as
the Navajo.
Mazda's sales of the two-door Navajo has slumped to 560 units a month this
year, down from about 850 units a month in 1990 when it began marketing
Ford's off-road vehicle. The move highlights the difficulties vehicle
manufacturers face when forming partnerships with competitors.
The Japanese company, however, was continuing negotiations with Ford to
receive and sell the more popular four-door version of the Navajo, but
agreement was not expected.
Ford holds a 24.5 per cent stake in the Japanese group and in June this year
it strengthened its ties by increasing its representation on the Mazda board
with the appointment of three Ford executives.
The appointments at Mazda underlined the problems at the Japanese car maker
due to the economic slowdown in Japan and overcapacity in other world
markets. The Ford appointments were announced together with a major revamp
of top management at Mazda, with five board members retiring.
The end of the Mazda-Ford sales venture in the US is another bump in the
road towards closer co-operation between the two vehicle producers.
Negotiations between the two companies on the European market, where Mazda
would like to use Ford's facilities as a manufacturing base, have so far
yielded no results after collapsing at one point early last year.
Mazda is one of the last main Japanese car companies with no manufacturing
base in Europe and last year the company blamed a 23 per cent fall in
overall exports in large part on slow demand in Europe. Seven of the eight
Japanese manufacturers in the west European market saw the volume of sales
fall in the first six months of this year.
Mazda did not comment on its proposed venture with Ford to manufacture
pick-up trucks in Thailand.
The companies started feasibility studies, to be completed next spring, of
the South-East Asian pick-up truck market, after which details of the
venture will be decided.
Production was set to start in 1998. Mazda has a joint venture production
line with Japanese and Thai companies in Bangkok.
Mazda said the Ford venture would run separately from the existing plant,
now working at full capacity.
Mazda holds 4 per cent of the Thai pick-up truck market, trailing Japanese
car makers Isuzu, which holds 31 per cent, and Toyota, at 27 per cent. Ford
only has a 0.2 per cent share.
Pick-up trucks account for 90 per cent of Thailand's commercial vehicle
market.
Among Japanese car makers Mazda is particularly in need of an alliance which
could help raise efficiency by making better use of its facilities and goes
some way towards furthering its global ambitions.
The company is suffering under the twin burdens of its under-utilised
state-of-the-art plant in which it invested heavily, and a large
distribution network for which it needs to supply a wide range of models.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940928

