FT943-12939

FT  22 JUL 94 / Tories tot up winners and losers after reshuffle


   By JAMES BLITZ and ROLAND RUDD


On Day One Mr John Major's reshuffle was hailed as a delicate balancing act
that could unite the Conservative party. But yesterday MPs from the left and
right wings were already using it to continue their long-running feud.
As ministers assembled in Downing Street for the first meeting of the new
cabinet, several Tory MPs complained that their wing of the party had not
won a clear victory in the reshuffle.
The small group of Euro-sceptic Tories were particularly disappointed that
none of their number had been given a government post at a time when the
prime minister is himself taking a more sceptical line on Europe.
The new party chairman, Mr Jeremy Hanley, a pro-European with liberal views,
was criticised by rightwingers for being 'soft' on public spending and
nuclear disarmament as well as on more personal grounds.
One rightwinger said: 'He may be very good at raising morale at
rubber-chicken Tory dinners but he does not have the sharp brain needed for
national TV appearances.'
The anti-federalist European Foundation - run by Mr Bill Cash, the
Euro-sceptic MP - was also critical of some of Mr Hanley's more pro-European
views. One said: 'We will be asking Mr Hanley whether he will accept and
reflect the sceptical party line over Europe.'
Mr Michael Portillo's appointment as employment secretary was the source of
concern to left-of-centre Tory MPs, with some arguing that the job would
give him a strong platform from which to pursue his rightwing agenda.
One prominent backbencher expressed concern that the prime minister had
given Mr Portillo one of the three main economic portfolios in the cabinet.
Another Tory leftwinger feared that there would be so little for Mr Portillo
to do at employment - a department whose future had been regarded by some as
under threat - that he would have more time to pursue his own rightwing
agenda.
Meanwhile, some cabinet ministers were working hard to introduce policy
changes in their new departments, un-encumbered by sniping from colleagues.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the new education secretary, appeared to be taking
particularly active steps to initiate a rapprochement with teaching unions
after two years of strained relations under Mr John Patten, her predecessor.
Officials at Mrs Shephard's department were telephoning a wide variety of
teaching organisations, including the National Association of Head Teachers,
to arrange meetings over the summer.
Secretaries of state at two other departments - social security and
transport - were urgently working out which responsibilities would be
assigned to junior ministers.
Dr Brian Mawhinney, the new transport secretary, was also considering how to
divide responsibilities in a department which has lost a ministerial post in
the reshuffle.
One of the three junior ministers is to take overall policy responsibility
for rail and road infrastructure, ports, airports and urban transport. A
second minister will take charge of services provided by railways, as well
as road haulage. The third will take control of environmental and safety
issues.
Mr William Hague, one of the social security department's two new ministers
of state, will be in charge of disablement issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940722

