FT941-3331

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (4):
'Evolutionary rather than revolutionary' - Multimedia in the office / Bill
Gates, founder and chairman of Microsoft, has poured scorn on most of the
multimedia trials in the US and Europe, reports Alan Cane. Microsoft is
meanwhile investing Dollars 100m a year in multimedia and aims to set the
agenda in the technology


   By ALAN CANE


Microsoft, the world's largest personal computer software company, is
harnessing its resources to a new goal: leadership in the design of
multimedia systems.
It is already investing over Dollars 100m a year - out of an research and
development budget of Dollars 473m - on the critical operating software. Mr
Bill Gates, the company's founder and chairman, said earlier this month that
the company had more people working on multimedia than any other software
group.
The implication is that the company wants to establish its software as the
global standard in multimedia just as its MS/DOS and Windows operating
systems are the world standard for IBM's design of personal computers.
There have been some early clues: Microsoft is already working with Sega,
the Japanese games console manufacturer, on an operating system for a new
machine, although Mr Gates says the project is small and divorced from
Microsoft's mainline operating systems development.
Some weeks ago, it bought Soft Image, a Canadian company which is market
leader in the esoteric discipline of software for moving picture animation.
The special effects in the film Jurassic Park are its work.
Furthermore, it has announced it intends to test its multimedia software in
collaboration with Tele-Communications Inc.,( TCI), the largest US cable
operator. A first fruit from the venture will be a new channel of
programming aimed at the consumer market for computer hardware, software and
accessories.
What Microsoft intends to provide is the operating software which will
manage the flow of information of all kinds on to high speed networks and
the software which will connect it to personal computer operating systems in
the home or office. It may also provide some of the applications - a
personal money management program, for example.
Mr Gates says 'there are a lot of companies developing software for the
'information highway,' just as there were a lot of companies involved in
operating systems at the beginning of the personal computer business.
Everybody who is doing multimedia software will have lots of pilots. Based
on the quality of those pilots, some will emerge stronger than others'.
Mr Gates said Microsoft would begin testing home multimedia services in the
US and Europe in 1995. He did not expect substantial returns on his
investment for five years, although he thought that there would be
substantive developments in multimedia in 1996-97 with entire cities
converted to interactive networks.
Multimedia and the 'information superhighway,' the high-capacity network
which will link vast repositories of information with modified television
sets or personal computers, are creating intense interest among computer
companies, telecommunications organisations and entertainment firms. They
are jockeying to take advantage of what are expected to be lucrative new
business opportunities.
Bill Gates, however, argues that most are taking the wrong approach - 'dead
ends' were how he described them - 'because the user-interface is so simple,
and because they do not tie in to personal computers in the right way, the
results will be disappointing. The revenue and the usage that comes out of
them will not justify the huge infrastructure costs.'
most of the trials to date have been designed to exploit domestic
multimedia, offering, typically, menus of video films for home viewing, Mr
Gates says that business will make use of the multimedia first.
'The first widespread use of these capabilities will be in business,' he
predicted. 'It will involve things like video-conferencing and collaboration
which would enable you to do your job without going into the office. Or it
could help companies find expertise to help them out without the expert
having to travel.
'The network itself could create electronic markets able to find a resource
of any type.'
'So, what in the past we have seen as electronic markets for currencies or
stocks will move into items of all types where chequeing references and
other kinds of working together can be done very effectively in electronic
form.'
'This will be done by extending the range of the personal computer. One of
the early symptoms will be very low cost video conferencing where a PC is
connected up to an ISDN (integrated services digital network). Within two or
three years this will be extremely widespread.
(Intel, which makes the microprocessors used in the majority of the world's
personal computers, earlier this year announced a low-cost set of components
capable of turning a personal computer into a video-conferencing terminal).
Mr Gates thought that multimedia in the office would be evolutionary rather
than revolutionary, driven by proven technologies like electronic mail -
'the benefits of electronic mail are unbelievable. We could not run
Microsoft without that capability.
'Today, some think of electronic mail and work group software and the
Internet (an open, publicly available computer network spanning several
continents) as separate things, but with some enhancements to Windows due in
less than a year, we will bring all these things together.'
Once the technology and benefits have been established in a business
environment, that would be the time to move into the home.
Mr Gates was critical of the narrow range of many of the current multimedia
trials: 'Some of the early pilots will be particularly embarrassing because
they will not have the breadth of applications,' he said.
'The network operators running these pilots are acting against their own
interests because they are going to prove exactly what they do not want to
prove - that there will not be enough revenue generated to justify building
the infrastructure.'
'Until you have a broad range of applications, you will never be able to
demonstrate the true potential of these systems. That is why instead of
doing crummy pilots in 1994, we will start our trials in 1995.'
He extended his criticism to Oracle, the US database specialist with which
British Telecommunications has formed an alliance to test interactive
entertainment services in the home. Oracle will provide the software and
systems integration: 'I'm sure Oracle will change its approach because it is
a terrible approach,' he said.
Bill Gates' comments have to be seen against a background of intense
competition in the nascent multimedia business. Furthermore, he has never
been slow to promote Microsoft's efforts and pick holes in the competition.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940316

