FT943-976

FT  27 SEP 94 / Interest rates expected to hold steady


   By GILLIAN TETT, Economics Staff


Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, and Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank
of England, met yesterday amid widespread expectations that base rates would
remain unchanged.
This follows their decision to raise rates to 5.75 per cent this month.
The meeting, part of their regular monthly monetary discussions, took place
as Mr Clarke prepared to fly to Malta for a meeting of the Commonwealth
countries' finance ministers today.
The decision to raise rates this month - the first such rate rise for five
years - surprised the markets, not least because many economists had
expected Mr Clarke to delay any rate rise until after the Conservative party
conference next month.
Most analysts believe that another rate rise is extremely unlikely for at
least another month.
The money markets are assuming that base rates will be almost 7 per cent by
the end of the year. But recent indications that the growth in consumer
spending and overall gross domestic product is likely to slow later this
year, coupled with the current low levels of inflation, have partly damped
speculation about another imminent rate rise.
These suspicions were yesterday boosted by the publication of the Treasury's
monthly monetary report. The report, which is little more than a compendium
of the latest economic statistics, noted that the 'monthly indicators were
mixed' in August, albeit consistent with steady economic recovery. The
report noted that retail sales had fallen in August, although the broader
trend remained upwards, while Confederation of British Industry output
expectations remained high and unemployment continued to fall.
Manufacturing stocks were slightly higher in the second quarter of the year
than previously estimated, the Central Statistical Office said yesterday.
The total level of stocks and work in progress in manufacturing rose in the
second quarter, by a seasonally adjusted Pounds 85m at 1990 prices, compared
with the first quarter. Stock levels in industry rose Pounds 320m in the
quarter, the fastest rise for a year.
Manufacturing investment grew at 3.7 per cent in the second quarter compared
with the first, down from the CSO's original estimates of 4.3 per cent
growth.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940927

