FT942-15777

FT  14 APR 94 / Open policy shows Bank's differences with Clarke: Minutes of
top-level meetings reveal wrangle over interest rate cuts


   By PETER NORMAN and PHILIP COGGAN


'To cut interest rates now . . . would run a risk of higher inflation
and some loss of credibility. (I) strongly advise against '
 - Eddie George at the February meeting
'(I see) little risk of an increase in inflation. A  1/2 per cent
reduction would be justified but (I see) the advantage in a  1/4 per
cent cut '
 - Kenneth Clarke. Rates fell to 5.25% from 5.5%
The chancellor and the governor of the Bank of England have had differences
in recent months over interest rate cuts and their assessments of the pace
of economic recovery, the government confirmed yesterday.
The disclosures came as another layer of secrecy was removed from monetary
policy-making when Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, published the minutes
of his monthly meetings with Mr Eddie George, the Bank's governor, in
January, February and early March.
Mr Clarke also announced that minutes of later meetings would be released
about six weeks after they have taken place.
The decision marks a further step towards greater openness, initiated after
the debacle of Britain's exit from the European exchange rate mechanism in
September 1992.
It brings the UK broadly into line with US practice, where the minutes of
the federal open market committee are released after some delay.
Publication of the next set of UK minutes, covering the meeting of March 30,
has been set for May 18.
Although at the January meeting Mr George recommended a 'bias towards
easing' in monetary policy, the minutes show a consistent pattern of the
chancellor being more willing to consider interest rate cuts than Mr George.
Contrary to some of his public pronouncements, Mr Clarke appears less
confident of the strength of recovery in the run-up to this month's tax
increases while Mr George sees 'upside risks' of higher inflation.
The minutes disclose that the February meeting, when the two finally agreed
to cut base rates to 5.25 per cent from 5.5 per cent, ran over two days and
not one as originally thought.
At that meeting Mr George 'strongly advised against' a rate cut, fearing
that it would run the risk of higher inflation and some loss of credibility.
Mr Clarke 'thought an immediate  1/2 per cent reduction would be justified'
but 'saw advantage in a  1/4 per cent cut'. The chancellor concluded that
rates should be reduced  1/4 per cent after Mr George said he 'could agree
to  1/4 per cent but not to  1/2 per cent'.
Yesterday, Mr George said that publishing the minutes would enable the
public to gain a better appreciation of the nuances behind the decisions and
the nature of any divergences. They showed that differences were 'very
rarely black and white'.
Mr Clarke said he had been attracted to more transparency in monetary policy
for some time. Publishing the minutes after a lag was a sensible move that
would enhance the credibility of the government's commitment to sustained
low inflation.
Publication of the minutes was recently recommended by the cross-party
Commons Treasury and civil service committee.
The chancellor's decision was welcomed yesterday by politicians from all
sides of the house. However, some City commentators argued that the
demonstration of past differences could cause problems in the future.
'While in principle, one applauds the decision, one suspects that at some
stage they are going to rue it,' said Mr John Shepperd, chief economist of
Yamaichi International (Europe).
'The risk with this whole process is, if we do get the situation where the
Bank is pushing for a rate increase and the Treasury is resisting, sterling
is going to be vulnerable because of the market's dislike of political
interference.'
Mr Don Smith of Midland Global Markets said: 'This has the potential to be a
market-moving document in the future. It is encouraging that the choice has
been between a cut in rates and keeping rates steady.'
Details of what the minutes reveal, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 23
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940414

