FT943-13303

FT  20 JUL 94 / Argyll shortens rolling contracts to two years: PosTel
campaign gathers pace as NAPF consults members on corporate governance


   By NEIL BUCKLEY, NORMA COHEN and DANIEL GREEN


Argyll group, the UK's third-largest food retailer, unexpectedly announced
at its annual meeting yesterday that it was cutting the length of its
directors' service contracts from three to two years.
The move follows a high-profile campaign by PosTel, the Pounds 25bn pension
fund, to limit the length of directors' 'rolling' contracts to two years.
Argyll said its move was an internal initiative, but admitted it had
consulted with its main shareholders.
However, PosTel suffered a setback to its campaign yesterday at the annual
meeting of Courtaulds, the chemicals company, where a three-year rolling
contract for chief executive Mr Sipko Huismans was approved, in spite of
PosTel voting against his re-election.
PosTel objects to the fact that executives with typical three-year rolling
contracts can demand three years' salary if forced to resign.
Mr Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of PosTel, said: 'We very much
welcome Argyll's move, but we will continue to press for rolling contracts
of two years or less. We will not go away.'
There were signs yesterday that PosTel's campaign could gather steam among
other institutional shareholders. The National Association of Pension Funds,
the UK's largest shareholder group, said it was considering modifying its
advice to members on three-year rolling contracts which are allowed under
the Cadbury Code on corporate governance.
Mr Geoff Lindey, chairman of the NAPF's investment committee, said it would
consult pension fund trustees on whether they wanted to wait for
modifications in the Cadbury Code due in 1995, or whether they should begin
voting against contracts with terms longer than two years. This would be in
line with the original NAPF advice to the Cadbury Committee.
Argyll's agm was dominated by shareholders' questions about directors' pay
and Sir Alistair Grant's 74 per cent increase in total remuneration to just
over Pounds 1m last year. Sir Alastair's rough ride came despite encouraging
trading figures. First-quarter pre-tax profit was 'usefully ahead', he said.
Argyll's shares gained 12 1/2 p to 251p.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940720

