FT941-3459

FT  16 MAR 94 / Arts: Farewell to a nice little era - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


So - as Private Eye's teenage poet EJ Thribb would say, farewell Minder,
Absolutely Fabulous and The Man From Auntie: your catchphrases were 'A nice
little earner', 'Be a good girl and make Mummy a capuccino' and 'My name's
Ben Elton good night'. Thursdays won't be the same without you. True, it
would be surprising if we had to wait long before Elton, now such a wholly
professional comedian, was back, and the BBC people claim there will be
another series of Absolutely Fabulous though they cannot say when. As for
Minder, it has run for 107 episodes, and, although they have cried wolf
before and then relented and given us more, it does seem as though one-off
'specials' are all we shall get in future.
The days when television schedules were carved in granite and changed with
the seasons just three times a year, seem to have gone for ever. Series that
run for even 13 episodes, never mind 26, are now rare. Switch on ITV next
Thursday at 8.30, the time when Minder has been going out, and you will see
the first in a half-hour series called Outside Edge, worked up by Richard
Harris from his splendid stage comedy about oddly matched couples in a
cricket club. So far there are just seven episodes.
Meanwhile, if you switch on ITV at 8.30 tomorrow night, you can make an
interesting comparison. Filling in for just one week is a Minder repeat, the
first episode ever made, called 'Gunfight At The OK Laundrette' (a spelling
which could explain the title of Hanif Kureishi's 1985 script My Beautiful
Laundrette). From the upbeat signature tune to the location filming of
London, from the central importance of the tough Terry McCann character to
the subordinate role played by George Cole's laughable Arthur Daley, this
shrieks of what it actually was: an effort by the Thames TV subsidiary
Euston Films to take the most notable aspects of The Sweeney and turn them
into a vehicle for Dennis Waterman who had played the rough diamond sergeant
in that police series. When you see in this first Minder episode armed
police leaping from a Transit van, filmed from overhead, there is no
mistaking the programme's antecedents.
As time went by Waterman's limitations and Cole's strengths became clear,
and the centre of gravity changed. Once McCann ceased to be the flywheel of
the series there was less need for violent action and Minder became more a
comedy of manners and character. Making the last episode mirror the first,
by having Arthur instead of his minder taken hostage, served to emphasise
the ways in which it had evolved. On the other hand Absolutely Fabulous has
rarely been anything more than a comedy of manners. There have been one or
two powerful inventions to relish, for instance the loathing of Patsy, the
sixties reprobate, for Saffron, the sanctimonious greenie teenie, a loathing
which cuts right across the grain of today's adulation of yoof and
environmental agonising.
However, that has been the exception, not the rule. The rule in Ab Fab has
been a type of comedy that relies upon dialogue in a way that makes it
almost as suitable for radio as for television. Interestingly, and somewhat
ironically, the comedy series starring Dawn French, Murder Most Horrid,
which now provides a comedy substitute on Thursday nights, is far more
concerned with dramatic 'business' and the physical aspects of comedy.
(Perhaps French and Saunders could get together and pool their varied
talents; what a partnership . . .) Unlike so many series, Murder Most Horrid
fully justifies the phrase 'situation comedy'.
In the opening episode French's attempt to hang herself was interrupted by
the arrival of a professional assassin intent upon killing a man in a
building across the street. She fits French with a walkie-talkie and sends
her across to do the dirty work, but security guards present problems.
Persuaded over the r/t to offer them 'blow jobs', a phrase that means
nothing to her, French bumps them off one at a time in the gents. Written by
Steven Moffat, this had the same sort of appeal as A Fish Called Wanda.
Remarkably episode 2, with a script by Paul Smith and Terry Kyan, proved
equally good and just as funny, with French appearing to be the unbearably
gossipy hostage of a bank robber but in the end turning all the tables.
The small spate of new series in what would once have been mid-season was
swollen on Sunday night by two in succession from BBC1: yet another comedy,
and yet another drama series about an oddball police detective. On the
evidence of the opening episodes, they do not look likely to challenge
French or Saunders for comedy laurels, or Minder for the qualipop drama
crown. The comedy, Honey For Tea, stars Felicity Kendal as a drop-dead
gorgeous American widow who has brought her hunk of a son, Jake, to
Cambridge to inveigle him into the college funded by his late father, while
wheedling herself a job in the bursar's office.
It is a good enough scenario, but Michael Aitkens, creator of the superb
Waiting For God, has mystifyingly opted for American and British stereotypes
which are two generations out of date. Silly ass Cambridge dons baffled by
Americanisms went out with mortar boards: today they take their cue from
David Lodge and earn fortunes on the international conference circuit. And
rich Americans, raised on a PBS channel diet of British costume drama, do
not split their sides at the notion of hunting anything as small as a fox.
As for Pie In The Sky, with Richard Griffiths as the reluctant detective who
wants to leave the police and run a restaurant but is being blackmailed into
staying (a thin variation on the old 'one last mission' routine) we shall
have to see. So far the foodie content looks more convincing than the police
element, but the important question will be whether this is written from the
character outwards, or is just another contrived formula: 'Let's put him in
a wheelchair] Oh no, Ironside. Well make him an antique dealer then - damn,
Lovejoy. How about a gourmet cook? Yes, that'll do . . .' Still, you never
know: Minder was produced to a formula with a purpose rather than bursting
from the breast of an impassioned writer, and that lasted 15 years.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940316

