FT941-4237

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (4): Residential sector leads -
Commercial property is generally still in the doldrums although there are
some exceptions / France


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


When the French finance ministry fled from its opulent offices in the Louvre
Museum in central Paris to its glacial new headquarters at Bercy, it also
abandoned a 19th century office building on a prime site on nearby rue
Saint-Honore which was immediately earmarked for sale.
Four years later, the building is still empty. The government has decided to
leave it vacant until the Paris property market picks up rather than risk
selling it now at a depressed price and thereby adding to the existing
pressures on commercial property prices in the city centre.
The government's decision might have been different had the building been
suitable for residential use. Commercial property is still in the doldrums
in France, but there have in recent months been signs of recovery in the
residential sphere. The French property business is now anxiously waiting to
see whether the pick-up in the residential market will spread to the
commercial sector, thereby marking the end of three gruelling years of
recession.
Almost every area of the French economy has been bruised by recession over
the past year, yet few sectors have been as badly affected as property. The
market peaked in 1990 when prices soared and the supply of new buildings,
particularly office space in the Golden Triangle and La Defense districts in
Paris and the Part-Dieu area of Lyon, increased dramatically.
But the market collapsed when the economy came under pressure in the early
1990s. The high rate of French real interest rates, which have for the past
few years been among the steepest in Europe, prompted companies to cut back
on investment and consumers to save, rather than spend, their money -
thereby depressing the demand for commercial and residential property alike.
The demand problem was aggravated in both sectors by the stream of new
developments coming on to the market. By the beginning of 1993, when France
moved into technical recession for the first time since the Gulf war, the
commercial market was further depressed by weak confidence and the
escalating rate of business failures. The rise in joblessness had a similar
effect on the residential sector.
Rentals and purchase prices tumbled in both sectors: although the pressure
was most acute in the commercial districts of Paris and Lyon that had fared
best during the boom years. A recent survey by Jones Lang Wootton estimated
that average annual rentals for prime office space in the Golden Triangle
had fallen from FFr4,500 a square metre in the final quarter of 1990 to
FFr3,500 by the end of 1993. In La Defense, prime rentals declined from
FFr3,100 to FFr2,050 over the same period. In Part-Dieu they fell from
FFr950 to FFr850.
However the French property scene has been spared the same rash of
receiverships which were such a painful feature of the US and UK industries
in the early 1990s. This is because of the defensive structure of the
market, whereby the big banks and insurance groups that dominate property
ownership, step in to support vulnerable companies and to prevent them from
collapsing and thus creating a vicious cycle of over-supply and declining
prices.
The French recession is now over, or so Mr Edouard Balladur, prime minister,
is anxiously attempting to assure the electorate.
The residential sector seems to be recovering first. Mr Andre Levy-Lang,
chairman of Paribas, recently said that the strains were easing in that
sector. Residential property prices are slowly starting to strengthen.
By contrast, commercial property is still generally depressed. There are
some exceptions, such as the retail sector which has perked up particularly
in the fashion sphere. The latest analysis of the French market by Knight
Frank & Rutley also detected an increase in activity in the office letting
sector as tenants have taken advantage of low rentals. But it also cautioned
that this pick-up had little impact on the supply situation as most tenants
had simply moved from one property to another of the same size.
Investment activity is still sluggish, according to Jones Lang Wootton, with
the big banks and insurers still refusing to adjust the book valuations of
their property holdings to reflect the reduced values of the mid-1990s.
However, it noted that some institutions were making more realistic
revaluations.
But in the meantime, the government does not seem to have enough confidence
to reopen and redevelop the old finance ministry building on rue
Saint-Honore - however optimistic Mr Balladur purports to be.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940311

