FT942-15992

FT  13 APR 94 / Howard forced to promise fresh curbs on video 'nasties'


   By IVOR OWEN and KEVIN BROWN


Faced with almost certain defeat in the Commons, Mr Michael Howard, the home
secretary, was yesterday forced to agree to introduce tighter restrictions
on the circulation of so-called video 'nasties' which glorify crime and
violence.
Breaches of the new law, to be included in the criminal justice and public
order bill, could involve fines up to Pounds 20,000 and/or a prison term of
up to two years.
Mr Howard was involved in a day of frenzied political bargaining as some 80
Conservative backbenchers joined about 170 other MPs in supporting a move by
Mr David Alton, the Liberal Democrat MP, to strengthen the existing law.
Mr Alton had sought to insert a new provision in the bill to prevent the
hiring for home viewing of videos that might cause psychological harm to a
child. Such a provision was originally dismissed as 'unworkable' by the home
secretary, but he was forced to change his ground as support for the demand
for tougher penalties spread across party lines in the Commons.
Sir Ivan Lawrence QC, the Tory MP who chairs the cross-party home affairs
committee, and other prominent government backbenchers joined Mr Tony Blair,
Labour's shadow home secretary, in signalling support for Mr Alton.
Mr Howard was left in no doubt by the government's business managers that he
would have to give ground. He then promised to introduce a new provision in
the bill incorporating the criteria advocated by Mr Alton.
As a result, the British Board of Film Classifications will be under a
statutory duty to take account of the likelihood of psychological harm being
caused to children when deciding which age groups should be given access to
videos for home viewing. The penalty for allowing access to videos outside
the permitted age category will be increased to include a fine of Pounds
5,000 and/or a term of imprisonment of up to six months.
Those who distribute 'pirate' videos unable to satisfy any of the age
categories will face fines of up to Pounds 20,000 and/or a prison sentence
of up to two years.
Mr Howard told the Commons he would consider whether the most violent videos
already on release could be reclassified.
His climbdown was approved by a group of senior ministers at Downing Street,
including Mr John Major, the prime minister, Mr Richard Ryder, chief whip,
Mr Tony Newton, leader of the Commons, and Lord Wakeham, chairman of the
cabinet home affairs committee.
Some Conservative MPs said Mr Howard had mishandled the video issue by
failing to appreciate the strength of feeling on the backbenches until it
was almost too late. However, others said his room for manoeuvre had been
limited by the unworkability of Mr Alton's proposals.
Labour will use the deal as a platform for a broad attack on Mr Howard
tomorrow.
Labour to treat local polls as referendum on Major Page 11
Ashdown returns from the shadows Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940413

