FT942-16172

FT  12 APR 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Seeking credibility for
quality standards


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Is the process of certifying companies with the UK's BS5750 quality
assurance standard and its international equivalent, ISO9000, losing its
credibility?
The European Commission is concerned that too many companies see
certification as an end in itself rather than a step towards improving
quality and is seeking support for the idea that improving competitiveness,
not awarding certificates, is what matters. Brussels' interest will be
welcomed by many smaller companies.
In little over a decade, BS5750 has been adopted by more than 28,000
companies. Over 30 bodies are now qualified to issue certificates, including
the British Standards Institution which drew up the standard. Countless
consultants help companies to prepare and maintain their certification. Yet
despite being designed to improve British industrial competitiveness, the
standard has become a nightmare for many small and medium-sized enterprises.
Critics say it is expensive, bureaucratic, and difficult to set up and
maintain. Some complain that while it was designed for manufacturers, the
standard lacks relevance for many smaller companies which are providers of
services.
This said, there are many companies that have adopted the standards and
successfully used the certification structure as part of a quality
improvement programme. For them certification is a step towards Total
Quality Management, the approach that focuses all an organisation's efforts
on what the customer wants.
But the critics say there are many other companies which have been peddled
an inappropriate standard by self-interested consultants and certification
bodies. Others, they say, have bought into certification solely to avoid
being dropped from a supplier's preferred list or so they can claim to be
'quality' companies for marketing purposes.
Jacques McMillan, head of the Commission unit in Directorate-General 111 in
charge of quality policy and certification, says: 'There are many
enterprises going bust where the last flag as they go under is their
certificate. I am trying to put it back in perspective so those companies
that actually need it should go for it and those that don't shouldn't. It
should not be thrust down the throats of small and medium-sized companies.'
These forthright views appear to have been sanitised in the paper called
Elements of Community Quality Policy, now circulating member states. But
McMillan hopes ministers late this year will look at the issue again in the
context of examining ways to increase Europe's competitiveness.
The Commission's move has received a guarded welcome from the Brussels-based
European Foundation for Quality Management, set up six years ago by 14
captains of European industry, including Sir Iain Vallance, chairman of BT.
'I welcome the Commission coming out with the beginnings of a quality
strategy for Europe,' said John King, EFQM director-general.
'But the major challenge is getting the message to the senior management of
European businesses that they have to be committed to quality policies and
not simply satisfied with product certification as represented by BS5750 and
ISO9000,' he said.
Critics say that quality assurance standards often do little more than
document existing procedures against which the company is subsequently
checked. A uniformity of process is achieved, but one that might be leading
to uniformly poor quality products. Only if management decides to focus on
quality issues is there any chance they will improve.
Certification has been abused - or mistrusted - by some larger companies as
well. McMillan says there are cases where large manufacturers are demanding
certification from suppliers but continue to insist on doing their own
quality audits, too.
Some companies use certification as an arbitrary way of cutting down their
supplier lists. This also undermines the value of the certificates awarded
to companies that are genuinely seeking to improve their competitiveness
through better quality.
Some US companies that have reluctantly adopted the ISO9000 standard have
done so because they feel that without certification they will be barred
entry to European Union markets.
Faced with uncertainty about who should seek certification, some companies
may have fallen prey to certification salesmen. 'They (companies) are not
being helped by the certification environment,' says McMillan.
'It is a lucrative environment for consultants and certifiers. If there is
no coherent policy it is difficult for some to know what to do because they
are hearing so many different voices.'
In the UK there is some hope of a helping hand through the maze. The BSI
will this week unveil a scheme it says will make BS5750 registration simpler
and cheaper.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940412

