FT942-12360

FT  29 APR 94 / Markets Report: Dollar under pressure


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The dollar looked very precarious on foreign exchanges yesterday, as the
market responded negatively to the release of mixed economic data, writes
Philip Gawith.
Advance first quarter US GDP figures produced the unfavourable combination
of lower than expected growth and higher than expected inflation.
The dollar finished in London at DM1.6697 against the D-Mark from DM1.6727
on Wednesday. It was also very weak against the yen, closing at Y101.885
from Y102.650.
The US currency was not helped by technical analysts calling a major
downward trend.
Elsewhere, the D-Mark lost ground in Europe on profit taking after the
German currency's recent bout of strength. The French and Dutch central
banks both trimmed 10 basis points off short term lending rates.
Sterling had a fairly stable day, staying above Dollars 1.50 against the
dollar - it closed at Dollars 1.5073 - but closing lower against the D-Mark
at DM2.5167 from DM2.52. The sterling index finished at 80.4 from 80.5 on
Wednesday.
There was a suspicion before the release of the US data that the market
would put a negative gloss on it, no matter what. In the event, it did not
require much effort.
On the one hand, the 2.6 per cent GDP growth figure compared with a market
forecast of 3.1 per cent. On the other, the Q1 GDP price deflator was 2.6
per cent, double the last figure and higher than the 2.3 per cent forecast.
Mr Brian Hilliard, senior international economist at SGST, commented: 'A
downward surprise on growth was not accompanied by a similar downward move
on inflation.'
Although the inflation figure might be seen as justifying higher interest
rates, the dollar was sold off, in tandem with weaker US debt and equity
markets. 'People are generally bearish about US financial instruments,' said
Mr Hilliard. Although he retains a medium term forecast of DM1.80 for the
dollar, he says 'the risk is all on the downside'.
Chartists are also predicting that the dollar will fall. Mr Brian Marber, an
independent technical analyst, said yesterday that it had breached key
technical resistance levels. 'The major trend is down and I am talking big
numbers,' said Mr Marber. He said this forecast would stand unless the
dollar rose again above DM1.72, which he is not predicting.
Mr Gerard Lyons, chief economist at DKB International, said the latest data
would require the Fed to keep policy on hold for now. 'It will not be able
to raise rates further against the backdrop of a clear slowdown in the
economy.'
The yen rose further with analysts predicting that the market would try and
test whether, and at what level, the Fed would intervene to defend the
dollar.
The last time the Fed supported the dollar was at Y101.30 in August last
year.
Mr Steve Barrow, economist at Chemical Bank, said the market was cautious
about short dollar positions. The last two times the dollar has fallen to
this level - August and February - it has bounced back quite sharply. He
predicted that the Fed would come in and intervene before the dollar fell to
Y100.
Mr Lyons argues that the Dollars /yen rate is more likely to be determined
by what the US says and does than by Japan. Evidence of the Japanese
government's concern about the level of thge yen came from Mr Eijiro Hata,
newly appointed minister for international trade and industry. He said Japan
needed to tackle the yen with other countries.
As expected, the Bundesbank council left the Lombard and Discount rates
unchanged at 6.5 per cent and 5 per cent respectively. The D-Mark was
slightly weaker, with dealers reporting profit-taking, and European
currencies gaining against the D-Mark on the back of dollar sales.
On the day that businessman Mr Silvio Berlusconi was asked to form Italy's
new government, the Italian lira firmed to close at L958.3 against the
D-Mark from L961.5.
The French franc also closed higher, at FFr3.429 from FFr3.434, after the
Bank of France announced it was trimming the intervention rate by ten basis
points to 5.7 per cent. The guilder was barely changed after the Dutch
central bank cut its special advances rate to 5.3 per cent from 5.4 per
cent.
German call money rates eased to 5.60/5.70 per cent after rising towards 6
per cent on Wednesday. Traders said the liquidity shortage had not been as
severe as anticipated.
Trade in the euromark futures was fairly brisk, but there was little change
in the five shortest contracts. The June contract settled one basis point
lower at 94.79.
Volumes in the short sterling futures were more modest and the June contract
closed unchanged at 94.61.
In the money market, the Bank of England provided late assistance of Pounds
365m after forecasting a Pounds 550m shortage. Earlier the bank had
purchased bills totalling Pounds 33m.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940429

