FT942-15741

FT  14 APR 94 / Record on rights clouds Salvadorean election


   By EDWARD ORLEBAR


   SAN SALVADOR


It was not long ago that many Salvadoreans felt the only way to settle
opposing views was to shoot each other. In this light, they handled their
differences with relative amity in the first round of the general election
on March 20.
But evidence of widespread voting irregularities, unchecked by the Supreme
Electoral Tribunal, have raised questions about whether the vote has
advanced the peace process, brokered by the UN, which began when the
government and guerrillas signed accords in January 1992 to end a 12-year
civil war.
'I used to give them the benefit of the doubt, but there comes a time when
you have to say it is bad faith,' says Dr David Browning, official UK
observer, about the tribunal, which is controlled by the right-wing
governing Arena party.
Mr Armando Calderon Sol, Arena presidential candidate, who failed by about
10,000 votes to secure the majority of the first-round vote, is expected to
win the run-off on April 24 against Mr Ruben Zamora, who heads a left-wing
coalition that includes former guerrillas of the Farabundo Mart National
Liberation Front.
The FMLN won almost a quarter of the vote in the elections, and its
politicians have found a space to operate within a political system which
excluded the left and centre-left from participation for more than 60 years.
Some senior FMLN officials have been murdered over the last year but El
Salvador's right-wing political establishment and economic elite has begun
to show some signs of tolerance towards its opponents.
But critics say reconciliation is far from complete. Human rights abuses,
particularly against the left, are still frequent and many of the social
causes that led to the war have yet to be redressed. In rural areas about 75
per cent of demobilised combatants from both sides have not been granted
land, and re-integration programmes have failed to meet targets. There is
also a long way to go on reform of the corrupt judicial system.
Deployment of a new civilian-run police force to take the place of the
widely loathed police forces under military control - a central achievement
of the peace agreement - is behind schedule and has been starved of funding.
In violation of the accords, the Arena government has drafted into the new
force members of the discredited National Police, without vetting.
According to a report by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm
of the US Congress, in February the Salvadorean government still needed
almost Dollars 700m (Pounds 474m) to fulfil its obligations under the peace
accords.
The diminishing international interest may result in a reduction in aid over
the next few years, after three years of considerable foreign assistance and
substantial loans from international financial institutions within the
framework of a stand-by agreement with the International Monetary Fund.
For the US, which poured Dollars 6bn of mostly military aid into El Salvador
during the war, the country is now less important. US aid was reduced by 60
per cent, from Dollars 230m in 1993 to Dollars 94m in 1994.
The future government, almost certainly to be headed by Mr Calderon Sol, may
show even less enthusiasm for fully implementing the peace accords than the
current one.
Mr Calderon Sol's commitment to the accords remains open to question. He
does not appear to head a defined current within the party, and it is
believed he will take the line of the party bosses. Some observers fear that
Arena leaders, whose party was founded in 1981, in part to counter attempts
to reduce the political influence and economic domination of a small elite,
has little interest in implementing the reforms contained in the accords.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940414

