FT942-12322

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (26): Competition
may not lead to lower interest rates - Credit cards / Blame admin and fraud,
says the industry / High Street Investment


   By PHILIP COGGAN


Competition in the credit-card market is intensifying. The launch of cards
by General Motors and Ford has created a new means for issuers to attract
cardholders.
Some holders may nevertheless be cynical about whether the market is truly
competitive. Even though base rates have dropped to 5.25 per cent, many
cards still charge an annualised rate above 20 per cent.
However, the card industry points out that the general level of interest
rates is not the main determinant of credit card charges. According to
Elizabeth Phillips, of the Credit Card Research Group, only about 40 per
cent of the interest charged by credit card companies relates to their cost
of funding. The rest relates to administrative costs and fraud.
Nevertheless, the rates charged by the industry did appear a touch uniform
until Save & Prosper broke ranks by introducing a lower rate card last
September. Interest on its Visa and Mastercard is just 0.95 per cent a
month, an APR of 13.9 per cent, compared with annual rates of 23.9 per cent
on cards such NatWest's Primary Visa.
For those who religiously pay off their balance in full each month, the most
important factor is likely to be the annual fee. Lloyds was the first issuer
to impose a fee, in 1990; since when most cards have followed suit, though a
few still hold out against the trend. Some issuers offer a conditional
'no-fee' deal. Others rebate the annual fee if you spend more than a minimum
sum in a year.
The industry norm is an annual fee of Pounds 10-Pounds 12, which still,
according to the industry, is insufficient to cover the costs of servicing a
card account. Those who pay interest, therefore, are still subsidising those
who pay off their bills. And since about three-quarters of cardholders
either never pay interest, or pay it only once or twice a year, this is
another reason why annualised percentage rates are a lot higher than base
rates.
A shift in the balance of power towards the interest-payer is unlikely. The
introduction of annual fees has already led to a reduction in the number of
cards in issue, according to the Credit Card Research Group, and a sharp
rise in annual fees would probably see the trend continue.
Since credit-card spending is still rising, the conclusion is that people
have consolidated their cards, to avoid paying too many annual fees. But the
proportion of adults holding credit cards has also fallen, from a peak of 34
per cent in 1989 to 31 per cent in 1993, according to a study by the
Financial Research Survey and NOP. This may indicate that the bad-debt
problems of the early 1990s have persuaded some consumers to give up their
cards, and may have caused issuers to be more selective when recruiting
holders.
The Ford and GM promotions suggest that the main thrust of future
competition in the credit card market may come from the perks on offer from
issuers. Using a tactic which has already been successful in the US, the
Ford and GM cards offer a points system, which earns the customer a discount
on the price of a new vehicle. The more you spend, the greater the discount
 -although you have to be a big spender to get the full benefit of the
promotion. Earning a Pounds 2,500 discount on a new Vauxhall requires the
holder to spend Pounds 50,000 on the card over five years.
The GM and Ford promotions may merely indicate the level of competition in
the auto market; nevertheless, cards linked to non-financial products may be
the wave of the future. Already the Sunday Times has started to offering its
own Visa card, with an APR of 18.9 per cent. The card offers discounts on a
range of products, including wine.
The probable strategy, rather like the air-miles offer from airlines, is
that a card 'locks in' the consumer to a particular product. Furthermore, as
retailers such as Marks and Spencer have found, a brand-name card allows a
company to accumulate a valuable database on its customers. It would not be
surprising if other groups, such as telecom companies, moved into the
market.
Will all this be of benefit to the consumer? Competition normally does
result in lower prices, though this may well arrive in the form of discounts
off other goods, rather than lower interest rates.
Golden privileges don't come cheap
With the exception of the Co-Op Bank's Visa Gold Card, which is free if used
a minimum of 10 times a year, gold cards do not come cheap. Cardholders pay
an annual fee of between Pounds 25 and Pounds 120 for the privilege.
What are they getting for their money, apart from a feeling of superiority
at the department store counter? Gold cards offer a number of benefits,
including:
Cheap overdrafts. Although you need to be better off to obtain a gold card
(the minimum annual salary is Pounds 20,000), a low-rate loan is the main
incentive. Midland Bank (with its gold Mastercard), Royal Bank of Scotland
(with a gold American Express Card) and the Bank of Scotland (with a gold
Premier card) all charge 2.5 per cent above their base rate. At the time of
writing, that would imply an interest rate of 7.75 per cent.
However, the overdraft limit varies sharply between the three. At Midland,
the limit is just Pounds 2,500; at the Royal Bank of Scotland, Pounds
10,000; and at the Bank of Scotland, Pounds 15,000.
Spending limits. This depends on whether the card is a 'charge card' (in
which case the balance has to be paid off in full every month) or a normal
credit card. Charge cards have no pre-set spending limit, which can be very
handy when paying for flights or hotel bills on foreign trips. On the other
hand, this facility is also available with a plain American Express card.
The conventional credit cards have fairly high minima (Pounds 3,000 with the
Co-Op and Midland's Gold Visa, Pounds 2,500 with Lloyds Bank's Gold
Mastercard).
Cash withdrawals. Gold cards normally allow holders to withdraw substantial
amounts of cash, at home and abroad, but at the expense of a fee, usually of
1.5 to 2 per cent a transaction. Midland's gold Visa, for example, allows
holders to withdraw up to Pounds 500 a day.
Travel. Most cards offer free insurance for travellers, with impressive
levels of cover ranging up to Pounds 250,000 at the Bank of Scotland.
However, this insurance usually covers only death or injury.
Many cards also offer a travel service, and guaranteed hotel reservations,
so that even if you arrive late, your room is not transferred to another
guest.
Extra incentives. Most gold cards offer roughly the same type of services,
so some card issuers have produced enticing extras. to try to differentiate
their product. With Midland's gold Mastercard, for example, you get access
to a priority share-dealing service. With the American Express Gold
Card,there is an 'entertainment service', which offers tickets to special
events.
Lloyds Bank's gold Mastercard offers a discount off on RAC membership. The
Coutts gold card, and the NatWest gold Mastercard offer you air miles
points.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

940429

