FT943-12811

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Kmart to sell 21.5% holding in
Coles Myer


   By BRUCE JACQUES


Kmart, the troubled US discount store group, yesterday performed an abrupt
about-turn by announcing that it was selling its 21.5 per cent in Coles
Myer, the Australian retailer, for ADollars 1.26bn (USDollars 924m).
Last month, Kmart attempted to dampen speculation that it may sell the stake
by saying that this was 'incorrect and unfounded'.
The speculation was given fresh impetus when angry Kmart shareholders,
frustrated at the company's poor financial performance, threw out its plans
to raise money by selling off minority stakes in its four specialty
retailing subsidiaries in the US.
Kmart needed the plan to go ahead because the proceeds were supposed to help
pay for the modernisation of its core US discount store operations. So when
the plan was voted down, attention switched back to the Coles Myers stake as
a potential source of capital.
The speculation had been depressing the Coles share price, and Kmart
suggested yesterday that Coles' directors had decided to take matters into
their own hands.
Mr Joseph E Antonini, Kmart chairman, said Kmart's board had analysed
various alternatives for the investment. 'Kmart has decided to be responsive
to the approach from Coles Myer and give them the opportunity to complete
this transaction which we believe is in the interest of both companies,' he
said.
Kmart said later the deal had no bearing on the issue of what would happen
to Kmart's specialty retailing operations. Shareholders want Kmart to sell
them outright to concentrate on putting its ailing discount stores to
rights. Kmart's board has yet to reach a decision.
The sale of the Coles stake will be undertaken in two parts, both
conditional. First, Coles plans to directly buy back, then cancel, just
under 10 per cent of its own capital at ADollars 4.55 a share, costing
ADollars 587m.
Second, Coles has undertaken to try to find a purchaser for the remaining
11.45 per cent Kmart stake through Barclays de Zoete Wedd Australia, the
investment bank, also at ADollars 4.55 a share, valuing the parcel at
ADollars 672m.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940722

