FT942-15530

FT  14 APR 94 / Government Bonds: US sector weakens despite soft retail
sales data


   By FRANK MCGURTY and SARA WEBB


   NEW YORK, LONDON


After a short-lived rally, US Treasury prices weakened yesterday afternoon
as traders looked ahead to Friday, when economic data which could lead to a
further tightening of monetary policy is due.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  17/32 lower
at 87 27/32 , with the yield rising to 7.25 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was down  1/32 at 99 15/32 , to yield 5.396 per cent.
The Commerce Department gave the market an early lift. It reported retail
sales last month up 0.4 per cent, well below the consensus forecast of 1 per
cent. But the news was not enough to sweep aside a sense of caution. Prices
could only sustain a modest move higher.
Meanwhile, March consumer price data matched expectations, and failed to
provide support.
The CPI came in at 0.3 per cent, with and without the volatile food and
energy components factored into the data.
But traders were less concerned with the CPI, which reflects current prices,
than with Friday's figures on industrial production and factory utilisation,
which suggest future inflationary trends.
With many anticipating bad news, a flurry of selling by dealers forced
prices into retreat.
Speculation that the data would provide sufficient cause for the Federal
Reserve to lift short-term interest rates once again accelerated the
sell-off, but bonds managed to climb from their lows in late trading.
The Bundesbank pared another three basis points off its repo rate yesterday,
and left the European government bond markets speculating as to whether the
German central bank would announce cuts in its key interest rates at today's
council meeting.
Most European bond markets opened on a firm note but then drifted off in the
course of the day on profit-taking.
In the German government bonds market, the Liffe bund futures contract
opened at 97.29 and picked up to reach a high of 97.36 ahead of the repo
announcement.
The Bundesbank accepted bids amounting to DM55.1bn in 13-day securities
repurchase agreements at 5.70 per cent and above. But the market then
drifted lower and reached a low of 96.87 before ending the day at 96.89.
The Bundesbank is due to hold a press conference today to release its
results. Few analysts or dealers expect the central bank to lower its
discount rate, although some feel there is a chance that the Lombard rate -
now at 6.75 per cent - may receive a 'cosmetic cut' of 25 to 50 basis
points.
Given that recent economic data - including yesterday's German retail sales
figures for February, which showed better than expected growth of 1 per cent
from the previous month - have suggested that the German economy is showing
signs of picking up, 'the urgency to cut interest rates no longer exists,'
says Mr Kit Juckes, economist at S. G. Warburg Securities.
However, he pointed out that the Bundesbank's monthly report, released
yesterday, suggested that the German bank is placing more emphasis on growth
and inflation figures, while appearing to play down the M3 figures.
The release of minutes from the regular monthly meetings between the
governor of the Bank of England and the chancellor of the exchequer provided
the highlight of the day for UK government bonds, giving hope of a further
cut in the base rate, dealers said.
The short sterling contract and short-dated gilts took heart from news that
the chancellor had favoured a bigger cut in UK interest rates than the
governor at the February meeting. The news raised hopes of a further base
rate cut, provided inflation stays under control. But while the news
provided a mild boost for the short end of the market, the rise proved quite
short-lived.
The Liffe long gilt future contract fell from a high of 108.03 to a low of
107.06 before closing at 107.13.
Japanese government bonds staged a rally in the futures market shortly
before the close after spending much of the day flat or slightly weaker.
Bond prices dipped on news that the Nikkei stock index had risen back above
20,000 for the first time in over a week. But dealers said a burst of
short-covering in the futures market late in the session, which appeared to
be one big player, pushed up prices. The June futures contract, which opened
at 111.29, rallied to close at the high of 111.70.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940414

