FT943-848

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Company News: Air France under pressure to
reduce stake in Sabena


   By EMMA TUCKER and JOHN RIDDING


   BRUSSELS, PARIS


Sabena is seeking to pressure Air France into reducing or selling its
minority stake in the Belgian state-owned carrier to enable the formation of
partnerships with other interested airlines.
Sabena confirmed yesterday that Delta, American Airlines, Swissair and KLM
had expressed an interest in buying a share of the company. Under an
alliance formed in 1992, Air France owns two thirds of Finacta, a Belgian
holding company which has a 37.5 per cent stake in Sabena.
Mr Elio di Rupo, the Belgian transport and communications minister, and Mr
Pierre Godfroid, president of Sabena, are examining the findings of a report
assessing the relationship between the two airlines. They are unlikely to
comment on the report, carried out by Lazard Freres, the French bank, before
the middle of next month.
'It is clear that we can't stand still in this period of rapid transition of
the aviation world,' Sabena said yesterday. 'If we do, we will lose terrain
to our competitors.'
Air France said that it had not yet received the report from Lazard and that
it did not intend to sell its stake in the Belgian airline. 'We are in
Sabena and we will stay there,' the French state-owned carrier stated.
Air France officials said that they had performed their duty as a
shareholder in Sabena, completing the fourth and final BFr1bn (Dollars 31m)
payment for its investment in July. The payment was the subject of
uncertainty given the financial constraints facing Air France, which
suffered losses of FFr8.48bn (Dollars 1.6bn) last year.
The French airline said that the report commissioned from Lazard is aimed at
presenting an analysis of the performance and prospects of the alliance. The
partnership has brought co-operation in several areas, including the
co-ordination of flights between Paris and Brussels, shared agencies in some
cities and co-operation on air miles schemes.
Industry observers said that Sabena was seeking to forge new partnerships in
an attempt to strengthen its international operations. Both Sabena and
Swissair have code-sharing agreements with Delta under which they link their
route networks on booking systems. The airlines plan a joint service between
Chicago and Brussels from November and co-operation in areas such as cargo
and passenger handling. Analysts believe the agreements could herald a
deeper strategic partnership between the airlines.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940927

