FT942-12785

FT  28 APR 94 / Reynolds calls for peace push


   By TIM COONE and DAVID OWEN


The British and Irish governments must push the Northern Ireland peace
process forward on a bilateral basis in the absence of political
developments in the province, Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister,
said yesterday.
Addressing backbenchers from the British and Irish parliaments at a meeting
of the interparliamentary body in Dublin, Mr Reynolds said he remained
hopeful that last December's joint declaration would produce results - but
added that he was disappointed with progress to date.
There had been 'little new evidence' that the two communities in the
province were likely to reach agreement if 'left to themselves'. The two
governments would have to play a role 'in encouraging, and maybe to some
degree formulating an outline of an agreement between them', he said. The
joint declaration made both governments 'effectively persuaders for an
agreement'.
Earlier this month Mr Reynolds revealed that the two governments had begun
drafting a 'framework document' around which a future political settlement
might be built.
But in his clearest acknowledgement yet that the peace process has in effect
stalled, Mr Reynolds cast doubt on whether Sinn Fein, the political wing of
the IRA, has the coherence and unity to deliver on its stated desire for a
peace deal, and called for a more 'enlightened' leadership from the unionist
parties.
He added that both governments 'would be anxious and willing to break the
present impasse' if Sinn Fein made clear what issues it still wanted
clarified.
His remarks came as Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary,
urged Sinn Fein to specify in what respects they believed the document to be
unclear.
The government had had to conclude that what 'clarification' really meant
was 'renegotiation', Sir Patrick said. 'We are not getting into that,' he
said. 'Nor are the Irish government.'
Sir Patrick said that the declaration's non-partisan approach meant nobody
needed to fear that their position would be 'ignored or excluded'. The
ending of violence in Northern Ireland was 'a prize that threatens no one'.
He added: 'It should relegate confrontation to the past.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940428

