FT943-989

FT  27 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Pakistan's energy sector attracts Dollars
4bn


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


   ISLAMABAD


Pakistan's efforts to attract investments in power generation and in oil and
gas exploration have borne fruit in the form of contracts with US companies
worth about Dollars 4bn. Ms Benazir Bhutto, the prime minister, described
the contracts as 'a landmark in the history of private sector investment' in
Pakistan.
The bulk of the new contracts involve power generation projects backed by US
businesses, including AES Corporation, Enron, GE Capital and Tenaska.
Occidental and Union Texas are involved in oil exploration contracts worth
Dollars 275m and many officials hope that new oil finds will help the
country's power generation efforts by providing lower cost fuel.
Domestic businesses have suffered production losses due to disrupted power
supplies. The rains that followed a long dry spell restored the country's
hydro-generation capacity and narrowed the gap between demand and supply.
However, the relief may be only temporary.
Many transmission lines are in a state of disrepair and the government
estimates that up to 33 per cent of the power generated in Karachi,
Pakistan's largest city, is lost in breakdowns, leakages and power thefts.
In the rest of the country, up to 23 per cent of generated power is lost in
similar ways.
An energy policy announced this summer has set the tone for fresh
investments. The government has eliminated much red tape by replacing a
series of official procedures with a one window set-up in Islamabad.
Moreover, investors have been assured of a bulk tariff rate of 6.5 cents per
kilowatt hour, considered to be one of the more attractive rates among
developing countries.
The government's private power board estimates that up to Dollars 5bn worth
of investments could come in power generation, in addition to the American
commitments, during the next three years.
However, for some investors, the signing of the deals may just be the
beginning of a difficult process involving financing. The financial package
requires them to put up a 20-30 per cent equity, while raising the rest in
loans or other financing. Senior Pakistani officials concede privately that
some of the sponsors may not be able to put together their financial
packages, especially as international demands for financing remain high.
Concerns have also been raised over the delay on Pakistan's plans to float
its first sovereign Eurobond offer worth Dollars 200m. It was originally
scheduled to take place this month but was postponed due to recent
turbulence on international bond markets.
Pakistani officials hope that the US commitments have opened the most
important window to attract fresh investments, and that other foreign
investors may follow.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940927

