FT942-14921

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (1): Relentless quest to be in the first
league - Income per head in Singapore has already topped that of some
industrialised countries - but the city-state's leaders are not complacent
about the future


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


Singapore's remarkable development represents a challenge to western
free-market recipes for success.
The government has a dominant role in planning the island's development. It
ensures that all the conditions are in place for the island to meet its
economic goals - ranging from building physical infrastructure, to the
maintenance of social order, to obtaining the right number of graduates in
engineering or computer science.
The public sector is extensive. According to a study by the US embassy in
Singapore, 'government-linked companies straddle almost every industrial
sector, from arms-making to food processing, from steel to semiconductors,
and from robot leasing to banking and property development.'
Under its privatisation policy, the government has been careful to maintain
control - last year, for example, it sold only 7.3 per cent of Singapore
Telecom to the public. With government-linked companies and foreign
manufacturers accounting for the bulk of industrial production, the domestic
private sector has a relatively low profile.
The combination of an open trading economy, government-led development and
social stability remains appealing to foreign investors even though the cost
of operating in Singapore
has risen. Last year, new commitments to manufacturing investment from
foreign companies totalled SDollars 3.1bn, or more than SDollars 1,000 per
head of Singapore's 3m population.
Singapore's leaders, their confidence boosted by an unexpected acceleration
of economic growth to almost 10 per cent last year, are becoming more
outspoken in defending the government's prominent role in the economy and in
the management of citizens' lives.
Mr Richard Hu, the veteran finance minister, chose to re-state some of the
government's essential philosophy in his budget speech at the end of
February - delivered against a background of not only rapid growth but also
fiscal surplus, low inflation and rising productivity.
High taxes to finance heavy government subsidies would discourage hard work
and enterprise, he said. But market solutions carried to the extreme 'are
harsh on the less able who become the poor and low-income earners.' He said:
'The government cannot adopt a totally laisser faire approach, and blindly
hope that market forces will make everything work out in the end.'
Mr Hu said the government sought to ensure racial integration in housing
estates - the population is 75 per cent ethnic Chinese; 14 per cent Malay;
and 8 per cent Indian - because 'left to natural forces, people will find it
more comfortable to gravitate towards the like-minded.'
The result of such choices would be 'racial and religious enclaves, a sure
formula for social strife as we have seen in other parts of the world.'
Similarly in education, 'while the choice of courses ultimately depends on
individual applicants, we cannot passively accept these individual choices
as the final word.' Too many doctors and lawyers would mean too few
engineers and computer scientists. 'The viability of our economy will be at
risk.'
Singaporeans justify this unusually interventionist approach through
reference to the country's perpetual vulnerability as a small island, wide
open to the cycles of the world economy, with no resources except its own
people.
They have been well schooled in this approach by Mr Lee Kuan Yew, who led
the country through its reluctant independence from Malaysia in 1965 until
1990 and remains, with the title of senior minister, a powerful force in the
cabinet of Mr Goh Chok Tong, the prime minister.
The unusual lengths to which the Singapore government goes to ensure social
order have been highlighted by last month's sentencing of Mr Michael Fay, an
18-year-old American convicted of vandalism, to six strokes of the rotan, a
heavy cane which leaves permanent scars.
The sentence provoked violent condemnation from some quarters in the US  -
even President Clinton said the punishment 'seems extreme' - although it
also received support from Americans who, writing to newspapers and
congressmen, said violence and vandalism in the US should be treated in
similar fashion.
'We believe that tough laws, enforced strictly and impartially, keep
Singapore not only clean but, more important, safe and crime-free,' said
Singapore's ambassador to the US.
Singapore's leaders insist that laws and penalties seen as tough in the west
are not controversial among Singaporeans. However, some of Singapore's elite
and leaders of the business community may be dismayed at the guilty verdict
pronounced last month on three economists and two journalists for breaches
of the Official Secrets Act. The case stemmed from premature publication of
the government's preliminary estimate of economic growth for the second
quarter of 1992.
The trial suggested that there may be growing conflict between the
government's desire to control information and its ambitious goal of
becoming a centre for information technology.
There is, however, little evidence that authoritarian government is
responsible for loss of popular support for the People's Action Party, which
has ruled Singapore since 1959. Nevertheless, the PAP, which holds virtually
all the seats in parliament, has suffered significant set-backs in elections
over the past few years.
The PAP is under no immediate threat. Opposition politicians find it
difficult to make headway against the PAP's formidable propaganda and legal
machine. The PAP has been strengthened by recent bickering within opposition
parties. However, PAP strategists are bound to be concerned at the level of
anti-government votes in most elections.
Prof Chan Heng Chee, an expert on the PAP and former ambassador to the
United Nations, believes economic development, affluence and education have
brought increased demand from Singaporeans for 'more political space,
participatory government, open government, and a step back from an
over-regulated society.'
Although they do not reject PAP government, Singaporeans 'do want to see
more opposition members in parliament,' she wrote in a paper last year. Prof
Chan says the PAP leadership understands it must moderate its style of
government. She also believes that for most Singaporeans, the main causes of
dissatisfaction are economic - such as the rising cost of living.
With costs rising and aspirations high - income per head has already topped
that of some industrialised countries - the city-state's leaders are not
complacent. They are relentlessly pursuing their goal of pushing the country
into the 'First League'.
Part of this drive is an attempt to spread Singapore's wings overseas. In a
country so dominated by the government, it is ironic to find leaders
frustrated with the lack of entrepreneurial spirit among businessmen. Mr Lee
and Mr Goh are urging them to be more venturesome in investing abroad.
The government's 'external wing' policy springs from the realisation that
Singapore's rapidly accumulating wealth can only be put to limited use at
home. At the same time, other Asian countries with lower labour costs,
especially China, are competing ever more fiercely for manufacturing
investment.
Manufacturing capacity cannot simply be shifted to cheaper countries as
Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong have done, because Singapore lacks
the home-grown companies to do this. Instead, it has opted to play to its
strengths: infrastructure, efficiency and marketing. It has gone into the
industrial parks business.
Singapore has built an industrial park nearby at Batam island in Indonesia.
It is doing the same at Bangalore in India - visited recently by Mr Goh -
and has even more ambitious plans for new towns in China - to which Mr Lee
has led several visits.
The hope must be that foreign companies will sign up for new plants in other
countries because they feel they will get treated as though they were in
Singapore: that is, with sure and speedy supply of essential infrastructure,
services and manpower.
In spite of Mr Lee's exhortation to take more risk, the foreign push is
carefully controlled. The government is prepared to invest up to a third of
its SDollars 78bn foreign exchange reserves, but the Economic Development
Board insists that every project must have a direct economic benefit to
Singapore - by which it means skilled jobs.
Mr Philip Yeo, EDB chairman, asserts vehemently that Singapore will not
become 'Father Christmas' to the rest of Asia. But with the 'external wing'
policy still in early days, the government's principal focus remains in
ensuring economic progress at home, where it has a number of concerns:
Singapore sees no economic security in leaving manufacturing to cheaper
countries in favour of becoming purely an international services 'hub'.
Therefore, it must continue to attract investment in manufacturing with the
skills and value-added appropriate to its high costs. This means moving up
the technology curve in the knowledge that products such as computer disc
drives, of which half the world's production is in Singapore, rapidly become
obsolete.
The latest hope in this direction is an EDB joint venture with foreign
companies to produce semiconductor chips. Foreign manufacturers are prepared
to accept Singapore's high costs because it is close to the markets for
their products; is stable and efficient; has manpower of sufficient skill;
and is an open economy.
Education is a primary concern, with skill levels well below those of other
newly-industrialised countries. The government is willing to borrow talent -
recent EDB advertisements in Indian newspapers for skilled professionals
attracted 18,000 responses.
The ageing of the population is the latest worry. The government takes a dim
view of spending money on old peoples' homes. Welfare policies 'take away
the responsibility of people for their own welfare, with detrimental
consequences for the family, state coffers and the competitiveness of the
economy,' according to a recent editorial in the Straits Times, which
normally reflects the official view. The government has therefore launched a
drive to promote 'family values' which include filial piety - supporting
parents in their old age.
Behind the 'family values' campaign, however, lies a deeper fear: that
Singapore's growing wealth will lead both to complacency among the young and
to greater demands for western-style liberty of the individual.
The government fears that this, in turn, would lead to the decay which it
sees in western society: sexual promiscuity, single parents, drugs,
violence. In its view, if Singapore succumbed to these problems, it would be
lost.
There is thus a defensive element in the growing role of prominent
Singaporeans in promoting 'Asian values', of which the essence is giving
general economic well-being a higher priority than individual liberty.
Mr Kishore Mahbubani, a senior foreign ministry official, writes in a recent
paper that until recently, Asians and Americans both assumed that the US had
discovered the secret of achieving a well-ordered society and that Asians
would emulate the political and economic arrangements of the US. But he
says: 'The US . . . does not appear to be a well-ordered society today.'
Urban Americans living in 'little fortresses,' frightened to go out at
night, find their personal freedom considerably reduced. This reduction, Mr
Mahbubani says, is the result of a 'mindless ideology' under which the
freedom of a small number of individuals is not constrained - for example,
through detention without trial - 'even if to do so would enhance the
freedom of the majority.'
Americans visiting east Asia, he says, 'will come to realise that their
society has swung too much in one direction: liberating the individual while
imprisoning society.'
But Singapore remains keenly aware of its need for close and friendly
relations with the US.
As a small nation in a region fraught with bilateral rivalries, it wants
Washington to remain the balancing wheel of regional security. As an open
trading economy, it needs the US to keep up pressure for reduction of trade
barriers. Most importantly, the US remains the largest export market and the
largest investor in Singapore.
Hence Singapore's enthusiastic support for Asia-Pacific Economic
Co-operation, the 18-member grouping whose new secretariat has been
established at the government's expense in Singapore.
Challenges to western faith in democracy reflect growing confidence
resulting from economic success. Singapore's aim in the coming years will be
to maintain the competitiveness and strong economic fundamentals which have
put it in a position to question western social and political values.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940418

