FT942-14911

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (6): Preference for
Rovers - User profile / Lucas


   By GARY MEAD


Restructuring, downsizing, re-organising - all flourishing euphemisms to
disguise the painful need to get costs into line with sales. Of all the
perks once available to company executives, the great taboo, the car, is
under attack from all directions.
Lucas Industries is another example of what can be done with a bit of
creative attention resulting from commercial pressure. In the course of a
year Lucas now reckons to be making savings of Pounds 3m through
significantly changing its company car practices. While the overall car pool
has stayed constant, with around 2,000 vehicles, its sourcing and servicing
of that pool has considerably altered.
There are two categories of employees entitled to a company car at Lucas,
the essential user - where it is a tool of the job, a function of doing
thousands of miles annually on company business - and management executives
whose position in the company hierarchy entitles them to a car as part of
their overall package.
In January, 1993, the company began looking into its company car polices,
with a view to tightening up the costs and bringing some managerial order to
what was rather a hotch-potch of choice. 'In a sense we were running what
was a whole series of mini-fleets, which was both very expensive and
sometimes confusing. It didn't make a lot of sense,' says the company.
Until last year both categories of user - essential car and management  -
were able to exercise a reasonable amount of choice over brand and model;
users were able to choose from six different manufacturers, have any model
within a certain price bracket, and could choose from diesel or petrol
No longer. In cost-conscious times some things have to go, and essential car
users now are restricted to one brand of car - Rover - under a solus
agreement. Mr George Simpson, formerly chairman of Rover, is to take over as
chief executive at Lucas in May.
Another fundamental change is that all Lucas's essential car users must
these days drive diesel cars, and choice of models has been circumscribed.
These fundamental changes have not been applied to the management car, over
which the individual still has a choice of manufacturer and model. Lucas
argues that as the company car for this grade of employee is still seen as
an incentive, part of the overall salary package, the decision to leave
things as they were is justified.
A further significant change is that Lucas now operates a policy of contract
hire, where previously it owned its fleet. Lex Vehicle Leasing now manages
the fleet. 'This minimises our administration costs and we can utilise their
fleet management expertise,' say Lucas.
So far, the company has not offered cash incentives to its employees to
rescind their company car. But the company is making it possible for
individuals within the management car bracket to down-grade their vehicle,
in order perhaps to get a smaller car and a variable sum of money, rather
than stick with large, plush models.
And as for the April 6 tax changes, Lucas thinks they will not really affect
its policies, but will naturally influence individual decisions in ways yet
to be seen. Perhaps the only safe prediction is that many more individuals
are likely to be thinking more carefully about precisely what benefits
accrue from possessing a company car - which in turn may erode its already
tarnished status as a status object.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940418

