FT944-2494

FT  16 DEC 94 / Quitting lifts lid on Indian sugar industry: Probe fall-out
draws attention to highly regulated and corruption-prone sector


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


A Cabinet minister's resignation has cast an unwanted light into the murky
world of the highly regulated and corruption-prone Indian sugar industry.
The causes of the departure of Mr A K Antony, the civil supplies minister,
lie in the government's mishandling of a sugar shortage earlier this year
which forced the country to pay tens of millions of dollars more for
imported sugar than it might otherwise have done. Sugar producers and
traders, in India and abroad, made bumper profits at the expense of the
Indian government and of sugar consumers.
In June, Mr P V Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, ordered an inquiry into
the affair by Mr Gian Prakash, a retired civil servant, who presented his
findings in September. The prime minister at first refused to publish the
report. But this week, after the ruling Congress (I) party's defeats in the
recent state elections in which corruption was an important issue, Mr
Narasimha Rao responded to opposition party pressure and allowed a junior
minister to present a short written summary to parliament. This vaguely
apportioned blame to almost everyone involved in control of the sugar
industry.
The low-key note, which the prime minister presumably hoped would offend
no-one, outraged Mr Antony, a minister with a reputation for honesty, who
was furious at being bracketed with those he believes responsible for the
debacle.
Mr Antony's resignation has intensified the pressure on those who played a
bigger role in the scandal.
India is both the world's largest producer and consumer of sugar. To ensure
that even the poor can buy sugar, about half the output is sold through
government ration shops at artificially low prices. The rest is sold on a
so-called free market, although even here prices are influenced by the
government which regulates the volume of sugar reaching the stores. Entry
into the industry is controlled by the government which grants production
licences - a lucrative source of bribes.
All this intervention fails to eliminate periodic swings between gluts and
shortages. The first inkling of a shortage this year emerged last winter
when Mr Antony, whose ministry is in charge of food distribution, and Mr A C
Sen, the chief civil servant in the food ministry, warned Mr Kalpnath Rai,
the food minister, that imports were needed. Mr Rai rejected the advice at a
meeting in December of the Cabinet Committee on Prices, which controls
administered prices.
Because of other official business, the committee did not meet again until
March, when rising sugar prices in the domestic market had set alarm bells
ringing. Mr Rai finally conceded that the crop would be smaller than
expected. According to documents leaked to Indian newspapers, Mr Manmohan
Singh, the finance minister who chairs the committee, remarked drily that
sugar production estimates should be assessed independently since 'certain
parties had a vested interest in giving credence to unreliable estimates'.
The committee agreed to allow private imports of sugar and authorised the
state-owned trading corporations, STC and MMTC which are run by the commerce
ministry, to import 1m tonnes to top up the domestic output of 9.6m tonnes.
The first privately imported sugar arrived in mid-April but it was not until
the end of May before the government agencies made their purchases.
The purchases were delayed by arguments between the food, commerce and
finance ministries over who should pay for any losses suffered from buying
sugar at world prices and selling them at (lower) Indian prices. The delays
were compounded by an abortive attempt by the Food Corporation of India, a
third government agency, to make its own sugar imports - a move authorised
by Mr Sen, the food secretary, and blocked by Mr Rai.
As word of India's purchasing plans leaked into the international market, so
prices soared from about Dollars 290 a tonne in January to Dollars 360 by
June. The Indian government eventually imported 1m tonnes - if it could have
paid Dollars 50 a tonne less through more adept trading, it would have saved
Dollars 50m. Private traders imported a further 1m: some of them made a
killing by securing early contracts. Those who bought late actually lost
money since by the end of the summer prices were falling once more.
Once the panic to secure supplies had passed, the attention shifted to
apportioning blame. Under pressure from the opposition parties, the prime
minister ordered Mr Prakash's inquiry. Although it has not been published,
it seems to have exonerated the prime minister personally and spread blame
among other ministers and officials.
All those allegedly involved have denied they were at fault.
If Mr Narasimha Rao hoped that the sugar affair would gradually fade away
amid concern over more immediate issues such as last week's state election
results, Mr Antony's resignation will have soured his plans.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941216

