FT943-13037

FT  21 JUL 94 / June consumer spending shows steady growth


   By GILLIAN TETT


Sales by clothing and footwear retailers rose sharply in June, while
household goods fell back, the Central Statistical Office said yesterday.
Overall, however, the retail sales data showed that the slow and steady
growth in consumer spending continued in June in spite of April's tax rises.
The volume of retail sales rose a seasonally adjusted 0.2 per cent in June
compared with May, and 3.3 per cent compared with the previous June. This
monthly annual increase was lower than in the last three months, but
analysts yesterday pointed out that the figures had been depressed by a
sudden surge in retail sales last June.
Measured on a three-monthly basis, which provides a better guide to the
trend, retail sales volumes rose 1 per cent in the three months to June
compared with the three months to March.
Compared with the same period a year ago sales volumes rose 3.9 per cent in
the quarter. Sales values grew at exactly the same rate in this period,
indicating that overall prices were flat and highlighting the low level of
retail sales inflation.
Although the monthly figures were roughly in line with City expectations,
they were slightly more downbeat than a Confederation of British Industry
survey of distributive trades released this week.
But one reason for this, analysts suggested, might be that the CBI survey
was conducted slightly later than the CSO report, and so incorporated more
of July's sales. This suggests July's retail sales data could show further
growth.
Other analysts suggested that the discrepancy might indicate that the CSO
had not captured the full growth in sales and so would revise up the numbers
next month. The CSO yesterday made significant upward revisions to previous
months' figures, revising May's rate of growth to 4.2 per cent from 3.9 per
cent.
The growth in sales was spread fairly evenly across sectors. Sales of
clothing and footwear performed best in the non-food sector in June, growing
1.8 per cent in volume terms, and 2.1 per cent in value terms compared with
May, after falling back slightly the previous month. Over the quarter,
clothing and footwear sales volumes rose 1.4 per cent.
Good weather helped boost shoe sales the British retail consortium said,
though it price competition remained extremely fierce in the clothing
sector, with annual inflation under 1 per cent.
Household goods dipped back in June after rising in May, growing 0.6 per
cent, in volume terms in the three months to June, compared with the
previous three months. The British Retail Consortium said that this
reflected the mixed fortunes of the housing market.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940721

