FT942-15443

FT  15 APR 94 / Tories launch Euro campaign


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


The government yesterday put free trade and competitiveness at the centre of
its European election campaign as senior ministers sought to quash
speculation that a poor result could trigger a leadership challenge to Mr
John Major.
Launching the party's election campaign at Conservative Central Office in
London, ministers and officials said the party was united behind a
free-market approach to Europe and opposition to socialist domination of the
European parliament.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, and Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary - the two main alternative candidates - ruled out a
leadership challenge and denied that the election amounted to a referendum
on Mr Major.
'We have both said that neither of us would ever stand against John Major.
There is no leadership issue,' Mr Clarke said. Mr Heseltine told
journalists: 'I agree with everything that Ken has said.'
Mr Heseltine said the prime minister would 'put forward the policies of this
government with the united support of this government. What he won't do is
abandon the essential policies which he believes are necessary to enable the
economy to continue to recover.'
But there was continued speculation at Westminster about Mr Major's future
if the Tories poll badly in the European elections on June 9 and the local
elections on May 5.
Launching the European campaign, Mr Heseltine, Mr Clarke and Mr David Hunt,
employment secretary, said there was a clear contrast between Labour's
commitment to regulation and the Conservatives' free-market approach.
'The Conservative contribution to the European debate is based on
competitiveness, free trade, low marginal taxes and supply-side reform
delivered within a sound macroeconomic framework.
'Here in Britain we are delivering the goods and we are showing the way to
our European allies,' Mr Clarke said. 'By contrast, the Labour and Liberal
parties would drive a coach and horses through carefully laid economic
policies.'
Mr Heseltine said there was growing support in the EU for Conservative
policies such as free trade, deregulation and more flexible labour markets.
Voters' choices, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940415

