FT942-14379

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (4): Low-cost carriers start to make
inroads - Developments in short-haul services


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


One of the most striking developments of the past 12 months has been the
emergence in the US airline industry of a powerful breed of new low-cost
airlines which have made increasing inroads in the traditional market of the
big American carriers.
The rise of these new low- cost carriers is the latest chapter in the
12-year-old story of US airline deregulation. Concentrating essentially on
shorter and medium-range domestic routes, these new carriers have challenged
the dominance of the big airlines, forcing them to take radical
restructuring steps ranging from the creation of new low-cost airline
subsidiaries to full employee ownership in the case of one of the biggest
carriers, United Airlines.
The question for Europe's newly liberalised airline industry is whether a
similar pattern will ultimately emerge in the European market. On the
surface at least, there are already signs that smaller airlines have taken
advantage of the new freedoms of the European Union's single aviation market
by extending their range of services to include domestic operations in other
EU member states, competing against the big carriers on busy intra- European
routes and stim- ulating fares competition both in the business and leisure
markets.
These smaller airlines have also helped develop a more extensive network of
regional services, boosting the growth of regional airports throughout
Europe. In some cases, this has involved head-on competition against the
larger carriers, but in most instances it has led to increasing co-operation
between smaller and bigger carriers with the smaller carriers providing
passenger feed for the longer haul services of larger airlines.
Large flag carriers, most notably British Airways, have actively developed
associated or subsidiary airlines in other EU states as part of their
efforts to create a broader European airline network. Apart from setting up
a lower cost European airline operation based at London's Gatwick Airport
following its takeover of Dan-Air, BA has sought to strengthen its reach in
the internal European market through its new Deutsche BA subsidiary in
Germany and its large minority stake in TAT, the French regional carrier.
In the same way, Lufthansa has set up a low-cost subsidiary in Germany to
serve the domestic market and has taken a stake in Lauda Air of Austria. KLM
Royal Dutch Airlines has stakes in Air UK, which has been expanding its
short-haul European network from its base at London's Stansted Airport, as
well as in the Dutch carrier Transavia, which now operates 10 scheduled
routes from Amsterdam.
Another growing trend has been the development of franchising with small
carriers negotiating franchising agreements with larger established
airlines. One example is the recent franchising agreement between the Irish
carrier Cityjet and Virgin, whereby Mr Richard Branson's carrier is
providing sales and marketing in the UK for Cityjet's service from London
City Airport to Dublin, using BAe 146 aircraft painted in Virgin livery.
Virgin has a similar agreement with South-East European Airlines of Greece,
which operates a Boeing 737 aircraft on Virgin's behalf between Athens and
London's Gatwick Airport.
The emergence of smaller carriers has had an impact on intra-European fares,
where standard fares have traditionally been about 30 per cent higher than
on equivalent routes in the US deregulated market. British Midland Airways
has led the field in bringing down fares on expensive intra-European routes
by providing competition from a third carrier on routes previously served by
the two flag carriers of each country.
Although the introduction of European 'open skies' at the beginning of last
year has clearly had tangible benefits for consumers and airline
competition, they have been somewhat limited by comparison to the impact of
deregulation in the US market.
In a far-reaching report on airline competition in the single European
market, the UK's Civil Aviation Authority has warned that any significant
increase in active competition in the longer term in Europe would occur only
if investors felt confident that airlines which are efficient and responsive
to their customers would survive and be profitable.
Unfortunately, substantial obstacles persist for smaller carriers and the
new entrants that the EU is seeking to encourage in the market. As the CAA
put it: 'Given substantial barriers to entry on many routes, the
opportunities for competition will be made reality only by positive
long-term action going beyond the liberalisation already achieved.'
The biggest hurdle remains the issue of state aid for financially troubled
European flag carriers. Unless limits are set on the amount of aid granted
to financially distressed state-owned airlines for restructuring, there are
clearly significant risks of distorting competition and discouraging new
entrants into the market.
French government proposals to inject a further FFr20bn into Air France, the
loss-making French national carrier, have provoked a wave of concern among
smaller carriers as well as larger airlines which have had to restructure
themselves and cope with the industry-wide slump on their own.
Mr Jurgen Weber, Lufthansa's chairman, recently warned that state aid was
encouraging bankrupt carriers to carry on with overcapacity which in turn
put pressure on fares. 'Six European carriers are known to have received or
applied for state subsidies to an amount of over Pounds 4.4bn: BA, KLM and
Lufthansa are the exception to this situation,' he said.
The other serious obstacle facing smaller airlines and undermining
competition is the lack of take-off and landing slots at congested European
airports. Unless new regulations are introduced to make more slots available
at busy airports for new competitors on European routes, the CAA argues that
existing flag carriers will further entrench their dominant position at
their main airport bases at the expense of potential new competitors.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940420

