FT944-2479

FT  16 DEC 94 / Cardoso on his mark for a reforming sprint: The Brazilian
president-elect is clear about his policy priorities


   By ANGUS FOSTER


Brazil's Senate gave an effusive farewell on Wednesday to Mr Fernando
Henrique Cardoso, who is to become the country's next president on January
1. If he pursues the policies needed to modernise the Brazilian state, and
which are sure to be unpopular, it may be some time before he is invited
back.
Mr Cardoso used the occasion to make a wide-ranging speech listing the
priorities for his four-year term in office. Rather than grandiose visions,
he concentrated on reforms he needs to tackle during the first few months.
'Brazil is in a hurry. We have only a limited period to take the measures to
guarantee stability and prepare for a new cycle of development,' he said.
Mr Cardoso's haste is prompted by time bombs within the government budget
and social security system. Both threaten the success of the Real currency
which Mr Cardoso planned when he was finance minister. The currency reduced
monthly inflation from about 50 per cent before its July launch to 2-3 per
cent today and its success ensured Mr Cardoso's election victory.
The Real worked partly because the government has this year balanced its
budget, mainly by severe spending cuts. Next year, however, the government
is forecasting a deficit of Dollars 5bn-Dollars 10bn (Pounds 3.2bn-Pounds
6.4bn), equal to 1-2 per cent of GDP and enough to prompt worries about
inflation. Meanwhile, Brazil's badly designed social security system, which
will soon have more beneficiaries than contributors, is set to cost Dollars
28bn in 1995, against just Dollars 14.2bn three years ago.
In his speech Mr Cardoso highlighted three areas for reform, all requiring
constitutional changes. He said the central government's responsibilities,
and spending obligations, needed to be devolved to local government and the
private sector; government revenues needed to be raised by an overhaul of
the tax system; and the social security system had to be reformed to remove
anomalies and lax rules.
None of these ideas is new, and there is widespread agreement in Congress
and the business sector that reform, in general terms, is needed. The
problem, however, and the reason why change has not yet happened, is that
specific proposals proved unpopular and often threatened big losses for
powerful interest groups.
Mr Cardoso, a cautious man who likes to build consensus before acting, took
care in his Senate speech not to mention any unpopular measures. Talking
about tax reform, he stressed the need to cut taxes on exports and basic
goods for poorer families. He did not dwell on his probable need to lift the
overall tax burden from 25 per cent of GDP, which is low by international
standards.
He said he would send specific ideas on constitutional reform to Congress in
February. Any changes would need three fifths approval; Mr Cardoso so far
looks capable of mustering the support.
His Social Democracy party (PSDB) and its allies have just under half the
seats in Congress, and earlier this week he won the backing of the
Democratic Movement (PMDB), Brazil's biggest political party. But until Mr
Cardoso takes office and spells out his plans, it is difficult to assess the
loyalty of his allies.
'He will have two to three months' honeymoon, then it will get difficult,'
Mr Luiz Pedone of the University of Braslia predicts. 'There will be strong
opposition, including from some of the government's backers, on
controversial reforms like reducing the central government's spending
obligations and the size of the public sector.'
The reforms Mr Cardoso is seeking will take time to affect significantly the
government's budget and will not start reducing its spending obligations
until 1996 at the earliest. Next year's deficit will probably have to be
covered by privatisation receipts.
Mr Cardoso said Brazil's privatisation programme, which has lagged behind
those of neighbours such as Argentina, needed to be 'accelerated and
extended' to energy, transport, telecoms and mining.
Departing from his prepared text, he spoke of how impressed he was by US
telecommunications technology on a recent visit to Miami. Brazil's telecoms'
monopoly - which has suffered from a lack of competition and government
under-investment - needed to be made more 'flexible' or be left behind, he
said.
These signals, which will be welcomed by foreign companies eyeing Brazil's
telecoms market, suggest Mr Cardoso's cautious conversion to privatisation
is continuing. However, he stressed the state need not lose control of its
monopoly, and he did not mention the state-owned oil monopoly Petrobras.
Persuading Congress to back speedier privatisation will also be difficult.
State-owned companies are still seen by many politicians as sources of
patronage.
A member of the outgoing government said Mr Cardoso's popularity when he
took office would give him clout to make many of the changes he needed, but
only if inflation stayed below 2-3 per cent a month and people continued to
feel better off.
'The first half of next year will be crucial for approving these reforms.
The danger is the new government will spend too long trying to reach
compromise solutions with interest groups which stand to lose out, and the
door will close.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941216

