FT941-3482

FT  16 MAR 94 / Recruitment: The permanent temp is a Handyman - As a new
style of organisation emerges from the recession, companies are turning to
temporary managers


   By RICHARD DONKIN


How hard do you need to work at getting a job? Most people have heard of
aspirants firing off scores of applications and of advertisements attracting
hundreds of inquiries, even for quite lowly posts.
There is nothing unusual about the committed job seeker, but the trend
towards more flexible workforces and slimmer companies is influencing
individual approaches to employment.
Richard McKeown has gone one step further than chasing every vacancy,
turning his skills as a chartered secretary into an aggressively marketed
business service aimed at short-term employment opportunities. McKeown, 46,
who lives in Uxbridge, west London, was made redundant in 1987 after the
company he worked for moved to south Wales and he decided not to go with it.
He invested Pounds 7,000 with an outplacement agency which did not find him
a job but which gave him valuable advice about interviews and how to write a
CV.
Since 1988 he has had a series of temporary contracts in the company
secretarial role and is now completing a short stint as a temporary
assistant company secretary at Kingfisher.
McKeown's name is registered with three recruitment agencies but he has gone
beyond being merely a hopeful job applicant. He spends Pounds 5,000 a year
on marketing himself. This includes employing a public relations expert.
He produces a glossy brochure advertising his skills, experience, previous
employers, selected references and the work he is capable of doing. He is,
in his own words, 'the all singing, all dancing one-man band'.
McKeown may be the manager of the future; the sort of individual whom
management philosopher Charles Handy, writes about in his new book, The
Empty Raincoat.
Handy talks about a portfolio approach to life where you decide how much you
want to work, how you want to work and where you want to work. Newly
restructured organisations, he has observed, are moving increasingly towards
the employment of fee-charging professionals.
A whole new employment industry has sprung up over the past 10-15 years to
provide temporary - or 'interim' - managers.
Many do not see themselves as temporary workers in the long term but are
prepared to fulfil such roles until a permanent post comes along. McKeown
claims to have 'crossed the Rubicon' in this respect and now sees himself as
a permanent temp.
He says he does not feel insecure, has never been despairing and is relaxed
about his prospects. His experience as an itinerant employee is growing. His
former clients include BTR, Lautro and Mercury Communications.
The use of temporary staff started in Silicon Valley in the US among
start-up companies. They employed a core of essential staff on a permanent
basis and made up the rest of their workforce with temporary contractors.
Now the strategy is spreading to individual managers.
McKeown argues that it can be good for professionals because they can
command higher fees than they would get on a salaried basis. It can be good
for the company because it is buying a short-term and often essential stop
gap at a fixed price. The downside for the employer would seem to be cost
and, to some extent, uncertainty about quality, although the temporary
nature of the employment lessens the potential damage of recruiting a dud.
Jeff Grout, managing director of Robert Half, which has about 500 temporary
accountants on its books, says: 'As companies have come out of the recession
they are not rushing to recruit staff back on a permanent basis.
'The traditional temp has changed dramatically. It used to be in low-level
grades but there are now some very senior people doing it.'
Charles Russam, managing director of the GMS consultancy and secretary of
the Association of Temporary and Interim Executive Services, says his
company database lists 3,500 executives to supply companies that need senior
business managers at director level or one level below.
He estimates the executive leasing or interim management sector is worth
between Pounds 70m and Pounds 100m in the UK and that it is growing at about
20 per cent a year as it is increasingly viewed as a serious alternative to
long-term employees. He says: 'Interim management is no longer being seen as
the recycling of clapped out executives but as a credible option for
business.
'Businesses are saying to themselves why do I need to keep such people on my
payroll when I can go into the market and get someone in to do a specific
job.'
But how do you avoid getting a useless manager attempting to revive a
washed-up career? Russam admits that such people have found their way on to
agency books. His own company, he says, will no longer list anyone for whom
it does not have three satisfactory references.
As registered employment agencies, such companies take their fees from
employers. 'It means that we owe a duty of care to our clients so it is in
our interests to ensure that the people we are supplying are of a good
calibre,' says Russam.
Interest in temporary managers is growing, he says, among expanding small
businesses which need hands-on management help, often on a part-time basis.
Use of the temporary professional has expanded markedly in the field of
information technology. About 20,000 to 30,000 freelance employees are
working in this area in the UK, with about 20 agencies marketing their
services. The biggest operator, CSS-Comac, has about 1,100 people working.
Tony Coombes, professional services director of Systems Resources of
Coventry, which has about 500 contract staff working for employers such as
IBM, says quality control is becoming increasingly important as customer
companies are demanding good people and consistency from suppliers.
'Everyone we place is an ambassador of the company. If they don't do well,
manufacturers will blame us,' he says.
The company has become rigorous with its contractors. All conversations with
freelances discussing their abilities are recorded afterwards and kept on
file. 'It may appear big brotherish but it's not. It is really a way of
making a quality selection against the requirement the client gives us,'
Coombes says.
Contracts tend to be for three months. Employees do not have the holiday
arrangements that their full-time colleagues enjoy but the trade-off in job
security tends to be higher salaries. Computer operators in the Pounds
15,000 to Pounds 20,000 salary range may find themselves earning the
equivalent of between Pounds 20,000 and Pounds 28,000 a week for the
duration of the contract. Experienced programmers will be earning the
equivalent of Pounds 30,000 to Pounds 45,000 a year compared with Pounds
20,000 to Pounds 30,000 in a full-time post.
Richard McKeown agrees that the fees commanded by temporary professionals
are higher than full-time salaries. The fee, he says, has to account for
personal overheads, self-provision of pensions, holidays and car. He also
feels justified in including an additional element to reflect his
availability at short notice.
One of the biggest problems for individuals, he argues, is adopting the
frame of mind that accepts temporary contract working as the norm. To do
this, he believes it is necessary to build up capital that can be used as a
buffer for the times when demand is quiet.
He says: 'There is a vast pool of highly qualified people out there. They
might have come to to it through redundancy, but so what? I think I'm better
at my job now than I was 10 years ago. It has been a positive experience.'

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940316

