FT944-2746

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: Proventus bids for rest of
Aritmos


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


Proventus, the Swedish investment group, yesterday launched a SKr1bn
(Dollars 132m) bid to buy out the 37 per cent outstanding stake it does not
own in its subsidiary Aritmos, the sporting goods company which includes
Puma, the German sports shoe maker.
Proventus said it had acquired the 15.2 per cent stake previously held by
the Swedish food group Cerealia, which had been Aritmos's second chief
shareholder. It was offering SKr33 per share in cash for the remaining
Aritmos shares, a premium of SKr5 over the last paid price of SKr28 reached
before Proventus and Aritmos shares were suspended on Wednesday.
The total value of the Cerealia and remaining bid was SKr1.06bn, to be
financed by bank borrowing, Proventus said.
Proventus, 70 per cent controlled by Mr Robert Weil, a Swedish private
investor, has holdings in several industrial companies including Van Roll,
the Swiss group. But it has made sporting and leisure goods its main
interest since buying into Aritmos in early 1993.
Since it won control of Aritmos it has restructured the group, spinning off
the Monark Stiga bicycles and Abu Garcia fishing equipment divisions into
separate quoted companies in which Proventus retains majority shareholdings.
Aritmos is focused on Puma, a previously troubled company which returned to
profit in the first six months of the year, Etonic, the second biggest
supplier of golf shoes in the US, and Tretorn, a leading tennis ball maker.
Aritmos reported pre-tax profits of SKr224m in the first six months on sales
of SKr3.5bn, a turnround from a SKr722m loss last year.
The bid was favoured by the Aritmos board, but it declined to take a
definitive position until it had received an independent valuation. The
offer is conditional on acceptances assuring Proventus of 90 per cent
ownership by February 3, but Proventus said it reserved the right to
complete even if the response left it short of 90 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941216

