FT944-14413

FT  22 OCT 94 / Outdoors: Purpose-built France - or old Austria? - Skiing


   By ARNIE WILSON


As Val d'Isere's 'criterium de la premiere neige' - the annual celebration
of the opening of the ski season - approaches once again, thousands of
skiers have already been trying to make their time-honoured decision: will
it be France or Austria this year. It is never an easy choice.
Since the Albertville Olympics of 1992, the French have made brave attempts
to abandon the Gallic shrug and dress up some of their architectural
mistakes in gentler cladding. But they still have not got Gemutlichkeit -
the traditional mountain welcome cocktail of yodelling, accordion, tuba,
schnapps and roaring fire - which is a German word much hyped in brochure
copy when referring to Austrian ski resorts. It does not translate readily
into French, to whom such a concept is anathema.
This may perhaps explain why British skiers can easily be divided between
Austrophiles and Francophiles, and why Austria and France are neck-and-neck
in popularity as destination countries of British skiers.
In a perfect world on the mountains, the ski resorts and ski lifts might be
French, the villages Austrian or Swiss, the mountain restaurants Italian and
the resort personnel North American.
The reality is that for 'serious skiers', the French resorts are unbeatable
while skiers who want the best all-round ski holiday experience might be
tempted by Austria, Switzerland, the US or Canada.
French ski resorts have a number of individual characteristics: first they
have the French, who are traditionally viewed as something of a mixed
blessing. On the plus side they have the highest resorts, some of the most
modern ski lifts, and ski-in ski-out accommodation.
Unlike the rest of Europe, France came comparatively late to skiing as a big
tourist attraction, and had the benefit of being able to build such resorts
as Les Arcs, La Plagne, Tignes, Avoriaz and Flaine in optimum locations for
good snow and access.
But this same 'purpose-built' tag was to alienate some skiers used to the
quintessential picturesque Austrian village with onion-domed church and
picture-postcard chalets.
Most Swiss and Austrian ski resorts were based on villages which were
already well-established. In France, only the likes of Chamonix, Val
d'Isere, Megeve and La Clusaz fall into this category.
The other advantage of skiing in France is self-catering, little practised
in the rest of the Alps. Rather than being tied to a fixed Austrian or Swiss
menu, the self-catering skier can enjoy eating out one night and cooking a
meal in the apartment the next. Or any combination of the two during the
holiday.
Self-catering goes hand in hand with driving to the ski area, and doubtless
skiers will be taking advantage of the Channel Tunnel to reach such resorts
as Courchevel, Meribel, Avoriaz and Flaine with plenty of provisions on
board, or stop at a hypermarket on the way there. And they can stop on the
way back and collect a crate or two of wine.
Skiers with cars can also take advantage of the increasing popularity of
multi-resort lift tickets, which allow you to ski, for example in Val
d'Isere and Tignes and spend a day in Les Arcs or La Plagne, and another in
the Trois Vallees.
Skiers who are really offended by the so-called concrete monstrosities that
passed for contemporary architecture in the late 1960s will perhaps be
comforted by the fact that the French realise they created some alpine
carbuncles a quarter of a century ago and are trying to do something about
it.
At Flaine, thought by some to be the ugliest of the purpose-built resorts,
the principal development in the 1990s - Le Hameau (the Hamlet) which is
still being added to - marks a return to traditional alpine architecture,
with the construction of attractive Scandinavian-style chalets and
apartments.
Thirty years after La Plagne's biggest eyesore Aime La Plagne was built, the
resort now has mixed feelings about the architecture. (Bellecote is no
picture-postcard either). They have since compensated for it by reverting to
a more neo-rustic style for some of its more recent developments. These
include Belle Plagne, Plagne Soleil and Plagne Village.
In spite of these much more attractive developments, it is certainly worth
visiting or even staying in the traditional villages of Champagny and
Montalbert just to get a break from La Plagne's brave new world of skiing
automation.
This way you can get the best of both worlds, enjoying a huge network of
good skiing by day, and a pleasantly rustic retreat by night. This works
well at Alpe d'Huez too, where you can retreat to Vaujany or Oz for intimate
evenings, and at Les Deux Alpes, where Venosc provides a little relief from
the boisterous local apres-ski.
But whether you like the quiet life, the frenzied demi-monde of all-night
discotheques and nightclubs, or the hurly-burly of an Austrian folk evening,
the basic skiing product offered by France and Austria will always be worlds
apart, and probably the better for it. There will never be a Saalbach-Entre
Flaine or a Chamonixental.
Perhaps this winter France may edge ahead of Austria in the popularity
stakes. More likely, the Austrians will stay ahead by a yodel. The French
may have the premiere neige, but they may not have the dernier mot when it
comes to luring British skiers from Alpbach to Alpe d'Huez.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941022

