FT942-12513

FT  29 APR 94 / Pre-pension executive salary rises rapped


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


Executives should not be allowed to boost their salaries sharply just before
retirement in order to qualify for a larger pension, Mr Tom Ross,
vice-chairman of the National Association of Pension Funds, said yesterday.
Speaking at the association's annual conference in Brighton, Mr Ross, a
partner at consulting actuaries Clay and Partners, said: 'I don't like the
fact that senior people have their salaries booted up sharply just before
retirement.'
He said the effect was to reduce the amount that schemes had available to
improve benefits for lower-paid workers, and such moves were never
sufficiently disclosed to shareholders.
Mr Ross outlined what he stressed was a personal view about how the
structure of pensions should evolve. He urged maintaining the basic state
pension at 15 per cent to 20 per cent of national average earnings instead
of allowing it to slide to roughly 7 per cent by the middle of the next
century. He also urged the creation of a separate earnings-related scheme,
in place of the state earnings-related pension, into which employers and
employees would make compulsory contributions. He advocated financing
improved state benefits by raising state pension ages to 75.
Meanwhile Mr William Hague, pensions minister, defended the government's
handling of personal pensions following attacks by conference delegates. Mr
Bill Day, national pensions officer of the GMB, the UK's third-largest
union, asked Mr Hague whether the government would consider making it a
criminal offence to mis-sell personal pensions.
Mr Day said that 10 days ago the GMB had set up a hotline for those who
feared that they had inappropriately contracted out of Serps through a
personal pension. The GMB has sent out 300,000 pamphlets to members about
personal pensions and has had 'loads' of calls from worried people, he said.
In only 25 per cent of cases has the GMB been able to reassure them that
they had made the right move.
Mr Hague said that the government was awaiting the results of a study by the
Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief regulatory watchdog, to
complete a review into pensions transfers.
Separately, Mr Hague said that while the government was anxious not to
impose too great a burden on employers with its new regulatory framework for
occupational pensions, companies should expect some increased costs. 'It is
difficult when you look at the Goode committee report and its 218
recommendations to see how it could be implemented without some increased
costs.'
Asked whether the government would seek to lower employers' costs by
revoking a 1990 law requiring those with surpluses to use them first to
improve pension benefits, Mr Hague demurred. But he said the government
would address the so-called limited price indexation rules as part of its
overall white paper on occupational pension reform expected in June or July.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940429

