FT942-16222

FT  12 APR 94 / World Trade News: China pact entices S Korea's big guys - An
expected surge in trade and investment by conglomerates


   By JOHN BURTON


The recent visit of South Korean President Kim Young-sam to Beijing has
inaugurated a new and bigger phase of South Korean investment in China.
While small and medium-sized businesses pioneered South Korean investments
in China, the next stage will be dominated by the country's big industrial
groups, or chaebol, accompanied by their subcontractors.
The chaebol have been cautious about entering China because of market
restrictions on the sale of their products and other worries ranging from
uncertain business laws to poor infrastructure.
But the signing at the end of March of a Sino-Korean technological and
industrial pact will open up the Chinese market to such South Korean
products as cars, telecommunications equipment and electronic goods. The
conclusion of a double taxation treaty and an agreement on business
contracts will also reassure Korean investors.
The entry of the chaebol is expected to increase total cumulative South
Korean investments in China from Dollars 1bn in 1993 to Dollars 4bn by 1997,
while boosting annual direct trade from Dollars 9bn to Dollars 28bn. China
accounted for almost half of South Korean investment abroad last year, while
South Korea enjoyed a Dollars 1.1bn trade surplus with China.
Mr Todd Maurer, analyst at Dongbang Peregrine in Seoul, says China has been
'paramount to the survival of financially weaker Korean companies operating
within saturated domestic industries', such as textiles, food products and
electronic components.
These companies have been using China as a cheap manufacturing base and
re-exporting their goods, with their wholly owned factories clustered around
the rim of the Yellow Sea because of its proximity to Korea.
Although low wages appeal to the chaebol, their primary interest is in
developing markets in China in co-operation with local joint venture
partners. This reflects a shift in the chaebol's strategy toward creating
markets in the developing world, in particular in Asia, as competition
intensifies in the industrialised countries.
Moreover, the chaebol view China as a backdoor entrance to investments in
North Korea. South Korean companies may be able to avoid a ban imposed by
Seoul on their direct investments in North Korea by using Chinese joint
venture partners to establish factories there. Korean companies, such as
Samsung, are also planning to invest in Chinese-supported transport links to
the Rajin-Sonbong free trade zone in north-eastern North Korea.
The chaebol have already made initial investments in China, mainly in the
electronics sector. Samsung and Goldstar, for example, operate VCR plants in
Tianjin, a prime investment area for Korean companies.
Goldstar recently announced that it is establishing joint venture colour TV
and VCR factories in Changsha and Shanghai respectively. Meanwhile, Yukong,
Korea's biggest oil company, plans to build a Dollars 1.5bn refinery in
Shenzhen which would be the largest joint venture to date.
Samsung wants to operate plants for petrochemicals, industrial chemicals and
electronics, while participating in the construction of port facilities and
other infrastructure projects.
Daewoo plans to manufacture heavy machinery, cars and motor vehicle parts,
and electronics in China in addition to winning construction orders.
The sectors that will benefit from the new agreement include:
Motor vehicles. The deal will probably allow at least one of Korea's main
carmakers - Hyundai, Kia and Daewoo - to build a joint venture factory by
1997. Hyundai and Kia already assemble a limited number of trucks and
minibuses in China, while Hyundai and Daewoo operate a small network of
after-service outlets. Daewoo plans to establish a parts joint venture soon
in Jilin Province in the hope that it can eventually assemble cars in China.
Telecommunications: South Korea will develop a new version of its time
division exchange (TDX) system for China's telephone network. Goldstar
Telecom and Samsung Electronics are setting up joint venture manufacturing
plants for TDXs in Shandong province and want to expand into the production
of fibre optics, transmission equipment and handsets.
Aerospace: Aviation Industries of China will co-operate with Samsung
Aerospace, Daewoo Heavy Industries and Korean Air Lines in developing and
producing a medium-sized commercial airliner with 50 to 100 seats for
regional carriers in Asia. Electronics: A Korean consortium, including
Samsung and Goldstar, will provide technology for the development of
high-definition television in return for access to the Chinese market.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940412

