FT941-3308

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (23):
The clear message: innovate or perish - Technology developments in Canada /
Canada's successful IT companies demonstrate that to survive they must be
show greater speed and originality than their US competitors


   By GEOF WHEELRIGHT


When you live next to a country as large as the US and want to succeed in
the information technology sector, you have to innovate to survive.
That is the story behind Canada's best personal computer and
telecommunications companies - which seem to win new business by creating
specialised solutions for surprisingly common challenges.
Take the success of Canadian personal computer fax software maker Delrina,
which hit the world markets in a big way with its WinFax software for
Microsoft Windows, a few years ago. Many companies had tried to produce
software which allowed users to fax documents direct from their PC screens,
but none had ever really achieved much success with it until this Canadian
company came along.
By closely identifying a need for simple design, low cost and an ability to
work with dozens of popular personal computer fax modems, Delrina almost
created the market for Windows-based fax software. Today it dominates that
market. It has been successful in building on the reputation of WinFax with
a range of form-design products and fax add-on systems, and operates in a
number of countries including a subsidiary operation in the UK.
Likewise, the Toronto-based Vivid Group identified at an early stage the
potential of 'virtual reality' technology. Using its implementation of this
idea, it started building entertainment and education systems.
Today, the company's Mandala System, an interactive virtual reality product,
allows users to indulge in a variety of 'virtual' experiences including
virtual ice hockey (something guaranteed to make it a big hit in Canada),
virtual volley ball or soccer, and even a virtual swim in the shark-infested
waters of Australia's Great Barrier Reef. The Vivid Group recently won the
ultimate accolade for its virtual reality technology when it was selected to
provide a key element of Paramount Pictures' Virtual Star Trek Transporter
Experience.
According to The Computer Paper, the founder and publisher of Canada's
largest computer publication, many successes of this kind do not stay
Canadian for very long. Douglas Alder, who founded The Computer Paper seven
years ago, says that moderate success is quite commonly followed by US
corporate acquisition.
He says that even raising initial venture capital is a tough slog for most
Canadian developers and entrepreneurs. 'There just aren't enough
millionaires in Canada,' he says. And even when Canadian companies do
achieve moderate success, there is no 'peer group of aspiring billionaires'
willing to spend the money, time and energy to help grow the Canadian
companies - 'most companies don't make it,' Alder says.
And when they do make it, they often become American companies in due
course. Take the case of SoftImage, the Quebec-based computer animation
specialists, recently acquired by US software house Microsoft for Dollars
130m.
In this case, SoftImage will be allowed to stay in Quebec and pursue its
existing business - while its technology will also be incorporated in future
Microsoft products.
Microsoft has been quite active in the Canadian technology sector. In 1991
it purchased Consumers Software, another Canadian company, and turned it
into its first big North American research and development facility outside
the United States.
Based in Vancouver, it now employs more than 100 people and has been renamed
Microsoft Workgroup Canada.
'We see a bright future for Canadian business and the local personal
computer industry,' says Mike Maples, executive vice-president at Microsoft.
'The Canadian personal computer hardware and software market is one of the
most advanced in the world.'
But being a Canadian personal computer hardware manufacturer is a tougher
business. Ask, for example, Benjamin K. Tam, president and chief executive
of Burnaby, British Columbia-based Darius Technology.
Tam has been making and selling personal computers in Canada for more than
six years, but admits that it is a tough market - particularly when many
Canadians can shop quite easily for US computers over the border.
Tam says that the recent Canada/US/Mexico North American Free Trade
Agreement (Nafta) does not make this job any easier.
'In the Canadian market, we are affected by the economic situation of our
giant neighbour, the US, as well as by the agreements and government policy
of the Canadian government,' he says.
'Nafta could affect us severely in the high technology sector. Although we
are known to be strong in the telecommunications side, we are not at all
competitive (in the computer market) because the sheer volume is not there
in Canada.'
One solution has been to sell recently-developed products, including a
network file server system based on Digital Equipment's powerful Alpha AXP
computer processor, in both the US and Canada.
As a result, Tam now boasts that 22 per cent of his company's annual sales
are in the US, with the rest in Canada. And in the near future, he is
expanding to the Far East - a move becoming increasingly popular among
Western Canadian companies.
Tam recently signed a Dollars 1.5m joint venture agreement with a
state-owned enterprise in China. It will begin manufacturing computer
displays in Shanghai this summer. Tam says that these products are being
made for both the Far East and North American markets.
In short, while Canada has the resources and the talent to create
world-class high technology companies, it may have to move quite quickly to
sell products outside its borders if these talents are to survive.
With a domestic market of only slightly more than 25m people, spread over
thousands of miles, this is perhaps not surprising.
In terms of land mass, Canada is the second-largest country in the world -
and distribution costs can be high. But judging by the successes of Delrina
and the Ottawa-based Corel Corporation (developer of the popular Corel Draw
software and now owners of the Ventura Publisher desktop publishing
suite)Canadian companies can succeed on the world market.
The secret is to be there from day one.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940316

