FT944-10899

FT  09 NOV 94 / Clarke unveils Whitehall drive for private funds


   By KEVIN BROWN and PHILIP COGGAN


Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, yesterday unveiled plans to bring private
finance into the heart of government by forcing Whitehall departments to
seek outside funding for all capital spending.
In a clear attempt to combat rightwing claims that the government has run
out of steam, Mr Clarke told the Confederation of British Industry
conference in Birmingham that private finance would be 'the main source of
growth' for public investment projects.
However, his attempt to demonstrate a firm grip on public spending was
undermined by the failure of a special 3 1/2 -hour cabinet meeting to agree
to his plans for a cut of more than Pounds 4bn in next year's Pounds 263bn
expenditure control total.
As the cabinet struggled with the details, Mr John Major was forced into a
highly unusual postponement of his weekly audience of the Queen. 'He has
been delayed,' Buckingham Palace said. 'As and when he is finished, he will
come up here.' Downing Street said ministers had had a 'very productive'
debate on the package, which calls for cuts in the transport, social
security and higher education budgets.
Ministers said that a handful of outstanding details - thought to centre on
cuts in the Pounds 8bn housing benefit budget - were expected to be agreed
at a second cabinet meeting tomorrow.
Mr Clarke's attempt to pump fresh life into the flagging public finance
initiative, launched in 1992 by Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor, was
given a mixed reception by industrialists.
The plan was welcomed by Mr Howard Davies, the CBI director-general, and Mr
Neville Simms, chief executive of Tarmac and the construction industry's
representative on the Treasury's private finance panel.
But Sir Richard Lloyd, chairman of Vickers, the engineering group, said the
initiative would be handicapped unless the Treasury relaxed stringent
regulations designed to ensure the taxpayer received value for money.
Mr Clarke said the requirement for an investigation of the viability of
private finance for capital projects would concentrate 'finite public
capital provision on those areas where, for whatever reason, private finance
is not possible'.
He published a note setting out progress on the private finance initiative
by 12 government departments, showing that Pounds 500m of private capital
will have been employed by the end of 1994-95.
'Much more is on the way,' he said. 'There are to be privately financed
prisons, the new Royal Armouries Museum in Leeds is under construction,
there will be hundreds of millions of pounds of water and sewerage projects
in Scotland and Northern Ireland.'
Other projects worth more than Pounds 100m are under way in the health
service.
Mr Alistair Darling, Labour's City spokesman, dismissed the chancellor's
initiative as 'little more than another wish list'.
Blair pledge, Page 10
CBI cool on union chief's training call, Page 11
Editorial Comment, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941109

