FT942-15447

FT  15 APR 94 / Post Office warns on sell-off delay


   By JENNY LUESBY and KEVIN BROWN


Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, yesterday rejected Post
Office claims that 30,000 jobs are at risk because of delays in
privatisation.
In the latest shot in a long-running campaign for privatisation, Mr Bill
Cockburn, Post Office chief executive, claimed that a quarter of the UK's
20,000 post offices could close unless the organisation was given commercial
freedom. Mr Cockburn said Post Office business was being eroded by
competitors while the government delayed the conclusions of a 21-month
review of its future. 'We are just weeks away from serious damage,' he said.
Mr Cockburn's comments echoed a warning from the Tory-dominated Commons
trade and industry committee that the Post Office was being damaged by the
government's failure to decide whether to go ahead with privatisation.
However, Mr Heseltine said it would be 'wrong' to conclude the review
prematurely because of pressure from senior Post Office managers.
'Jobs are at risk because new technology might change the demand for labour,
or because there are economies of scale to be achieved. That has nothing to
do with the timing of the review,' he said.
'They are not going to lose 30,000 jobs whether we report on the future of
the Post Office this month or next month.'
Mr Heseltine has made clear that he favours privatisation, but ministers are
aware that legislation would face strong opposition in the Commons. Many
rural Conservative MPs believe that the Post Office would close uneconomic
sub-post offices after privatisation.
Early privatisation is opposed by some members of the cabinet, who fear that
further controversial legislation would worsen divisions in the Conservative
party.
Mr Cockburn said that up to 20 per cent of Post Office business was at risk.
'We must not be seduced into believing that the current status quo is a safe
haven: the Post Office must escape the constraints on its investment imposed
by the public sector borrowing requirement, or face a future of declining
business and rising prices,' he said.
Mr Cockburn said the government should 'take the time it needs to reach the
right decision, but to lose opportunities by default makes no sense'.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940415

