FT943-738

FT  28 SEP 94 / Haiti gun scheme backfires: The market upsets US plan


   By JAMES HARDING


The US military opened for business in Port-au-Prince yesterday with a
programme to buy back weapons from civilians. This appeared to be founded
more on wishful thinking than respect for market forces.
Haitians are being asked to hand in their guns as part of the US effort to
secure a stable environment for the retirement of the existing military
leadership and the restoration of elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Goodwill may be as much of a factor as the profit incentive.
The price for handguns is USDollars 50, for semi-automatic rifles Dollars
100, for automatic rifles Dollars 200 and for machine guns, mortars and
artillery Dollars 300.
On the black market, however, firearms can fetch more than five times the
amounts offered by the US army. A .45 revolver, for example, could expect to
find a buyer willing to pay as much as USDollars 500.
A further disincentive is that although the US is quoting prices in US
dollars, it intends to pay out in Haitian currency at the official exchange
rate. Considering one can get 18 gourdes for a dollar on the streets as
opposed to 12.5 at official exchange outlets, guns for gourdes is a far less
attractive proposition than handing in weapons for hard currency.
At the Bowen Military Airfield in downtown Port-au-Prince, where the first
buyback facility was opened yesterday, officers acknowledged business had
been 'very, very slow'.
A high-walled truck had been parked on the disused runway to act as a
receptacle for the hand-ins. Lost at the far end of the truck was a sorry
collection of an old M1 carbine rifle, a Saturday Night Special .32 calibre
pistol, and two .38 revolvers. The infantryman on guard described their
operational quality as 'shoddy at best'.
The Haitian offering looked all the more paltry beside the guided missiles,
hand grenades, 20mm cartridges, detonators, M855 magazines and 84mm Five
Launchers piled on palettes on the tarmac.
But US officers were putting on a brave face: 'The first day is going to be
a bit bumpy,' said one 'but when the news gets out and about people will
start rolling in here.' And if they don't, the US was promising to be
flexible on price.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940928

