FT942-15994

FT  13 APR 94 / Serbs hold UN observers and refuse to meet envoys


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


Serb forces in Bosnia were last night holding more than 30 United Nations
observers  - some at gunpoint  - as the US and Russia called for a return to
negotiations over the country's future.
Despite the call, the Serbs refused to meet UN officials, including Mr
Yakushi Akashi, the UN special representative, and General Bertrand de
Lapresle, head of UN forces in former Yugoslavia, who arrived in Sarajevo.
France also accused Bosnian Serbs of hostage-taking, saying that 11 French
relief workers had been arrested on charges of trying to smuggle ammunition
into Sarajevo.
Meanwhile, President Clinton warned Bosnia's Moslem leadership not to take
advantage of Nato's air raids against the Serbs to mount new offensives.
Earlier, Moslem forces defending the enclave of Gorazde had broken an
overnight lull in the fighting by opening fire with mortars on Serb troops
surrounding the city.
Mr Clinton also said he had been encouraged by calls from Russia for a
withdrawal of Serb forces from their newly acquired territory in the Gorazde
area.
However, the US and Russia continued to differ over the legitimacy of using
Nato air power. President Clinton said it was possible that air strikes
might be used to protect not only Gorazde but five other UN-designated 'safe
areas' in Bosnia.
But President Boris Yeltsin of Russia reaffirmed his view that the use of
force by outside powers would not solve the Bosnian issue. He warned that
continued air attacks could prolong the war.
Mr Yeltsin, concluding a visit to Spain, said: 'In that part of the world,
we can only think of a negotiated solution.'
He confirmed the chill in east-west relations by saying that Russia, which
has given conflicting signals about its intentions, was now in 'no hurry' to
enter the Partnership for Peace arrangement proposed by Nato. This was a
surprisingly cool response to the proposal.
Mr John Major, the British prime minister, yesterday insisted that Nato had
acted correctly in authorising air attacks on Serb forces and that there had
been no need for consultation with any government  - including Russia  -
before the strikes went ahead.
However, he sought to soothe Moscow's concern over the attacks by hinting
that consultation with other governments might precede future air strikes.
'Wherever it is militarily practicable, it is to wise to seek the support of
those countries that supported that resolution.'
Also yesterday in a show of defiance, Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb
leader, and General Ratko Mladic, commander of Bosnian Serb forces, said
they would shoot down any Nato aircraft flying over their territory.
Western officials said they doubted whether the Serb forces around Gorazde,
believed to number 10,000 men and to be using about 25 tanks, had
anti-aircraft guns sophisticated enough to threaten advanced Nato aircraft.
UN looks to Churkin's skill, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940413

