FT944-14406

FT  22 OCT 94 / As They Say in Europe: Anchors, engineers and great powers


   By JAMES MORGAN


Germany is a great power, as the elections there show. A great power is one
that has elections which others define in the light of their own national
interests.
Britain receives a limited version of that compliment because of the
obstructive nature of its European policies. On the other hand, no newspaper
outside Italy interpreted the outcome of that country's election in terms of
what it meant for its readers. But Germany is so treated whether it likes it
or not: it is a big country, it has the biggest national income in Europe
and it has borders with nine other nations.
In the past that has spelt trouble. It might do so again. In the meantime,
each nation sees chancellor Kohl as a Father Christmas, who can give them
nice presents, or a policeman who might, with luck, be cajoled into adopting
a helpful attitude. Thus in Budapest, Nepszabadsag wrote: 'From a Central
European perspective, Kohl's re-election may be especially good news as he
may fulfil his pledge of ushering the countries of Central Europe, among
which Hungary is numbered, into the European Union and Nato.'
In Britain, the papers disagreed among themselves. The Times argued that the
British should ally themselves with Germany to create a free trading
north-western axis in Europe.
The Daily Telegraph said they should 'build alliances with those within the
union who prefer consolidation before contemplating further development'.
The French similarly viewed the German election from one point of view. In
this case it was the alleged need for what they grandly call the
construction of Europe. And, curiously enough, the conclusion reached by
most of the press was one which showed the possibilities of some kind of new
entente with the British.
The French are obsessed with proposals which envisage the creation of a
'hard core' composed of Germany, France and the Benelux countries which
would make their own little union. Le Figaro called this 'squaring the
circle' for it would permit the union to develop greater cohesion while
allowing it to expand at the same time.
Elsewhere all is hostility. Sud-Ouest wrote that Germany is anxious to
organise the Europe of which it dreams: 'A pledge of peace and a market
made-to-measure.'
InfoMatin said Germany was adopting a take-it-or-leave-it policy. That, if
pursued, would unleash a noisy wave of objections in France from
anti-Maastricht elements. These include personalities near to the tough
interior minister, Charles Pasqua, who 'do not hesitate to compare the
geographical limits of the 'hard core' with the frontiers of the Holy Roman
Empire.' They now believe that anyone who says 'yes' to the Germans are
incorrigible 'Vichyists'. In other words, going along with the German
project is a form of treason.
Most agreed that since Chancellor Kohl was now in his last term in office he
was going to do all he could to achieve the integration of Europe, just as
he had achieved German unification.
Once again we see the growing complexity of intra-European relationships.
The British bitterly oppose the creation of a hard-core club they would not
join anyway. They want expansion, which, they hope, could scupper the idea
of more integration. The French want more integration, to drive the union
ever closer together, so long as they are doing the driving. They have
supreme faith in their own ideas until they emanate from Germans.
In Germany there is continued reluctance to accept the country's new role.
It is one which many had hoped would never be assumed again in the light of
the catastrophic results of previous experiments in German leadership.
A surprised Die Welt remarked: 'Whoever glances beyond our frontiers is
amazed. Kohl's re-election finds an overwhelming echo of admiration abroad,
far better than the CDU bosses could have dreamed. There, everybody speaks
of the guarantor of stability, of his reliable style of government, of a
locomotive for integration and many other laudatory epithets.
That there is a small parliamentary majority is noted with regret. What is
stressed is the strength of German democracy, its desire for partnership and
its stability.'
This is the great paradox. The Germans themselves speak of the need to keep
Germany firmly anchored in Europe. But the more firmly it is anchored, the
more Germany becomes the motor and the more it risks being seen as too
powerful and a threat. You do not need an engineer to picture what happens
when someone starts up what is either a firmly anchored motor or a motorised
anchor.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

941022

