FT944-2962

FT  15 DEC 94 / Shareholders raise stakes in Saatchi battle


   By ROBERT PESTON


The battle between Saatchi & Saatchi's dissident shareholders and Mr Maurice
Saatchi, chairman and founder of the advertising group, intensified
yesterday when shareholders formally requested that Mr Saatchi should be
removed from the board.
Mr David Herro, of US fund manager Harris Associates, has written to
Saatchi's directors saying that if the board does not take action, a group
of shareholders will call an extraordinary meeting which will 'include the
resolution to remove the chairman of the board'.
The letter was written on behalf of Harris, the State of Wisconsin
Investment Board and General Electric Pension Trust, which together control
24.8 per cent of Saatchi. Extraordinary meetings can be called by any
shareholders controlling more than 10 per cent of a company.
Mr Herro said last night that he has the support of several other big
shareholders and believes he is speaking for more than 40 per cent of the
shares.
'Our main complaint is that we feel the chairman is putting his own
interests before those of the company or his shareholders,' he said.
Saatchi's board will consider Mr Herro's demand at a board meeting on
Friday. Directors said the vote could go either way, but Mr Herro said he
was optimistic they would 'do the right thing'.
One Saatchi director said he was extremely concerned about the possible
damage to the company if there was a public battle between shareholders and
the board in the seven weeks preceding an extraordinary meeting.
The fight between shareholders and Mr Saatchi has come to a head because of
their fury at a proposal that Mr Saatchi should receive a Pounds 5m option
package.
However Mr Herro has been concerned for nearly a year that Mr Saatchi's
entrepreneurial style is unsuited to the chairmanship of a public company.
He alleges, for example, that earlier this year Mr Saatchi wished to remove
the group's chief executive, Mr Charles Scott. 'All Scott had done was to
try to reduce holding company expenses', said Mr Herro.
Mr Herro also wants the board to drop 'Saatchi' from the holding company
name, to prevent potential damage to subsidiaries which do not have that
word in their names. A name change is supported by non-executives, but Mr
Saatchi has said he may quit if his surname is dropped.
Mr Saatchi has warned directors that big clients may take their business to
other agencies if he leaves. However, Mr Herro is sceptical about this. Mr
Saatchi is particularly close to two clients, Mars and British Airways.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941215

