FT942-15961

FT  13 APR 94 / Los Angeles freeway reopened


   By REUTER


   LOS ANGELES


The world's busiest freeway, which collapsed in two places during an
earthquake in January, reopened on Monday night, marking the biggest success
yet in Los Angeles' massive disaster-recovery effort, Reuter reports from
Los Angeles.
For the first time since the 6.8-magnitude quake struck, traffic moved
across the full length of the Santa Monica Freeway, the city's main
east-west artery.
The reopening was originally planned for early yesterday - in time for
morning commuters - but crews finished their work with time to spare and
officials raced to the scene for a brief ceremony in time to make the
late-night newscasts.
Smiling proudly for the cameras, Governor Pete Wilson, US Transportation
Secretary Federico Pena and Mayor Richard Riordan removed a half-dozen
plastic orange cones from the roadway and the first cars passed seconds
later.
The closure of the freeway, which normally carries 300,000 motorists each
day across a 15-mile stretch between downtown Los Angeles and coastal Santa
Monica, had been a stark reminder of this year's seismic upheaval, which
killed 60 people, snapped freeway overpasses and made more than 20,000 homes
uninhabitable. Losses have been estimated at up to Dollars 20m (Pounds
13.6m), making it the second most costly natural disaster in US history
after Hurricane Andrew in 1992.
Work on mending the Santa Monica Freeway, also known as Interstate-10, began
on February 5. It reopened 73 days ahead of schedule, earning the
construction company CC Myers a bonus of Dollars 200,000 a day saved, or
Dollars 14.8m.
But even with the Santa Monica Freeway back to normal after Dollars
30m-worth of reconstruction, drivers may still have reason to worry. The Los
Angeles Times reported yesterday that in its haste to reopen the freeway,
the California Department of Transportation let two replacement bridges be
built with seismic weaknesses that must be corrected to prevent significant
damage in a future quake.
Commuters' headaches are not over yet. Repairs under way on the Golden State
Freeway and other main roads are expected to take months to complete.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940413

