FT942-15935

FT  13 APR 94 / Irish PM hints at bypassing Ulster parties


   By TIM COONE and MICHAEL CASSELL


The British and Irish governments may be prepared to go over the heads of
Northern Ireland's political parties to draw up new political arrangements
and structures affecting the province, Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime
minister, claimed yesterday.
Remarks intended to drive home London and Dublin's determination to maintain
the momentum of the peace process may cause consternation among unionists.
Mr Reynolds told the Irish parliament that the governments were pressing
ahead with drafting a new 'framework document' as the focus for renewed
talks in the province 'as and when the parties are ready to resume'.
But he emphasised the two governments agreed that 'no party', whether
unionist or republican, would be allowed to block progress towards a
political solution. Asked if this meant the two governments might 'go over
the heads' of the province's parties in their efforts to seek a settlement,
Mr Reynolds acknowledged: 'It may well arrive at that situation, although it
would be preferable to have the agreement of the parties.'
The Northern Ireland Office last night had no comment on Mr Reynold's
remarks, although it emphasised that the British government remained adamant
there could be no imposed solutions. The entire basis of the Downing Street
declaration, they stressed, was the desire to achieve agreement on Ulster's
future. Current bilateral talks with the parties would progress on that
basis.
The Anglo-Irish framework document will seek to flesh out the Downing Street
declaration by detailing the new north-south structures and institutions
envisaged in the document and, according to Mr Reynolds yesterday, will also
try to deal with 'other issues'.
Unionist leaders will be concerned that this may signify that Dublin intends
to have a say in the framing of new constitutional arrangements for Northern
Ireland.
Mr Reynolds did not expect the unionists to come to the table before the
elections to the European parliament this June, but he hoped that progress
could be made during the summer. A 'deep and yawning gap' between the
British government and Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, would also
'have eventually to be bridged' he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

