FT944-2526

FT  16 DEC 94 / Pounds 10bn spent on treating water


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


The 30 regional water companies in England and Wales have spent more than
Pounds 10bn to improve supplies and raise quality since the 1990-91
financial year, according to Ofwat, the regulatory body.
The figure, published in a report on the companies' financial performance
and investment, will stoke criticisms which arose earlier this year over
whether the industry is placing too much of its investment burden on
customers.
Some consumer groups and Labour politicians have claimed that charges have
been raised unnecessarily to fund ambitious investment programmes to improve
supplies and raise water quality to European Union standards.
According to the critics, the companies have financed much of their
investment through excessive charges so they could maintain high profits and
dividends after privatisation in 1989.
But Ofwat argues that the industry has borrowed heavily to finance long-term
spending. The industry's net debt amounted to Pounds 3.3bn at the end of
March - roughly equivalent to the companies' cash requirements since
1990-91. Moreover, almost Pounds 2bn more has been ploughed back through
retained profits.
The surge in borrowing has been reflected in rising interest charges.
Interest payments climbed from virtually nil in 1990-91 to about Pounds 200m
in the last financial year.
The Water Services Association, which groups the 10 biggest companies
handling both fresh and waste water, said about half the industry's
financial needs were now coming from external sources.
In a separate report, Ofwat revealed sharp differences in companies' charges
for delivering water. Costs varied from 41p per cu m at Hartlepools Water to
103p per cu m at Tendring Hundred Water, against an industry average of 58p
per cu m.
Welsh Water was fined Pounds 20,000 yesterday after the Saundersfoot, west
Wales, holiday resort was seriously affected by pollution.
Tenby magistrates heard that large quantities of sewage were discharged into
a stream then on to the beach where people were bathing.
Welsh Water admitted two charges under the Water Resources Act. It was also
ordered to pay Pounds 2,264 costs.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941216

