FT941-4226

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (15): Construction cranes will
be back - Two grand business property developments are good indicators of
what is going on in Madrid's property market / Spain


   By TOM BURNS


Big business property developments tend to have grandiose names and those in
Spain are no exception to the rule.
The Gateway to Europe, at the northern edge of Madrid's central axis, the
broad Castellana boulevard, is one grand example and the Field of Nations,
just beyond the city's limits and close to the airport is another. Both are
good indicators of what has happened, what is happening and what is likely
to happen to the Spanish capital's property market.
The Gateway, which consists of two 46-storey office blocks that lean towards
each other, is better known in Madrid as the KIO towers after the Kuwait
Investment Office whose company, Prima Inmobiliaria, began to build them
when the property market was booming in the late 1980s.
The company, together with the KIO's main Spanish investment arm, went into
receivership in December 1992 and the half-completed Gateway was finally
acquired at a bargain price a year later by a syndicate of domestic
financial groups and by FCC, a leading construction company.
The Field of Nations, a 90,000 sq m business park which includes Madrid's
main trade fair centre, has gradually come on stream in the past four years
and is now up and running and virtually filled up. Recently, an insurance
company, Genesis, which is jointly owned by Metropolitan Life of the US and
by Banco Santander, the leading domestic bank, acquired an 8,000 sq m block
in the park, one of the last available locations.
The acquisition by Genesis appeared to indicate a trend. 'If a bank like
Santander, which knows the market very well, is buying freehold it means
that the office market has bottomed out,' says Mr John Baines, chief
executive of real estate company Healey and Baker in Madrid.
In recent months, Procter and Gamble, Unysis, Bull and the domestic energy
company Cepsa have rented large areas of office space in the Campo. Richard
Ellis, which together with Healey and Baker is a leading player in the
domestic property market, believes that suburbs - and particularly business
parks - stand to gain as companies seek to relocate because of potentially
rising leasehold costs in older city-centre buildings.
The costs could rise sharply for companies with pre-1985 leases which will
be deregulated when a new Urban Leasehold Act comes into force later this
year. The act would have been on the statute book last year but was
postponed when parliament was dissolved and new elections held.
The increased expense will be a distinct change for rental prices have come
down strongly, by as much as 40 per cent in some buildings. Early in 1993,
the supply of offices along the 'prime prime' Castellana boulevard axis
outstripped demand, something which, Richard Ellis points out, 'nobody could
have imagined'.
But then again few expected that the Spanish economy would fall so fast and
so deeply into a recession midway through 1992. The painful shrinkage of the
GDP came to a halt in the third quarter of last year and a moderate but
sustained expansion is in place and will become evident in the second half
of the current year.
On the property market, the cycle appeared to be distinctly changing before
the end of last year. Healey and Baker estimates that vacancy rates along
the Castellana central business area will drop in the course of this year to
a mere 6 per cent and there is a general consensus in the market that office
rents are set to rise.
The ownership troubles that afflicted the Gateway, or the KIO towers, could
consequently have been a blessing in disguise. Work has restarted on the two
blocks after an interval of nearly 18 months and they are likely to be
completed and ready for occupation in the spring of next year - just when
office space demand is expected to be growing strongly.
In Barcelona, where there is less demand for large office locations (the
great majority of corporate headquarters in Spain are in Madrid), demand
will pick up more moderately. Starting rental prices are similar in both
cities but the vacancy rates in Barcelona are appreciably higher than those
in Madrid.
International investors are mostly quiet in the office sector but there is
increasing activity in retail properties and particularly in shopping
centres. The latter have mushroomed all over Spain with good results but
there is room for more growth.
The retail excitement will prod the office sector into activity sooner
rather than later. A key factor in this is that interest rates have come
down fast in Spain over the past eight months and are set to fall further in
the months ahead. Developers can now acquire three-year, medium-term finance
at around 8.5 per cent and it is a sure bet that the big construction
cranes, which used to be such a permanent feature of Spanish city skylines,
will be back.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940311

