FT941-4210

FT  12 MAR 94 / Toshio's tourists turn a pretty profit: A businessman's
novel way of beating Japanese high prices


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


Mr Toshio Miyaji is a popular man. He's setting off from Tokyo to London and
Paris on Monday and more than 10,000 women want to go with him. The 100 he
chose to accompany him he picked out of a hat.
The reasons for Mr Miyaji's unusual attraction are not too hard to find. Not
only is the 64-year-old Japanese shopkeeper paying for the women's travel
and accommodation, he is also giving them Y500,000 (some Pounds 3,000) each
to spend on luxury goods in the most expensive stores Paris and London can
offer.
Mr Miyaji's intentions are strictly honourable. He's out to make money. The
differences in the prices of luxury goods in Europe and Japan are so great
that, in spite of the costs of a week's stay, he can resell the goods in
Tokyo at a profit.
Mr Miyaji knows he can make a profit on the trip because he has done it
before. At the beginning of last year, he led two-thirds of his 60 employees
on a free trip to Paris to buy Louis Vuitton and Chanel handbags.
'Last time the accommodation and flight cost Y470,000 per person and I only
made Y880,000 on the whole journey,' says Mr Miyaji. This time he has hotel
and airline sponsorship. 'It's only costing me Y200,000 for each housewife.'
Although he may be popular in Tokyo, Mr Miyaji is less well esteemed among
Europe's luxury goods makers. When last in Paris he found his photograph
posted up in a Louis Vuitton store. 'They didn't want to sell to me,' he
complains.
Lipstick is one of the main objectives of his latest journey. 'The
difference in prices is outrageous. A Chanel lipstick costs Y3,500 in Tokyo,
but only Y1,500 in Paris. A poll showed that 82 per cent of Japanese women
want to wear foreign lipstick, but a law dating back 50 years limits imports
to 10 per cent of the market.
'Women represent 70 per cent of my customers and I want to do something for
them,' claims Mr Miyaji. 'I'm going to import the lipstick back into Japan
and sell it at a discount. That's punishable by two years in jail. But I'm
prepared to go to jail. It's bad to violate laws, but I'm resolved to fight
an inappropriate ones. Unless I do so, consumers will continue to suffer
high prices.'
Mr Miyaji does not expect to go to jail. He has built up a formidable retail
empire, Jonan Denki, by pushing the authorities and Japanese manufacturing
establishment just so far.
In just 20 years, he created a Y12bn-a-year chain of six Tokyo stores
through aggressive discounting.
Jonan Denki is built on cash. Mr Miyaji's shambolic office, littered with
Chanel eau de toilette, cheap star-shaped transparent plastic clocks, and
the odd bottle of Russian vodka and brandy, is also adorned by an automatic
cash counting machine of the kind usually found in banks. As he pushes a
handful of money from his wallet through the machine, he proudly claims the
machine is the only one operated by a retail store in Tokyo. The wad comes
to a disappointing Y300,000.
Mr Miyaji's explains his ultimate objective is not to make money, but to
create a revolution in retailing.
'The Berlin wall may have fallen. But here in Japan nothing alters. We must
force change,' he says. At the vanguard of his struggle will be 100
housewives wielding lipstick.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940312

