FT944-11093

FT  08 NOV 94 / Technology: The future is crystal clear - Growing
international competition to capture a share of the LCD market


   By VANESSA HOULDER


When an earthquake hits Sharp's liquid crystal display plant at Tenri in
Japan, its manufacturing operations automatically shut down. Otherwise, this
stark, pristine factory - where the automatic guided vehicles are more
evident than people and the air is a million times cleaner than the outside
world - works round the clock, turning out 120,000 displays a month.
The plant is one of the most sophisticated in the liquid crystal display
industry, which is becoming larger and more innovative each year. The thin
profile, light weight and moderate power consumption of LCDs make them a
vital component in everything from laptop computers to control-panel
displays in jet aircraft.
Growing demand for LCD screens is creating intense international competition
for a share of the Dollars 5.3bn (Pounds 3.3bn) world market. At present,
Japanese manufacturers, led by Sharp - which claims a 45 per cent market
share - have a virtual monopoly of the market.
Japan's dominance of this technology has spurred the US government into
taking one of its boldest industrial policy initiatives for many years. In
April, the Clinton administration announced a plan to provide about Dollars
700m for the development and manufacture of flat panel displays in an
attempt to wrest market share away from the Japanese producers.
The Japanese manufacturers, however, are spending heavily in an attempt to
preserve their lead. Sharp, for instance, is spending Y120bn (Pounds 759m)
on LCD plant and equipment in the three years to 1995; it is building the
world's largest LCD plant in Taki-cho, between Osaka and Nagoya at a cost of
Y53bn.
The company's involvement in the LCD market goes back to the early 1970s.
That was a few years after the discovery by RCA, the US broadcasting
company, that liquid crystals - substances that behave optically as a
crystal and mechanically as a liquid - could be made to realign so they
transmitted light when subjected to an electric charge.
The finding was quickly exploited in cheap watches and calculators. But the
poor quality of the early LCDs, which had weak contrast and a narrow viewing
angle, made them unsuitable for displays larger than a watch face.
Over time, LCDs went through a number of enhancements. A sharper contrast
was produced, for example, by the introduction of supertwisted nematic LCDs.
Another important breakthrough came when passive-matrix LCDs were superseded
by active-matrix LCDs, in which individual transistors turn each element in
the display on and off. The full colour and high contrast of these displays
allowed them to be incorporated in miniature colour televisions.
Sharp's position in the flat panel display market was reinforced in 1986,
when it decided to redouble its research efforts in LCDs. The sharp increase
in the value of the yen in 1986 convinced the company it had to shift more
of its products from labour-intensive to knowledge-intensive products. Haruo
Tsuji, the newly-appointed president, was looking for another mainstay
besides semiconductors. 'We decided to devote particular efforts to LCDs,'
he says. 'I felt keenly there was a need for a successor to cathode ray
tubes.'
Sharp and its rivals have put immense effort into trying to increase the
size of the displays. In 1988, it presented the first display that measured
14 in across the diagonal. It has recently created a new record by producing
a prototype of a 21 in screen.
Building large displays poses formidable problems. A display is made up of
hundreds of thousands of individual pixels, or dots, each of which must be
controlled by a tiny transistor. The importance of avoiding even a single
flawed pixel requires extraordinary precision on the part of manufacturers,
even by the exacting standards of the electronics industry.
As screens become larger, manufacturers also face greater problems in
fabricating the thin film transistors uniformly, distributing the liquid
crystal material evenly and resolving timing problems in the signals.
Research is continuing into producing higher quality images, thinner
profiles and lower power consumption of the displays. At the same time, the
manufacturers are trying to improve manufacturing yields and reduce costs.
A potential threat for manufacturers is that competition will drive down
prices. Competition is intensifying, particularly as Korean manufacturers,
such as Samsung, Hyundai and Lucky Goldstar, move into the market.
But Tsuji believes that demand for LCDs is growing at a pace sufficient to
outstrip supply. His judgment is backed by Koichiro Chiwata, electronics
analyst at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo, who believes that supply and demand
for LCDs will remain tight enough for Sharp's LCD business to 'do well for
at least the next five years'.
At present, two-thirds of the LCD market is used for notebook computers; the
second most important application is for display screens in Pachinko
parlours, amusement arcades where a Japanese version of pinball is played.
But other uses such as wall-mounted television, video projectors, navigation
systems, portable game machines and personal information tools, are expected
to expand the market.
Sharp is devoting particular research effort to developing new products that
include LCD screens. One example is the Viewcam, a camcorder with an LCD
monitor instead of a traditional viewfinder, which it introduced in 1992.
Although most LCD-based products currently make use of the 'shutter
function' of liquid crystals, new applications could stem from their other
properties, such as their ability to react to light and to store
information. These qualities have already been put to use in the development
of a pen-based word processor, which senses the movement of a pen on the
screen.
Sharp believes the market will grow to Dollars 20bn by the end of the
century. 'I consider the field of LCD is really immense and extensive,' says
Tsuji.
Another possible threat to Sharp's dominant position in the market is that
LCDs will be superseded by another technology. The technical difficulty of
building large LCD displays at an acceptable price has prompted some
companies to work on other technologies. For example, plasma displays, in
which images are created from gas-filled tubes, are considered to be a
leading contender in the race to create a market for flat, wall-mounted
television screens.
A number of technologists are backing ferroelectric displays, a form of LCD
technology that does not require transistors to switch the liquid crystal
cells, as a cost-effective approach to building large display screens.
Electroluminescent displays, which depend on an electron exciting a phosphor
in a thin film, are also receiving close attention.
A number of international companies are devoting particular attention to
field emission displays, which resemble an array of tiny cathode ray tubes.
Although it is still relatively immature technology, its backers believe it
could score over LCDs because it would be relatively cheap to produce.
Sharp, too, is working on the next generation of display technologies. But
for the present, it believes the supremacy of LCDs is assured. 'In five,
seven, 10 years from now, LCD will be the main type of product (in flat
panel displays),' says Atsushi Asada, senior executive vice-president.
Sharp's continued lead in LCDs cannot be guaranteed, but its strong
performance in the sector has stood it in good stead at a time when Japanese
manufacturers are suffering the effects of the high yen and consumers' jaded
appetite for electronic gadgets.
Sharp acknowledges it cannot be complacent. The rise in the value of the yen
costs Y3bn in profit for every point gained against the dollar. According to
Taizo Katsura, senior executive vice-president, it is crucial the company
continues to develop high-value components. 'As a manufacturer we cannot be
competitive by depending on the assembly side,' he says.
It will also need to maintain its edge in research. Technological innovation
is crucial if the company is to devise the next generation of products that
will open up new markets, says Tsuji. 'We have to develop key technologies.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

941108

