FT941-5538

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Copper tarnishes RTZ - The week
ahead


IMI, the diversified engineering group, is expected to announce a small
increase in annual profits on Monday, probably around Pounds 70m for 1993
against Pounds 68m for 1992. It has been coping with rationalisation of its
fluid power operations and losses on computer activities.
More vigorous profits growth is held back by the state of continental
European economies, but there should be rising revenue from the UK and US.
Little better than break-even is expected from Fisons, the troubled
pharmaceuticals and scientific equipment group, when it reports full-year
figures on Tuesday. Profits of between Pounds 50m and Pounds 70m will be
wiped out by re-structuring provisions, particularly at the loss-making
scientific equipment division.
RTZ, the world's biggest mining company, is expected to report net
attributable earnings for 1993 of around Pounds 300m on Wednesday, up from
Pounds 249m previously. The results will be hampered by weak copper prices
but helped by a strong performance from CRA, its Australian associate.
During the year the group has sharpened its focus on mining, buying Nerco's
US coal interests and disposing of Pillar, its industrial division, which is
expected to result in a Pounds 165m loss after writing back goodwill.
Full-year figures from Cadbury Schweppes, also due on Wednesday, will be
affected heavily by the group's recent acquisition programme, including
Aguas Minerals of Mexico and A&W Brands of the US, together with last
September's rights issue. The net result could be a rise in pre-tax profits
from Pounds 333m to Pounds 400m, with perhaps Pounds 25m of the rise due to
the weakness of sterling.
Standard Chartered is expected to deliver its first strong and unflawed set
of results for several years on Wednesday, with analysts expecting pre-tax
profits to double from Pounds 197m in 1992 to about Pounds 400m for last
year.
Last year's 20p net dividend is expected to be covered up to four times by
earnings. The bank could feel the need to underpin its recently volatile
share price with a strong increase in the final dividend.
The City expects Rolls-Royce, the UK aero-engine and industrial power group,
to report improved pre-tax profits of Pounds 60m-Pounds 75m for 1993 on
Thursday. In 1992, losses were Pounds 184m pre-tax. Having launched a Pounds
307m rights issue last year, it reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 31m for
the first half of 1993. At the interim stage, it forecast an unchanged
dividend of 5p a share for the full year.
Shares in BTR, the UK industrial conglomerate, have underperformed the
market by about 20 per cent since last August. This is likely to be
exercising its executives before the group's 1993 results on Thursday.
The company first unsettled the market by warning in September that the
outlook remained uncertain for any economic recovery in the group's second
half. Analysts duly trimmed their forecasts and the present expectation is
for pre-tax profits of about Pounds 1.38bn, compared with Pounds 1.09bn last
time.
Full-year figures from Hillsdown on Thursday will show a rebound from the
depressed Pounds 63.7m post-exceptional figure for 1992. However, the gain
against the reported pre-tax profit of Pounds 154.1m will be smaller - the
range of forecasts extends from Pounds 155m to Pounds 164m.
Profits on the disposal of non-core activities are likely to fuel a sharp
improvement at TI, the specialist engineering group, which is expected to
post pre-tax profits of up to Pounds 130m on Thursday, against a re-stated
Pounds 87.4m last time.
Interest in the Barclays results' announcement on Thursday is heightened
because it will be the first time that Martin Taylor, the new chief
executive, will have the chance to give his views after examining the
banking group thoroughly.
Because the bank cut its dividend last year as a result of making a Pounds
242m loss, analysts do not expect any increase. But the reduced dividend is
likely to be well covered, with analysts predicting pre-tax profits of about
Pounds 750m.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940305

