FT942-12427

FT  29 APR 94 / UK Company News: David Brown shares fall on cautious
statement


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Shares in David Brown Group, the Yorkshire-based specialist engineer which
came to the market last April, fell by 23p to 263p after the company sounded
a cautious note on trading.
Mr Derek Kingsbury, chairman, said the group - which in November bought the
hydraulics and transmissions division of Hamworthy from Powell Duffryn for
Pounds 11.1m - still saw few signs of widespread recovery.
He said: 'Progress remains largely dependent on the many initiatives our
management is taking to grow the businesses, together with the benefits from
rationalisation and turnround of the Hamworthy operation.'
Pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 9.3m to Pounds 10.8m in the year to
February 4, but the increase was entirely due to the post-flotation
reduction in interest payments to Pounds 234,000 (Pounds 1.78m).
Turnover rose to Pounds 86.5m (Pounds 81m), because of an 11-week
contribution from the Hamworthy operations.
Despite a small profits contribution from the new businesses, operating
profit was flat at Pounds 11.1m, which the group said reflected the
difficult conditions in its main markets.
The vehicle transmissions division maintained sales and profits, in spite of
a first-half gap between orders for gearboxes in the Challenger 1 and
Challenger 2 tanks.
The group said a 20 per cent drop in sales to the military had been replaced
by developing commercial business.
Mr Chris Brown, joint chief executive, said the recent government decision
to buy up to 259 Challenger 2 tanks was likely to extend the group's order
book from 1997 well into the next century.
The pumps division increased sales, but operating profits fell by 26 per
cent because of a change in the sales mix towards lower-margin business.
Some 150 jobs have been shed from the Hamworthy operations at Poole, Dorset,
and of the two factories there, one is being closed.
A further 100 net jobs will be lost in the transmissions business.
Pro-forma earnings per share were flat at 14.1p. A final dividend of 4.3p
gives a total of 6.4p
COMMENT
The shares have had a good run since flotation at 170p, but the tone of this
statement caused analysts to downgrade expectations. There was
disappointment over the extent of pricing pressure in special products,
which makes custome-built gearboxes, and the recent collapse of Lancer Boss
will not help the group - sales to the lift-truck maker were worth more than
Pounds 1m a year, and a hefty bad debt charge is expected. The strategy of
consolidating and modernising the group's businesses still makes a lot of
sense, but the benefits may take longer to materialise than had been hoped.
Even after yesterday's 9 per cent fall, a prospective multiple of 18 puts
the shares on a 16 per cent premium to the market - which looks fully
valued.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940429

