FT941-5501

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: Curtain up on Newcastle - Off the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The Royal Shakespeare Company is playing away this month, enjoying its
annual visit to Newcastle. Following it north is Peter Brook, with his new
play The Man Who. In May comes the Maly Drama Theatre of St Petersburg, and
the premiere of a Michael Clark dance work. All this in Newcastle?
The city fathers may not have digested the message from Birmingham, Glasgow
and Manchester that the arts can be an economic stimulant. But the Arts
Council and its satrap on the spot, Northern Arts, are filling the breach,
providing funding for the high-calibre visiting companies and aiding the
revitalisation of Northern Stage.
Two years ago, the company was in a parlous state. Alan Lyddiard was brought
in from Glasgow as artistic director and his first task was to take control
of the Playhouse Theatre. Now he has created the first Newcastle
International Festival of Theatre. He thinks in terms of consortia and
packages, and plans a Nordic Arts festival, uniting theatres in Derry,
Newcastle, across Scandinavia and St Petersburg, where Northern Stage plans
to perform Animal Farm next year.
The one established cultural beacon in Newcastle occupies an inaccessible
prefab under one of the Tyne bridges. From this suitably modest spot Neil
Astley runs Bloodaxe, which over the last two years has doubled its sales to
become the leading publisher of contemporary poetry in the UK.
About 50 books are published a year. Half make money; half do not, but with
poetry now appearing on Radio One and public readings by poets assuming the
appeal of pop concerts, Bloodaxe is on a high.
With established poets RS Thomas and Tony Harrison, rap poet Benjamin
Zephaniah and pop poet Joolz on its list, Bloodaxe looks like the first
specialist poetry publisher in the land to flourish for generations. It
still needs Pounds 66,000 from Northern Arts to cover the cost of the poets
that take years to move into the black. The hundred unsolicited manuscripts
that arrive each week on Astley's desk cannot be ignored. It was this pile
that yielded Glyn Maxwell's earlier work.
Across the Tyne, Gateshead has always felt itself the poor relation to
Newcastle. But it has plans to show its innate superiority with two
ambitious plans for the visual arts.
At the entrance to the town, on the A1, Gateshead is proposing to erect a
mammoth metal sculpture of an angel, designed by Anthony Gormley and cast by
British Steel. It will be 150ft high with a wing span of 60ft. It should be
ready by in two years time, when the northern region becomes the Arts
Council's key venue for the Year of the Visual Arts. The work will cost at
least Pounds 150,000 but Gateshead is confident that trusts, sponsors and
British Steel will contribute to make the project possible.
By 1996 Gateshead also hopes to have opened part of the region's largest art
gallery, the converted Baltic Flour Mill on the banks of the Tyne. This is
the north east's main candidate for Millennium Fund money from the Lottery.
It will cost around Pounds 10m to convert the mill into a gallery, which
will be used for visiting exhibitions. Lord Palumbo, outgoing chairman of
the Arts Council, and Nick Serota of the Tate are enthusiastic about the
project. The only problem is that the ledges beneath the roof provide
protected perches for kittihawks which apparently are protected and take
priority over art.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

940305

