FT941-5628

FT  05 MAR 94 / Lobby groups left to carry green banner


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


Though Greenpeace lost its 14-month battle to halt Thorp in the High Court
yesterday, the case suggests that pressure groups rather than opposition
political parties provide the main challenge to the government's
environmental policies.
'There is no question that the people the government has been worried about
right through the whole Thorp affair are Greenpeace, not Labour,' said one
official at the Department of the Environment.
Thorp, one of last year's most controversial industrial issues, presented
Labour with a dilemma. The party's policy is to phase out nuclear power, but
the plant, which employs 2,000 in a region of high unemployment, is in the
constituency of Mr Jack Cunningham, shadow foreign secretary.
Mr Chris Smith, shadow environment spokesman, called Mr Cunningham's support
for Thorp a 'legitimate constituency view'. But according to Mr Andrew Lees,
campaigns director of the pressure group Friends of the Earth, the overall
effect was that Labour was 'stunningly silent - they managed to keep their
heads down, that's all'.
Critics feel that the recurrent conflict between jobs and being green
prevents Labour developing a coherent environmental strategy. For example,
Labour opposes the rapid shutdown of the coal industry even though this cuts
emissions of carbon dioxide and the threat to global warming. But according
to Mr Dieter Helm of Oxera, the forecasting group, Labour's plans for more
energy efficiency 'provide only a short-term answer and duck questions of
long-term energy policy'.
The Liberal Democrats produced a clearer line on Thorp. Mr Simon Hughes,
environment spokesman, used the debate adeptly to call for more public
access to environmental data. But they too have sometimes seemed reluctant
to acknowledge the costs of curbing pollution.
Mr Scott Barrett, lecturer in environmental economics at the London Business
School, said: 'Their concerns about putting value added tax on household
fuel are hard to understand as they have advocated pretty big environmental
taxes.'
In contrast, Whitehall officials credit the pressure groups with having
forced the government to re-examine Thorp's future, even if they did not
eventually change its mind. Part of that influence, officials make clear,
was the pressure groups' increasing use of the courts. Officials say
Greenpeace's threat of legal action last summer prompted a second public
consultation into the plant, delaying the go-ahead by several months.
Legal action by lobbyists has been rare in the UK compared with the US,
where powerful groups such as the Sierra Club, the San Francisco-based
ecology group, keep large legal teams on retainer. Court action has begun to
appeal to UK campaigners partly because of the amount of UK and European
legislation passed in the past decade.
Mr Lees, who said that Friends of the Earth would step up lawsuits against
the government and companies, added that 'European regulation has given us a
particularly good lever'.
A second reason is the groups' growing financial muscle. Greenpeace UK
received Pounds 6.6m last year in donations before fundraising costs, and
Friends of the Earth about Pounds 4.5m on the same basis.
But Thorp also displays two factors which could eventually jeopardise the
pressure groups' success. In the Thorp case, the judge ruled that Greenpeace
and Lancashire County Council did not have to pay the government's costs,
but normally the costs of losing such cases are formidable.
The second threat is that the campaigners' agenda may increasingly be moving
away from their supporters' concerns, which could eventually undermine their
ability to raise funds.
Lord Melchett, director of Greenpeace UK, said that while Greenpeace's
policymakers had felt Thorp was a priority, its members may have cared more
about whaling and toxic waste.
Mr Lees also acknowledged a gap: 'We have pretensions beyond representing
our members - we are acting in loco parentis for the future.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940305

