FT941-16797

FT  07 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Steichen says no more farm
reform needed


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


The European Union will need to make no further adjustments to its reforms
of its common agricultural policy provided that member countries stick to
the schedule already agreed for changes, which runs until 1996, Mr Rene
Steichen, the union's agriculture commissioner said yesterday.
Speaking at the Oxford Farming Conference, Mr Steichen said: 'There are good
reasons to hope that we can erode current cereal stocks by rising internal
consumption and the increase in subsidised exports allowed under last-minute
changes to the Blair House deal'.
He said that no further CAP reforms for the arable sector would be necessary
to fit in with the recent settlement in the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade. The modifications to the Blair House accord, which were made to quell
French objections to the Gatt deal, will allow the EU to export an
additional 8.1m tonnes of wheat and flour over the six years from 1995. That
represented about a third of current stocks of between 23m and 25m tonnes,
Mr Steichen said.
In addition, he pointed to a rise in the consumption of wheat for animal
feed within the EU. This is expected to grow by 4m to 5m tonnes in the
latest marketing year and looks set to rise by 11m tonnes a year within two
to three years.
Nevertheless, cereals stocks were still 'alarmingly high,' and the community
had some way to go in getting rid of them, the commissioner stressed.
He pointed to the crucial role played by the unpopular acreage set-aside
programme in the reform of the arable sector. 'I appreciate and sympathise
with the concerns of farmers on set-aside,' he admitted. But he claimed that
decisions taken at the last council meeting in December to enable farmers to
opt voluntarily to set-aside larger portions of their land than the
compulsory 15 per cent would make the programme more acceptable to producers
and society.
'This could mean that there will be a tendency towards lower set-aside
requirements rather than an increase after 1996.'
Mr Steichen insisted that CAP reform was compatible with the Gatt agreement
as long as member countries implemented the reforms strictly.
He said that the modifications to the Blair House deal, as well as
increasing the amount of subsidised wheat exports over six years, would see
the EU exporting an additional 362,000 tonnes of cheap beef - 65 per cent of
the EU's stockpile - 253,000 tonnes of poultry and 102,000 tonnes of peas.
Although the overall picture of CAP reform was positive, Mr Steichen
stressed that reform of the beef sector was urgently needed 'before an
emergency situation arises'. Beef stocks had recently become more balanced -
falling from 1m tonnes to about 500,000 tonnes - but that was the result of
the production cycle rather than reform.
'In 1 to 2 years we will be facing an imbalance caused by overproduction
again,' he warned.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940107

