FT942-15867

FT  13 APR 94 / Tax officials told to be more sensitive in dealing with
public


   By ANDREW JACK


Tax officials should be more sensitive in their dealings with the public and
make more effort to understand taxpayers' views, according to the head of
the independent tax watchdog.
Releasing the first set of figures since her office began work last July, Ms
Elizabeth Filkin, the Revenue adjudicator, said she had upheld nearly
two-thirds of completed cases brought by disgruntled taxpayers against the
Inland Revenue.
Of the 104 cases concluded so far, 64 have been settled wholly or partly in
favour of the taxpayer, 36 in favour of the Revenue and four were withdrawn
by the complainants.
The most common causes for complaints were delays in obtaining tax refunds,
the conduct of Revenue investigations and excessive haste in attempting to
collect tax arrears  - often without using sufficient discretion.
Ms Filkin said: 'Sometimes the Revenue has been aggressive and shown little
imagination in realising what it is like to be a taxpayer. It doesn't take
into account the fright it causes to small businesses.'
She called for greater training, more 'customer focus' and the need for tax
officials to 'put yourselves more into other people's shoes'.
She said inspectors had sometimes made too many assumptions about taxpayers'
understanding of the tax system, and wrote antagonistic letters in
'officialese' when they did not themselves understand the tax position.
However, Ms Filkin stressed that she was pleased with the way the Revenue
had co-operated with her office and followed the findings she had made.
She added that problems were inevitable in an organisation as large as the
Revenue, which she called 'the largest business in the country'.
Since the adjudicator's office began operations nine months ago it has
received 1,519 complaints about the Revenue, of which 1,006 were resolved
without a full investigation.
The adjudicator's office was created as part of the Revenue's attempts under
the Citizen's Charter to improve services. It is funded by the Revenue but
Ms Filkin is not part of the department's management structure.
Ms Filkin said the complaints received were generally more complicated than
she had initially anticipated, and that 73 per cent had been made by people
with incomes below Pounds 15,000.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940413

