FT941-12934

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (4): From the middle of nowhere - Merloni, known
for its Ariston brand, is the only big white goods company still in Italian
hands. Its success was built on design flair and efficiency. David Lane
examines its overseas impact / Exporter profile / Merloni of Italy


   By DAVID LANE


Large household appliances rank high in any list of Italian manufacturing
strengths. For many years Italy's white goods industry has been a European
leader, leaving little space for foreign intruders in its home market and
aggressively capturing market share abroad. It has provided jobs for tens of
thousands and a wealth of case study material for business school students.
Refrigerators and washing machines were in the forefront of goods that
contributed significantly to export success during the 1960s 'economic
miracle'. They continue to do so. The shake-out in the sector during the
1980s has left fewer, but stronger, large players. Merloni Elettrodomestici
is one of them.
Known for its Ariston brand, Merloni recorded consolidated sales of about
L1,700bn last year, of which about two thirds were outside Italy. Holding
market leadership with 22 per cent of its home market, Merloni has nearly 10
per cent of the white goods market in both France and the UK, as well as
almost 4 per cent in Germany. 'France and the UK together generate the same
turnover as Italy,' notes Vittorio Merloni, chairman.
'We were helped by the exchange rate last year. But we do not want, or need,
to compete through devaluation,' claims Mr Merloni. He adds that the company
gained a full point of European market share in 1993. Profits also
increased. The group posted L14bn on L726bn sales at the end of June,
doubling 1992's L7bn half-year result on L631bn sales, and the year-end
figures are expected to show further improvement.
Merloni is one of Europe's four big white goods makers, keeping company with
Electrolux, Whirlpool (Philips) and Siemens. It is now the only
Italian-owned maker in the top league, the 1980s shake-out in the sector
seeing Zanussi taken over by Electrolux and Ignis taken over by Philips.
Merloni itself contributed to the rationalisation by absorbing Indesit six
years ago.
The company has come from behind to take a place among today's leaders.
Established in 1930 by the present chairman's father, Merloni was originally
a maker of weighing machines. Diversification took it first, at the
beginning of the 1960s, into the manufacture of gas cylinders, and then into
gas cookers and water heaters.
'We made our first electrical appliances at the end of the 1960s. Being a
latecomer to the sector we faced the disadvantage of being small when
competitors were already large. But we benefited from the advantage of an
established and growing market,' says Mr Merloni.
'In shifting into electrical appliances we were able to draw on our existing
technologies, processes and distribution systems. Design was, however, the
aspect that marked us out from our competitors. 'Merloni has been in the
forefront in design,' he explains.
Italian industrial design seemed to take the world by storm during the 1960s
and 1970s. 'Merloni rode this wave,' says the company's chairman. He adds,
'Ten years ago we launched the 'Margherita' range, and this was very
influential. A new generation of appliances is currently being designed by
Giugiaro to re-launch the Indesit brand.'
Design is an important factor. 'But costs and the cost/quality ratio are
crucial,' says Mr Merloni. He explains that, while the competitive edge of
low labour costs enjoyed by Italian manufacturing during the 'economic
miracle' has long since been eroded, labour is now a smaller part of total
costs.
'It was about 25 per cent in the 1960s. Today the wage bill represents less
than 15 per cent of our total costs. It is no accident that we have invested
heavily in production processes to reduce the impact of labour costs.
Directing investment into new and more efficient equipment has been
encouraged by Italian tax laws which permit a significant level of
accelerated depreciation,' says Mr Merloni.
Design flair and efficiency in production help explain Italy's leadership in
white goods. Can this be maintained? Mr Merloni is confident that it can. 'A
highly competitive system has developed. Alongside the small number of large
well-known manufacturers there are many lesser-known and small makers. My
brother's company is an example. It makes 1.5m refrigerators and washing
machines each year for leading brands. Behind the white goods makers there
is a robust and flexible network of component and machinery manufacturers,'
says Mr Merloni. He believes that Italy's position is not at risk in the
short or medium term.
Mr Merloni says that transport costs are one of the reasons why the company
will return to manufacturing in Britain. (It decided to close its Colston
subsidiary at the end of the 1980s.) Merloni currently makes almost one
quarter of its annual production of 4.3m units - split about equally between
cookers and ovens, refrigerators and freezers, and washing machines and
dishwashers - in its French, Portuguese and Turkish subsidiaries.
Although manufacturing may increase abroad, the importance of the Italian
home base will not diminish. Merloni's main factory is at Fabriano in the
Marches. 'It is in the middle of nowhere,' remarks Mr Merloni. He adds:
'Marchigiani have always been forced to look to distant markets. Ten years
ago 70 per cent of Merloni's sales were in Italy and 30 per cent abroad. Now
the converse is true.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940127

