FT942-14389

FT  20 APR 94 / World Stock Markets: Bad news from Balkans, tax measures hit
Athens - The recent slide in Greek equities


   By KERIN HOPE


Bad news from the Balkans and a furore over the Greek government's plans for
fiscal reform are sending tremors through the Athens Stock Exchange.
Last week the general index bottomed at 954.39, down by 20 per cent from its
high of 1,194.58 on January 18, recovering to 992.47 on Monday and easing
slightly again yesterday.
In the Balkans, it was not just NATO air strikes in Bosnia, signalling that
peace in the former Yugoslavia is still far off, which affected the index. A
border incident with Albania, where Greek textiles companies are starting to
transfer production, added to investors' anxieties; and the European Union's
decision to start legal proceedings against Greece over its blockade of the
former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia was another blow.
On top of that, equities have also been troubled by aspects of the socialist
government's fiscal package. In particular, a proposal to tax dividends on
mutual funds' holdings of treasury bills at 15 per cent took the bourse by
surprise.
While earnings on bank deposits are taxed at 15 per cent, interest on
government debt is still tax-free. Greece's flourishing mutual funds, with
assets of Dr1,500bn (Dollars 6bn), are heavily invested in government
securities, currently paying real interest of around 8 per cent.
Apart from upsetting fund managers' investment plans, the measure is
expected to stall mutual fund growth. Fixed income funds, which invest
almost all their assets in treasury bills, are especially hard hit, as there
are few other suitable instruments available locally.
Although not aimed directly at the equity market, the tax proposal has
affected sentiment there. Mr Peter Doukas of Citibank said: 'It's a rather
amateurish way of raising revenues that's going to hold the market back for
a while.'
Still, beneath the outrage voiced by fund managers, the conviction remains
strong that Greece will perform well in the medium term. The queue of
companies waiting for listings has never been longer, with several sectors
of the economy about to be represented for the first time.
Listings by more than 20 companies in the first six months of this year are
forecast to raise over Dr60bn in fresh equity. Rights issues by companies
already listed are projected to total Dr 80bn in the same period.
Following the example of Credit Bank, which raised Dr31bn earlier this
month, including a Dr7.5bn international tranche placed by Barings, Ionian
Bank is planning a similar-sized rights issue.
Intracom, the telecoms equipment manufacturer, also plans to raise at least
Dr20bn, while Intrasoft, its software subsidiary, is to be floated on the
bourse.
However, construction companies are still setting the pace, with more than a
dozen due to be listed by mid-year. They seem undeterred by persistent
rumours that funds from the EU's new structural assistance package may be
delayed, bringing postponements of infrastructure projects in preparation.
Mr Victor Pisante of Telesis Capital says: 'The trend is for other companies
in the same sector to seek listings once someone takes the plunge.
Maintaining competitiveness is an important consideration.'
Other companies preparing for a listing include passenger shipping lines,
software manufacturers, textile producers, a media group and a fish farm.
The biggest issue of all, the listing of 25-30 per cent of OTE, the Greek
state telecoms monopoly, is starting to take shape, with advisers due to be
appointed this month.
Planned for October, the flotation is projected to raise over Dr300bn, of
which the Athens bourse could absorb around Dr100bn, according to government
advisers. The remainder would be offered to European, American and Japanese
investors.
The flotation was originally set for last autumn but fell through when the
conservative government collapsed. The socialists' advisers claim that, with
international appetite for telecoms stocks increasing, the timing is now
better than before.

The Financial Times


London Page 43

940420

