FT942-16190

FT  12 APR 94 / Private investor watchdog suffers further setback


   By ALISON SMITH


The Personal Investment Authority, the new watchdog to protect private
investors, suffered a fresh blow yesterday when it emerged that Mr Peter
Taylor, its deputy chairman, is to stand down because of a change in his
role at Sun Alliance.
The timing of the news is unfortunate for the PIA, although it is not as
serious a setback for the regulator as the resignation from its board of Mr
Jim Stretton, deputy managing director of Standard Life. He left in January,
arguing that the authority's plans did not amount to genuine
self-regulation.
While the government remains firmly committed to the PIA, the new regulator
has not yet put beyond doubt its ability to attract enough support from
across the financial services sector to achieve credibility.
News of Mr Taylor's impending departure will add to the suggestion of
uncertainty about the PIA which has undermined the authority's momentum.
The PIA's strength has been diminished by the failure of some larger
potential members to apply so far - although many are said to be planning to
sign up.
The regulator is still waiting to see if there will be applications from
some leading life offices and some other significant financial institutions,
such as the Halifax building society.
The Prudential, the UK life insurer, is the only organisation so far to
announce its outright rejection of the PIA and its intention to exercise its
right to be regulated directly by the Securities and Investments Board, the
City's chief watchdog.
Mr Taylor became Sun Alliance group marketing director with international
responsibilities at the beginning of this month. He had previously been head
of the Sun Alliance UK life company. He became deputy chairman of the PIA in
1992.
Sun Alliance said that Mr Taylor's decision was entirely a result of his new
duties. The company has already applied for membership of the PIA and
underlined yesterday that it still saw it as the logical progression from
the existing regulatory arrangements.
Mr Taylor will leave the PIA board later in the year, at a date to be
agreed. It is not clear whether this would be before the authority is due to
become operational in July.
Ms Colette Bowe, PIA chief executive, said there was no suggestion that Mr
Taylor was leaving because he was unhappy with the regulatory arrangements.
She said his decision was entirely to do with the other claims on his time
resulting from his new responsibilities at Sun Alliance.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940412

