FT943-12944

FT  22 JUL 94 / Trade deficit outside EU cut


   By GILLIAN TETT, Economics Staff


British exports to countries outside the European Union rose to record
levels in the second quarter of this year, the Central Statistical Office
said yesterday.
The value of exports to non-EU countries between April and June was a
seasonally adjusted Pounds 15.57bn, a rise of 1.5 per cent compared with the
previous three months, and 10 per cent compared with the same period a year
ago.
Exports rose to Pounds 5.27bn in June, from Pounds 5.09bn in May.
This rise in exports, coupled with fairly flat levels of imports,
contributed to a gradual narrowing of the trade deficit with non-EU
countries. The deficit in June was Pounds 0.5bn, down from Pounds 0.67bn in
May.
Analysts pointed out that some of this improvement was due to strong oil
exports and a rebound in the exports of erratics such as ships, aircraft and
silver.
Nevertheless, the underlying trend was also healthy. Measured without oil
and erratics, the deficit fell to Pounds 0.59bn in June. May's underlying
deficit figure was revised down to Pounds 0.6bn, from Pounds 0.67bn.
Mr Richard Needham, trade minister, yesterday welcomed the figures as a sign
that '1994 is a year of consistent success for exporters'.
This cheery prognosis was echoed by the Institute of Export, which called on
British companies to exploit the 'huge opportunities' in China and
South-East Asia.
Exports to North America grew at the fastest rate of the sectors in the
second quarter, rising 6.5 per cent compared with the first quarter, and 15
per cent compared with the second quarter last year.
Exports to the world's other leading industrialised countries in the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development grew by 6 per cent in
the three months to June, quarter on quarter.
But although the export figures were yesterday greeted with pleasure in the
City, analysts expressed some confusion about the import data.
Imports in June were broadly flat on the month, running at Pounds 5.76bn.
But this concealed a 6 per cent fall in seasonally adjusted import volumes,
quarter on quarter, and a 6 per cent rise in the non-seasonally adjusted
import prices, also quarter on quarter.
Some analysts suggested that this reflected rising world commodity prices.
Raw material costs rose 5 per cent in the second quarter, compared with the
first.
Consequently, analysts suggested, the fall in import volumes might reflect
the fact that higher import prices were encouraging companies to reduce
their imports - or possibly, might reflect a slight slowing in
manufacturing.
However, Mr Adam Cole of James Capel said that discrepancy might reflect
statistical problems, since the price rises were not confined to the raw
materials sector.
Import prices of manufactured goods have risen 10 per cent since January -
far more than any sterling movement in this period.
The CSO said yesterday that it had conducted statistical double checks on
the data, and suggested that one reason for the trend might be that
companies were substituting for cheaper EU or domestic imports.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940722

