FT942-14852

FT  19 APR 94 / Greenspan plays an early hand: US rates rise


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


When a senior politician gives you cover, use it. That seems to be the
motivation for the unexpected quarter point increase in short-term rates
signalled by Mr Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, yesterday.
The Fed's move followed tacit approval by the Clinton administration at the
weekend of a further tightening of monetary policy. Mr Lloyd Bentsen,
Treasury secretary, said he expected short-term rates to rise another half
point, to 4 per cent, by the end of the year. His remarks make it virtually
certain that rates will rise at least that much, probably by early summer.
Mr Greenspan was doubtless also keen to respond to stronger-than-expected
economic data in recent weeks. Adjusted for the effects of severe winter
weather, recent figures indicate the pace of economic growth slowed little,
if at all, in the first quarter from the unsustainable rate of about 5 per
cent registered in the second half of last year.
In the first quarter, industrial production grew at an annual rate of 7.7
per cent compared with 6.7 per cent in last year's final quarter. The pace
of vehicle sales was stronger than at the end of last year and consumer
confidence was significantly higher. The main factor pulling down overall
growth was a sharp fall in construction, which reflected factors such as bad
weather and the Californian earthquake.
The view at the Fed is that unless further steps are taken to slow growth,
the economy will hit capacity constraints later this year. Yesterday's move
was thus intended to help prevent inflationary pressures, already visible in
rising commodity prices, eventually translating into broader upward pressure
on wholesale and consumer price inflation.
But although long bond yields have risen steeply in anticipation of further
rate increases, few analysts expected another rate increase so soon. Because
the previous two increases had been announced after meetings of the
policy-making Federal Open Market Committee, most were convinced the Fed
would not move again until a meeting scheduled for May 17. Fed officials
fuelled such speculation by indicating another increase in rates was
unlikely while markets remained in turmoil.
However, by moving yesterday, after a conference call with the Fed's
regional presidents, Mr Greenspan was able to quash rumours that his own
authority within the Fed had been eroded. Some US commentators had
speculated that the FOMC was no longer giving the chairman his customary
discretion to raise or lower rates between meetings, if economic conditions
seemed to warrant action.
The increase in short rates to 3.75 per cent takes the Fed closer to its
goal of re-establishing a 'neutral' monetary policy. But it has clearly not
reached its destination. Yesterday most analysts were betting that the Fed
would raise rates by another quarter point at the May 17 meeting. A further
quarter or half point increase is then probable in ensuing weeks, taking
short rates to about 4.5 per cent by mid-year.
What happens thereafter will depend on the pace of economic growth and
inflation trends. Analysts expect the growth rate to decline from 4-5 per
cent at an annual rate now to about 3 per cent towards the end of this year,
partly as a result of the increase in short and long-term rates that has
already occurred.
Monetarist-leaning economists also point out that increases in short rates
have already sharply reduced the rate of growth of bank reserves and other
narrow monetary aggregates. They expect this to result in slower growth of
nominal spending later this year. Taking all these factors into
consideration, optimists believe the Fed might not need to raise rates much
beyond 4.5 per cent.
History, however, suggests that business cycle upswings are quite hard to
control once they gain momentum. Later this year the US could begin to get a
boost from economic recovery in Europe and other trading partners. The Fed
may thus face irresistible pressure to raise short-term rates to 5 per cent
or higher - well above the levels so far sanctioned by senior Clinton
administration officials.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940419

