FT944-2960

FT  15 DEC 94 / BP unveils ambitious performance targets


   By ROBERT CORZINE


British Petroleum has announced that it wants to boost profits by 50 per
cent within two years, and cut its debt by about Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.8bn),
without any help from higher oil prices.
Mr David Simon, chief executive, unveiled the performance targets, the first
since a boardroom coup plunged the company into crisis 2 1/2 years ago, at a
presentation to City of London analysts and institutional shareholders
yesterday.
He said BP had established a track record in meeting the key financial
targets it had set for itself at the time of the crisis. The company was now
healthy enough move on to a new set of goals. BP's strategic emphasis over
the next two years will be on 'improved profitability, disciplined growth
and a strong balance sheet'.
BP's profits in the first nine months of this year were Dollars 1.59bn. It
wants to increase annual replacement cost earnings to Dollars 3bn a year
within two years. Mr Simon said this was possible even if oil prices remain
around the present, relatively low, level of Dollars 16 a barrel for the
benchmark Brent Blend. He conceded that a fall to the Dollars 12-Dollars 14
seen earlier this year would force BP to re-consider the timing of its
targets.
Higher product volumes, new technology, cost reductions, improved
organisational structures and lower interest charges would all contribute to
the planned earnings improvement.
The importance of a strong balance sheet meant BP wanted to reduce its debt
of Dollars 10.8bn to about Dollars 8bn by 1996. That would bring down
gearing from about 60 per cent to 30-35 per cent, a figure more in line with
BP's peers in the international oil industry.
The company expected to increase its capital spending to about Dollars 4.5bn
next year, from less than Dollars 4bn in 1994. Mr Simon said improved
productivity meant the company could maintain itself on an annual capital
expenditure of Dollars 3.5bn. The additional Dollars 1bn would be devoted to
growth of existing or new projects.
Mr Simon, who is to take over as chairman next July, declined to comment on
possible increases to BP's dividend, except to say that increases could
'only be justified on the basis of sustained performance improvement'. He
also denied that the company would use its strong free cash flow to buy back
its shares.
Mr John Browne, head of exploration and production, who will take over from
Mr Simon next year, also announced that BP had found enough oil and gas to
replace its 1994 production. It expects to expand production by 2 per cent
over the next three years.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941215

