FT942-15742

FT  14 APR 94 / Hedge funds 'no threat' to US system


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


US financial regulators yesterday told Congress they needed no new powers to
deal with any potential risks posed to the financial system by hedge funds.
Hedge funds - private investment pools which are often aggressively managed
and are usually structured to avoid direct regulation - have been blamed by
various commentators for everything from the collapse of the European
exchange rate mechanism to the recent drop in US bond prices.
However, a panel of regulators yesterday told the House of Representatives
banking committee that these posed no significant threat to the banking
system or the securities markets, and their treatment should be no different
to that of other investors.
'Hedge funds do not pose a significant risk to the national banking system,'
said Mr Eugene Ludwig, comptroller of the currency, whose office monitors a
large portion of the US banking system.
'It is important to recognise that hedge funds are not fundamentally
different from other institutions,' added Mr John Laware, a governor of the
Federal Reserve Board, which also monitors some banks.
But Mr Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission,
said he was 'concerned about the risks that could be posed to our markets by
the activities of some of these large, very active and aggressive hedge
funds.'
He said he had asked some of the largest funds voluntarily to give the SEC
information about their market positions and trading strategies.
Congressman Henry Gonzalez, chairman of the banking committee, said he was
concerned that hedge funds mights 'amass enough financial clout to move
markets.'
But regulators said the influence of the hedge funds on market movements had
been exaggerated.
Mr George Soros, whose Quantum Fund is regarded as the doyen of hedge funds
and whose group manages more than Dollars 11bn, told the banking committee
that more public forms of institutionally managed money, such as mutual
funds, posed a bigger threat to market stability than hedge funds because
they are 'trend followers by definition', and thus more likely to exaggerate
market movements.
'As far as my hedge funds are concerned, you are looking in the wrong
place,' Mr Soros said.
One other Congressional concern about hedge funds is the risk they might
pose to the banks from which they borrow to leverage their trading
operations.
Mr Ludwig said, however, that only eight of the banks under his supervision
had any involvement with hedge funds, with exposures ranging from 0.09 per
cent to 0.91 per cent of capital; their combined exposure was only Dollars
1.04bn, almost all of it covered by collateral such as government bonds.
After a morning of hearings, it became sadly clear, however, that few of Mr
Gonzalez's colleagues on the committee had the slightest idea of what a
hedge fund might be, and instead group them with derivatives in a catch-all
category of vaguely menacing financial concepts.
More supervision urged, Page 33

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940414

