FT941-4154

FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (8): Making a home where the
grass is greener - Gerald Cadogan visits a farm in the Welsh hills where two
friends work hard for self-sufficiency / The Good Life


   By GERALD CADOGAN


Marmalade and Marmite are the handsomest pigs I have seen. A dappled black
and tan breed called Oxford Sandy and Black, they are a match for that
platonic ideal of a pig, Lord Emsworth's prized Empress of Blandings in P G
Wodehouse's novels. These pigs live 800ft up a Welsh mountain in
comfortable, clean-strawed styes on a self-sufficient small farm run by
Jamie Harris and her friend Eileen Proctor.
Family or household are better words than farm. The animals are happy. Jamie
loves them and talks to them. But she is not sentimental about them. In her
freezer she keeps joints of her well-raised kid, lamb and pork. She talks
about the smallholding in the matter-of-fact way of Mediterranean peasants.
But her affection for the animals would be rare in the Mediterranean. I
found them indoors when I visited on the coldest day of the year, when even
winter coats could not survive the cut of the wind. The goats in the byre
next to the pigs nuzzled up and wanted to be scratched under the chin like
cats, used to friendly humans.
The goats were striking breeds: two Swiss Tottenbergs, the third - Marina -
an Anglo-Nubian with a big 'Roman' nose who could have stepped out of an
ancient tomb painting on the banks of the Nile. She produces unusually rich,
creamy milk that Jamie turns into cheese.
Jamie is trying to find a separator to make butter and cream. These tools
have become scarce, even though not long ago most homes in Wales had one -
an indication of how the old skills of husbandry, which self-sufficiency
requires, are dying fast.
The 14-acre farm also has ducks and two donkeys - Shelley and Bruno - who
will soon be pulling a cart. 'It cuts using the car and pollution.' Six
Jacob's ewes, a tough breed suited for the Welsh hills, will be lambing
soon. Jamie spins the wool and knits gloves as uncommercial Christmas
presents - truly homespun, she says.
She has tried shearing, but 'it is hard not to cut the sheep as you dig
through 6in of fleece. They said you must keep going but I hesitated.' Now
she lets professionals do it.
The chickens are the trousery-legged Cochin breed, which Queen Victoria
introduced to Britain. They lay plenty of eggs, except in late autumn, when
their energy goes into moulting and growing new feathers. But the ducks are
pluckier, and lay all year round.
The hen houses, high off the ground, are made from old floorboards, as Jamie
believes in re-using everything. The greenhouse is made from the windows
local townspeople discarded when plastic windows came in. Twice a week,
Jamie goes to market for the old fruit and vegetables, which she boils up
for the pigs and goats.
Jamie (from Brighton) and Eileen (from South Shields) are both townies. They
were running the village post office at Cross-in-Hand in Sussex, when a
friend gave Jamie John Seymour's book on self-sufficiency. 'On down days I
found I was reading the chapter on how to keep ducks.'
They ran a wholefood restaurant in Crowborough, Sussex for a while.
Then, eight years ago, they bought Lan Farm. They paid the reserve price
after the farm failed to sell at auction. A gift of a dozen hens, who need
attention twice a day, tied them to the place immediately. After that, there
was no reason not to have other animals and learn to meet their different
demands.
As one leaves Pontypridd, and climbs up and up through the housing estates
of Graigwen the houses stop at a cattle grid. Fields begin. The farm is
close by, on top of the hill, with thrilling views and fresh air in
abundance.
'It feels so right to be here,' Jamie said. 'Putting the chickens to bed the
other night, with a glorious sunset, and thinking of the dinner, our own
potatoes and parsnips and goat, I felt quite emotional.'
The farmhouse was in rack and ruin, and had two collapsed barns when they
started. The first job was to pull the barns down. Neighbours offered help
and the names of craftsmen. 'It all just happened after that. Now we have
earned the respect of the community,' who walk past on Sunday afternoons and
can see how well run it is.
When I arrived, a tea of cheese scones, Welsh raisin cakes, soft cheese and
goat's milk fudge was waiting in the dry and spotless kitchen.
Have they found any anti-English feeling? 'This is not a second home. We
live and work here.' And anti-Englishness is less in south Wales than in mid
and north Wales, they thought.
But it is hard work. The animals are always there. And the walled garden is
demanding. The vegetables come type by type in seasonal floods, as they did
for everybody in the country in the pre-supermarket era. Now on the menu are
leeks, parsnips and potatoes.
The animals are their meat. They take them to a local butcher for slaughter.
He is only 20 minutes away and luckily still licensed.
'If the EU took his licence away, it would be a 60-minute journey. Think of
the poor animals, and the fuel and pollution.'
Are they self-sufficient? 'We are very close to it. The shopping bills are
going down.' But they cannot escape cash altogether, if only to pay the
council tax, utilities and the vet. So they take horses for summer grazing,
which helps towards repairing the gates and fences. They cannot take them in
winter as they have no stabling.
And they take guests for bed-and-breakfast - as people in Wales have been
encouraged to do after the collapse of the coal and steel industries. No
licence is needed for up to six guests, who can eat up the surplus produce.
'Bed-and-breakfast provides the cash, but it drives me potty,' Jamie said.
They have recently given up cooking dinner for the guests. After a long day
outside, it was too much. Jamie feels more and more strongly the pull of the
earth and the animals. Last summer she made an Indian-style tepee and slept
in it for three months.
They are considering selling the farm (inquiries 0443-403606). Jamie would
like to run holidays for underprivileged children, to whom she could hand on
the skills she has learned. The children would make cheese, tend the
animals, live in log cabins and learn the simple self-reliance of
self-sufficiency.
She would like to stay in Wales, a little nearer sea-level than the top of a
wind-blasted mountain, but has yet to find the place. Setting up a trust
would allow it to carry on after her time is up, she says.
What would they advise others? 'Go for it, sensibly though,' Jamie said.
'Expect a very hard life, all hours, seven days a week,' Eileen said.
Jamie continued: 'If you can't do it in the way we have, you can still make
your own bread and marmalade and cut out packaging. A lot of it is
knowledge. People think they don't know, but they can learn.'
As they have learned. You leave the farm wiser and happier. The goodness of
the earth and its produce permeates it. Look after it properly, and it will
look after you. Self-sufficiency means freedom because, whatever happens,
you have learned to cope.

The Financial Times


Survey PRO Page 7

940312

