FT942-15640

FT  14 APR 94 / Arts: Posturing with Bill T Jones - Dance


   By CLEMENT CRISP


At the end of an evening spent with Bill T Jones and his dancers - and
rarely can an evening seem longer - you realise that there is no substitute
for choreography. Jones and his troupe have been industriously trying, as
the aeons pass, to show that there is an alternative - it is called
posturing - but attitudinise and scamper as they may, the stuff on display
is artistically naif, visually dire.
Jones and his cohort opened a week's season on Tuesday. After a 25 minute
wait while Sadler's Wells - which wins my vote as the most graceless theatre
in London - crammed in the last of the audience, the curtain rose to reveal
two figures in a setting of white drapery, a male dancer having made a
swift, acrobatic exit. One was slowly tightening a length of cloth about her
head; the other, a man spreadingly obese and naked (but mercifully with his
back to us), was auditioning for Lucian Freud's next study of all-too-solid
flesh. A Pendericki score accompanied these enchanting activities.
Thereafter, events were a Gadarene rush entitled Absence. Absence of what -
talent; interest; purpose - was left to us to decide.
Battening on good music is the mugger's way with dance. Jones next chose to
torment Berlioz' Nuits d'ete - in the exquisite Regine Crespin recording -
by nailing a sequence of fatuous incidents on the music's shimmering
surface. Men wore long skirts but were bare chested. Women, in tights or
little black dresses, registered grief. Jones took flash photographs of his
dancers. Posturing was epidemic. Dull mime, heavy breathing, cheap-jack
sentimentality, were the currency of a piece where every coin was false. The
finale - set, dear Heaven, to Le spectre de la rose - showed the cast in
white sheeting (the stage looked like a linen-draper's window in Hell)
trailing up-stage into the white drapery while one of the men proved that
nudity on stage is no enhancement to religiosity. This miserable scene might
pass as a beatific vision from a television evangelist: on any other terms
it was insufferable.
The two other works in the programme were equally noisome. Achilles loved
Patroclus was a solo for Arthur Aviles who shimmied and strutted among
classical columns, fragments of speech and a clattering rock score. D-Man in
the waters jumped on the Mendelssohn octet and was a survey of the cliches
in Jones' compositional kit. (Bodies rolling over the stage; hands flapping
in front of the face; feverish but unfocussed energy; portentous, hollow
gesture). It does not bear comment. The Jones manner is not about dancing at
all. It makes all the politically correct moves for our time - ethnically,
emotionally, sexually, even in its vagaries of dancers' size and skill - but
none of the moves has choreographic interest.
Bill T Jones and Company are at Sadler's Wells until April 16.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940414

