FT942-15732

FT  14 APR 94 / World Trade News: Union falls short on solidarity -
Marrakesh Diary


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


This week's ministerial conference of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade has not so far been a glorious showcase for the European Union's
post-Maastricht solidarity.
Indeed, many member governments have seemed determined to cling to sovereign
prerogatives with a tenacity which would warm the hearts of diehard Tory
Eurosceptics in Britain.
Take France, for instance. Mr Gerard Longuet, its industry minister,
astutely captured the headlines by making his first priority a bilateral
meeting with Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, within hours of
the latter's arrival on Tuesday.
Mr Longuet had the double satisfaction of getting to see Mr Kantor before
Sir Leon Brittan, the EU trade commissioner, did so and of then immediately
holding a packed press conference at which he pontificated on the great
global economic issues.
Mr Longuet justified this exercise in freelance diplomacy on the grounds
that he was entitled to act independently in those areas not covered by
'Community competence' - the jargon for jointly agreed EU policies. He
freely admitted, however, that he would be hard put to say exactly where the
boundaries of such policies fell.
* * *
Since Sir Leon arrived in Marrakesh, his life has been complicated by the
antics of EU states seemingly intent on demonstrating the truth of the old
parliamentary adage that 'your opponents are in front of you and your
enemies behind you'.
Soon after his first meeting with Mr Kantor, he had to rush off to an
emergency session of the Council of Ministers, summoned because of Germany's
last-minute doubts about whether an arcane legal dispute about banana
imports would allow it to sign the Uruguay Round trade deal tomorrow. The
Portuguese, meanwhile, have seized the opportunity to make a fuss about
textiles trade.
As if this were not enough, all 12 member states decided to stage an
eleventh-hour protest yesterday about the signing of the Round. The
Commission had suggested that it and member state ministers should sign as a
group under the collective rubric of the EU. That is how EU members are
listed in the official Gatt list of delegations.
The suggestion was, however, too much for the 12 governments. They insisted
that they follow the overall alphabetical order of the list of Gatt
delegations. As a result, France's signature will precede Gabon's, the
Netherlands will follow Namibia and the UK will sit next to the United Arab
Emirates.
* * *
The actual document to be signed tomorrow is a monster. Consisting of the
final text of the Uruguay Round, lists of detailed tariff schedules and
sundry last-minute additions, it will run to more than 20,000 pages and
weigh in at around 175kg. Just the thing for insomniacs with strong arms.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940414

