FT943-13334

FT  20 JUL 94 / Arts: Eerie coolness of a hot group


   By KAREN FRICKER


No city provides a clearer example of US theatre in microcosm than Chicago.
Commercial theatre dominates; several large houses pull in the biggest
audiences with touring productions of top Broadway musicals.
The city's leading resident theatre, the Goodman, is relatively financially
secure, but establishment comes at a price. The theatre is forced to weigh
its artistic choices against the tastes of its subscribers, while fending
off accusations by critics and the rest of the theatre community of
pandering to the mainstream.
At the other end of the spectrum, Chicago's network of tiny storefront
theatres remains vital, despite the odds. More than any other US city,
Chicago is the place where a group of college graduates with a few dollars
and a script can have a go.
The real problems lie in the middle ground. When a new theatre group
achieves some success, expansion is nearly impossible. There are few
mid-sized spaces around, and the costs involved in mounting larger
productions are often untenable.
Meanwhile, most of the first wave of Chicago's medium-sized theatre groups -
the Remains, Northlight, Body Politic and Organic Theatre companies - are in
mid-life crisis, low on cash and searching for renewed artistic inspiration.
But the Steppenwolf Theatre Company, whose raw, hyper-naturalistic acting
style and its crop of rising young stars placed it at the forefront of
American theatre in the 1970s and 1980s, is the exception to the rule.
Nowadays, Steppenwolf doggedly maintains its actor-run status even as it
dons the trappings of establishment.
The company built a new main stage theatre in 1991 and added a studio space
this year. It regularly sends productions to New York and London (though
with varied success: its US premiere production of Jim Cartwright's The Rise
and Fall of Little Voice lasted all of a week on Broadway this spring).
Its recent production of Libra was in many ways vintage Steppenwolf: not
only was it an adaptation of a prose work for the stage - the popular local
genre made famous by Steppenwolf's adaptation of The Grapes of Wrath - but
it was also adapted and directed by the company's best-known member, John
Malkovich.
But while it was the heat of Steppenwolf's productions which won the company
its initial fame, what is striking about Libra, based on Don DeLillo's
fictionalised account of the life of Lee Harvey Oswald, is its eerie
coolness. Both novel and play attempt a dispassionate account of an event
that inflamed the world, but Malkovich's production keeps the audience so
much at arm's length that, eventually, we feel unnecessary.
Like the novel, Malkovich's Libra weaves together real and fictional events
to create a portrait of a bright but disaffected young man who becomes the
patsy of a group of ex-FBI and CIA agents looking to avenge the Bay of Pigs
fiasco.
All the actors, with the exception of Alexis Arquette, who plays Oswald,
take multiple roles in Malkovich's techno-laden, collage-like production,
which is similar in look and form to the work of the avant-garde Wooster
Group.
As the play opens, the cast sits behind a long desk interrogating Oswald,
who stands upstage. This action continues throughout the production,
interspersed with scenes from Oswald's life, played out with the barest
suggestion of props, costumes and sets. Photographs and captions identifying
the characters and events are flashed on to a screen behind the actors; a
bank of television screens sometimes descends from the flies to play
Kennedy-era footage.
The production seems designed to keep the audience on edge. In the midst of
a naturalistic scene, characters will pick up microphones and deliver their
dialogue to the audience, talk-show host-style.
Some actors play their roles as pure schtick (Rick Snyder's twitchy Jack
Ruby), some for pure believability (Ingeborga Dapkunaite's moving, lovely
Marina Oswald). Laurie Metcalf turns in a set-chomping Steppenwolf star-turn
in two roles: Lee's stifling mother Marguerite and David Ferrie, the bizarre
small-time crook who was Oswald's closest contact to the plotters.
Arquette's Oswald remains eerily distant from the action; it is never clear
if it is actor or character who is disengaged.
The success of DeLillo's novel lies in his ability to emulate Oswald's
twisted mind and life through its disjointed narrative, while still creating
a sense of tension and dramatic build.
Malkovich's Libra lacks a similar cumulative weight; its beginning and
ending points seem random, as if it were excerpted from a longer piece.
However daringly staged and impressively acted, Libra retains the feeling of
an intelligent but misguided experiment.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940720

