FT944-2265

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (1): Lively two year-old at the
crossroads - Industry and the economy are advancing steadily. But Slovak
politics are increasingly polarised


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON and VINCENT BOLAND


After two years of independence the basic institutions of the new Slovak
state are in place and the economy is responding well to tough, IMF-imposed
monetary and fiscal policies. Rising exports are stimulating a recovery of
industrial growth and boosting reserves.
But this central European country of 5.3m people remains politically
polarised between a coalition of populist and nationalist forces, led by Mr
Vladimir Meciar, and a fragmented opposition of Christian democrats,
socialists and liberals.
Slovakia's aims remain the creation of a prosperous democracy and eventual
membership of an enlarged European Union alongside the other former
communist states of central Europe. But fulfilment of these aims remains
fraught with considerable uncertainty.
General elections over the last weekend of September re-affirmed Mr Meciar
and his Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) as the dominant force in
Slovak politics. He won the assent of 35 per cent of voters, more than his
party's three main rivals combined. The result was a personal triumph for
this charismatic but unforgiving man, and a traumatic defeat for both
President Michal Kovac and Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik. Both are former
allies of Mr Meciar who defected from the HZDS and helped to orchestrate the
parliamentary revolt that toppled him and his government in March.
The new government put together by Mr Moravcik in the spring was a
broad-based 'historic compromise' of socialists, Christian democrats and
liberal democrats. It held together well, presented a sober, democratic
image to the outside world and restarted mass privatisation and other
stalled economic reforms. But hopes that the coalition parties would gain
electoral advantage from their good governance were dashed by the
electorate.
The Party of the Democratic Left (SLD), led by an intelligent and articulate
band of young former communists under Mr Peter Weiss, hoped to emerge as the
biggest single party from elections. Instead it suffered a haemorrhage of
support from frustrated workers and the unemployed and won only 10.4 per
cent of the vote.
The Christian democrats (KDH), led by Mr Jan Carnogursky, received 10.2 per
cent while the Democratic Union (DU), a collection of liberal democrats and
former HZDS dissidents led by Mr Moravcik, picked up 8.6 per cent. In total,
the coalition parties received 29.2 per cent of the votes and 50 seats in
the 150 seat parliament against the 35 per cent of votes and 61 seats gained
by the HZDS.
Mr Meciar's victory left him far short of the simple majority needed to
govern, and even further from the qualified majority of 90 seats needed to
satisfy his main ambition of changing the constitution of the state which he
did so much to bring into existence. His long term aim is to transform
Slovakia from a parliamentary into a presidential democracy, with himself as
president. It is a prospect which fills many Slovaks with alarm.
Mr Meciar's appeal, while not inconsiderable, is concentrated geographically
in the economically depressed hinterland of the Vah valley and central
Slovakia. Sociologically he is popular among the weaker, less educated
elements in Bratislava and Kosice, which have a tradition of ethnic
tolerance and intellectual independence. He, and his xenophobic nationalist
allies, the Slovak National Party, (SNS), are implacably opposed by the 10
per cent ethnic Hungarian minority whose votes up to now have been frozen in
the political ghetto of ethnic-Hungarian parties.
In the short term, Mr Meciar faces the task of forming a credible and
efficient government with his nationalist allies from the SNS and his
'workerist' partners from the new Workers Union. The latter won more than 7
per cent of the vote by articulating the demands of the low paid and
unemployed for more money and more jobs. These demands will be difficult to
reconcile with the IMF's prescription of balanced budgets and fiscal
restraint.
Longer term, the task facing the opposition is to forge a more united and
credible centre party out of the social democratic, liberal and Christian
democratic strands of Slovak political life, and to keep Mr Meciar within
the bounds of political behaviour that are required if Slovakia is
eventually to enter the EU alongside the Czech Republic.
Meanwhile, behind the Sturm und Drang of Slovak politics, a substantial
improvement is taking place in the macro-economic performance of the Slovak
economy, with substantial agreement between the main parties on the need to
continue taking the bitter medicine prescribed by the IMF.
The underlying structural weaknesses of the Slovak economy were revealed by
the loss of an estimated Dollars 700m a year subsidy from Prague on
independence in January 1993, and above all by the collapse of Comecon
markets and the end of the Cold War.
Attempts to restructure the big military factories concentrated in the Vah
valley and central Slovakia have had very limited results. New investment
and joint ventures with foreign companies to shift from producing tanks to
tractors, fork-lift trucks and construction machinery were all predicated on
a post-communist reconstruction boom in the former Soviet states which, thus
far, has failed to materialise. Unemployment in these areas remains very
high, between 25-40 per cent in some districts compared with the national
average of 14 per cent.
On the other hand, the private sector now accounts for more than 40 per cent
of GDP and is growing steadily. A revived mass privatisation programme seems
destined to survive the change of government, albeit with relatively minor
modifications.
Several of the biggest former state owned industries such as Slovnaft, the
refining and petrochemical complex, and VSZ, the biggest integrated steel
group, have been partly privatised and re-organised with substantial new
investment. Long-stalled projects, like the Slovalco aluminium smelter in
central Slovakia, are being revived with support from the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
The main need now is for an acceleration of institutional reforms of the
banking and finance sector and better management and new investment in the
enterprise and farming sectors. Meanwhile, strong demand for steel,
petrochemicals and other Slovak products in world markets has contributed to
an export boom which is raising industrial output and pouring hard currency
into the reserves which have more than quadrupled over the last 18 months to
around Dollars 3.4bn.
Tight central bank control of monetary policy and public spending cuts have
brought prices down to within sight of single digit inflation next year.
Lower inflation and rising reserves have reinforced the Slovak koruna, which
was devalued by 10 per cent in July 1993 in agreement with the IMF. Since
then the exchange rate has been stable.
Inflows of foreign investment, however, are just a trickle compared with
levels in the Czech Republic, Hungary or Poland. This is a direct result of
political instability. Slovakia needs to maintain its access to the
international capital markets to get financing for the massive job of
restructuring industry and developing the infrastructure.
The 3.2m people who have invested in the voucher privatisation programme
have effectively passed a vote of confidence in continued economic reform.
Mr Meciar is far too astute to miss that message, and it may yet have a
large bearing on his policies in government.
'Heed what he does, not what he says,' say some observers in Bratislava of
Mr Meciar, arguing that he is a different, more pragmatic animal in
government than his rhetoric at the hustings makes him appear. Many Slovaks
as well as potential foreign investors and political partners will be doing
just that.

The Financial Times


London Page I

941216

