FT943-692

FT  28 SEP 94 / Arts: Bruckner and Mahler - South Bank music


   By PAUL DRIVER


One of those eternal pairings, like Wordsworth and Coleridge or Holmes and
Watson, Bruckner and Mahler were featured on consecutive nights at the Royal
Festival Hall, the sixth symphony of Bruckner on Sunday, the ninth of Mahler
on Monday. The first was played by the London Philharmonic under Franz
Welser-Most as the opening concert of its new season. The atmosphere - and
indeed the playing - spoke rather of a tired end to something rather than
pastures new. The hall was half-empty, the orchestra's handling of
Bruckner's difficult idiom dutiful, even tepid, rather than
forward-springing or inspirational.
How indispensable it is for a Bruckner orchestra to believe in every note it
plays - however repetitious the notes may be] Bruckner deals in great brute
primordial lumps of sound - the polar opposite of Mahler's sinuous,
chameleon irony - and the players must invest even the most naked and
obvious-seeming gestures with a sort of reverential sparkle. This never
happened on Sunday. One never had the sense that a musical universe was
being created out of nothing. One got a sense that the players were bored
and unimpressed.
True, there were a few fully achieved moments, carrying the weight of
Brucknerian mystery: for instance, that ominously cold change of harmony
(strings, low brass and low clarinet) at the end of the Adagio; or the brief
upper-sting pizzicato figures which introduce the third movement Trio. But
for all Welser-Most's Brucknerian pedigree, there was a feeling of
dispensability about this performance. His account of Messiaen's four
symphonic meditations L'Ascension, an early (1933), pre-birdsong, very
beautiful work, was, however, strong: the third movement toccata splendidly
athletic in Messiaen's uniquely exultant fashion; the final movement's
prayerful, peculiar string sonority bitingly realised. And it was a bold but
wholly appropriate idea to preface Bruckner with music, albeit very
different in character, by another composer who builds with mighty blocks of
sound and builds to the glory of God.
Mahler's ninth symphony, like his tenth, but signally unlike his eighth,
seems to mark a retreat from confidence in any such glory, the cold reality
of death now seeming all. Certainly in the reading given by the NHK Symphony
Orchestra, Tokyo - on a European tour under Jerusalem-born conductor Eliahu
Inbal - it was the stark, pained, sardonic, unillusioned aspects of the work
that were emphasised, by means of unyielding tempi and technically brilliant
unsparing clarity of texture.
This Japanese orchestra is astonishing skilful at rendering the score's fine
detail and fiercely singing out its complexly interwoven strands of
near-perpetual polyphony. In the first movement - perhaps Mahler's most
extraordinary - I found this forceful precision exhilarating, and objected
only to an all too blazingly prominent first trumpet. But increasingly I
came to miss the essential Mahlerian qualities of tonal refinement and
rubato phrasing. There was something literal-minded about the brilliant
skill. In avoiding sentimentality, Inbal sacrificed inwardness. The
Rondo-Burleske third movement's touching pre-echo of the slow finale was
indulged with but the barest lyricism; and the opening of the great Adagio,
though intoned by a mightily impressive body of strings, somehow failed to
convey genuine weight of feeling. It studiously avoided warmth.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940928

