FT942-12823

FT  28 APR 94 / Solidarity strike shakes Poland's coalition


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI and CHRYSTIA FREELAND


   WARSAW, BELCHATOW


Poland's centre-left coalition government yesterday faced its most serious
political threat since it was elected last autumn, as the Solidarity trade
union prepared a day of nationwide strikes today demanding an end to wage
controls in state industries.
Solidarity supporters at four open-cast lignite mines which supply one third
of Poland's power stations have been on strike since last Thursday.
Yesterday a quarter of the hard coal mines were on strike too.
Workers at Belchatow, an open-cast mine 150km south of Warsaw where
opposition to privatisation plans was the trigger for the current wave of
strikes, held a bellicose rally yesterday which underscored how much
Solidarity has changed since the 1980s, when the union led a united nation
in its struggle to overthrow the communist regime.
'This government is worse than the old communists were,' said a middle-aged
miner, wearing his dirt-streaked navy overalls and a red and white
Solidarity arm-band. 'The only improvement today is that at least they no
longer send riot police to break up our strikes.'
Angry speakers at the rally at Belchatow - which, like the other lignite
mines, poses a particularly acute threat to the government because the power
stations it supplies do not maintain large stocks of lignite coal - voiced
the grievances of a working class which fears it will lose out in the
radical political and economic reforms which the workers themselves made
possible.
'A very specific group of individuals is benefiting from privatisation,
while the workers get nothing,' a Solidarity official told a cheering crowd
of more than 5,000 miners.
Paradoxically, it is now - after Poland's radical shock therapy reforms gave
the nation the highest growth rate in Europe in 1993 and have produced
evident prosperity - that workers' fears that they will lose their jobs
threaten to derail the country's macro-economic stability and its plans to
restructure and privatise inefficient state-owned heavy industries.
Solidarity, which has under 2m members, wants the government to produce a
plan for dropping the wage controls by this evening as a condition for
ending the protest. Solidarity is also asking for the controls to be
replaced by a system of collective wage bargaining within guidelines agreed
annually by a tripartite commission composed of unions, government and the
employers.
More generally, the union wants a commitment from the government of policies
ensuring real wages growth this year at half the rate of GDP growth for 1994
which is predicted at 4.5 per cent.
This formula was promised to Solidarity by the previous government led by Ms
Hanna Suchocka and the present coalition promised the removal of wage
controls in its election campaign last autumn. The wage controls, dating
from the 1980s, have also been criticised by right-wing economists who argue
that companies which pay their employees too much should be allowed to go
bankrupt.
However, non-communist governments have in the past four years kept them in
place for fear that Poland's still prevalent state owned monopoly producers
would raise prices to pay for wage increases if the controls were lifted.
Mr Waldemar Pawlak, the prime minister and Peasant Party (PSL) leader,
recently said that he didn't see the sense of keeping the controls, even
though his ministers, led by Mr Henryk Chmielak, the acting finance
minister, are arguing that the move would fuel inflation. Mr Pawlak did,
however, consent last week to having the coalition's deputies in parliament
propose a new wage control law to replace earlier regulations which expired
on March 31.
The government's mishandling of the crisis was on display at Belchatow,
where a minister, his voice booming over the speaker telephone for nearly an
hour, sought in vain to negotiate with union officials. They told him to
come to their mine if he wanted to talk and warned that 'this is not just
some party.'
President Lech Walesa - founder of Solidarity and no friend of the present
government, which contains former communists in the Left Democratic Alliance
 -weakened the government's bargaining position late yesterday.
Referring to the wage control law, he said: 'I would not sign it today. I
have my doubts. I will listen to the nation.'
Just before Mr Walesa went on a two-day state visit to Lithuania on Tuesday
he said he would 'resolve the situation' on his return.
Indeed he has recently lost no opportunity of saying that he thought Mr
Pawlak, who is 33 years old, didn't have the experience to handle the
present crisis.
Yesterday Mr Miroslaw Pietrewicz, the head of the government's planning
commission (CUP) warned of the inflationary dangers of removing the
controls.
President Walesa and Poland's prime minister yesterday agreed on a candidate
for finance minister. The job, vacant for nearly three months, is expected
to be taken by Grzegorz Kolodko, an economics professor and an advocate of
austere financial policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940428

