FT942-12247

FT  30 APR 94 / UK Company News: Pelican cash call for Dome chain


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Pelican Group, the acquisitive restaurant operator, has agreed to buy the
Dome cafe chain - which helped to pioneer brasserie-style catering in the UK
 -from Forte, the hotels and restaurants group.
Pelican is paying Pounds 11.5m in cash and also announced a fully
underwritten Pounds 20m rights issue to pay for the chain and the conversion
of most of the outlets into its own Cafe Rouge brand of restaurant.
The 5-for-9 cash call at 80p was well received and Pelican's shares rose by
4p to 95p.
Mr Roger Myers, Pelican's chairman, was advising Courage, the brewer, when
in 1984 it opened the first Dome cafe in Hampstead, London.
In 1986 Forte bought what had by then become a chain of four outlets.
However, they always seemed to sit uneasily within the larger group which
now wants to focus on its core hotels and roadside catering businesses.
The Forte connection was carefully concealed, since the group rightly
suspected that its style-conscious young customers might not want to know
that their trendy local was owned by the same company which controlled the
Little Chef and Happy Eater roadside restaurant chains.
Pelican is buying 16 restaurants, of which 13 currently operate under the
Dome name. Forte will keep and rebrand three Dome outlets - two sited in
group hotels and one in London's Regent Street. The latter was the site of
the original milk bar from which Lord Forte launched his empire.
Pelican is acquiring three other London restaurants in the deal - the Oriel
in Sloane Square, and two Bar Escoba outlets, in Kensington and Ealing.
The new owners will convert nine of the Dome outlets and the Bar Escoba in
Ealing to its Cafe Rouge format. Three other Domes will retain the name and
be run mainly as bars - 'which is what they were always meant to be,'
according to Mr Myers.
Pelican said the deal would enable expansion away from Greater London
through the acquisition of sites in Oxford, Cambridge and Windsor.
The group forecast it would make pre-tax profits in the year to March 31 of
Pounds 2.5m (Pounds 908,000). A final dividend of not less than 1.25p is
forecast.
The rapidly-expanding group, which came to the USM in 1990, has seen its
share price triple since the begining of 1993. It will seek a full listing
when its audited annual results are published in July.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940430

