FT944-6026

FT  01 DEC 94 / Rao may face defeats in close state polls: Congress party
faces acid test


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


Mr P V Narasimha Rao, the Indian prime minister, is entering his biggest
electoral test since he took office and launched his economic reforms more
than three years ago.
Today and next Monday, voters are going to the polls in his home state of
Andhra Pradesh, in southern India, to choose a state assembly. Similar
elections have already been held in the small states of Goa, on the west
coast, and Sikkim, in the north, and are being completed today in the large
southern state of Karnataka. Counting in all four polls will start on
December 9.
Despite his 73 years, Mr Rao has summoned up the energy to campaign
personally in all four states, saying the elections are an acid test for the
ruling Congress (I) party and its policies, including economic reform. 'The
stakes are high in these elections for everyone; the people, the government,
the country,' he says.
The indications are Congress, in power in all four states, could fare badly,
not least in Andhra. The wily premier has thus been trying to distance his
(as opposed to his party's) reputation from the results saying the polls are
'no referendum on me'.
Strictly speaking the prime minister may be right. The issues which have
dominated campaigns in all four states have been local - the performance of
state governments, corruption, and rival promises to deliver free rice and
other goodies to the voters.
His record is rarely mentioned, while the premier's economic reforms barely
reg-ister in the minds of most voters.
However two national issues have had a bearing on the elections. One is
inflation, which has been running recently at about 9 per cent a year.
Although this is considerably lower than the 13 per cent recorded in Mr
Rao's first year, prices are still rising uncomfortably fast for many
voters.
Congress has also suffered from the prime minister's handling of the sacking
of the Ayodhya mosque in December 1992 by militant Hindus. Angry Moslem
voters, traditional Congress voters, have turned elsewhere, particularly in
Andhra.
If Congress fares badly in the state polls, the prime minister seems bound
to run into criticism in Delhi. As the man from Andhra Pradesh and the only
southerner at the top of a party traditionally dominated by northerners, he
will have to accept some responsibility for defeat in the south.
He seems strong enough to withstand any attempts to oust him until the next
general election, due by mid-1996. But a poor showing in these state polls
may undermine his authority. Northern Congress leaders such as Mr Arjun
Singh, the deputy prime minister, who have criticised Mr Rao before, might
try again.
With state elections due in four more big states early next year -
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa and Bihar - and with the general election on
the horizon, it is probably too late for Mr Rao's rivals to risk an all-out
attack. The threat to party unity would be too great.
But if Congress does as poorly as expected in the polls, the party could
face a period of sniping and back-stabbing.
Whether he likes it or not, the prime minister's fortunes are most closely
tied to Andhra.
A rich agricultural state with a small but fast-growing industrial base,
Andhra has done well during his rule. But the Congress-run state has seen
two chief ministers ousted in the past five years because of alleged
corruption and intra-party quarrelling and the incumbent chief minister also
faces allegations of nepotism and bribe-taking.
The challenge to Congress comes from one of India's most colourful
politicians - Mr N T Rama Rao.
A 72-year-old former film star universally known as NTR, he entered state
politics 12 years ago. With the support of a young new wife, Lakshmi
Parvathi, NTR has been drawing huge crowds at rallies.
His promise of subsidised rice at the low price of Rs2 (4 pence) a
kilogramme has been the single biggest vote-winner of the campaign.
A Congress party counter-offer of free rice for the poor has been met with
widespread scepticism.
But memories of the last NTR administration in the 1980s, also hit by
charges of corruption, incompetence and internal dissent, may persuade some
voters to stick with Congress.
Recent opinion polls however show NTR's regional party, the Telugu Desam
party, could wrest the state from Congress.
In Karnataka the ruling Congress party also faces the likely loss of a clear
majority. But with three other groupings all expected to garner reasonable
shares of the vote, the outcome could be a hung assembly with seats split
between Congress, a rebel Congress faction, the left-leaning Janata Dal and
the rightwing Bharatiya Janata party.
In Goa the main political issue is whether the BJP has been able to
capitalise on an alliance it has formed with a local party - the MGP - to
help overthrow a rather jaded Congress government. The opposition alliance
is expected to win but it is not clear how much national benefit the BJP can
derive from victory in such a small state.
In Sikkim the fight is on to fill a vacuum created by the overthrow in May
of Mr Nar Bahadur Bhandari, who ruled the state for 15 years in the name of
the Sikkim Sangram Parishad, a local party, indirectly supported by
Con-gress.
Mr Bhandari is battling to return to power, with his main competition coming
from Congress and another local grouping.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941201

