FT942-12695

FT  28 APR 94 / Lasmo set to rebuff Enterprise bid: David Lascelles and
Peggy Hollinger report on moves in the independent oil sector


   By DAVID LASCELLES and PEGGY HOLLINGER


Enterprise Oil is expected to move on rival oil explorer Lasmo this week
following yesterday's statement that it was considering an offer for the
company.
Any approach is expected to be heartily rebuffed by Lasmo which yesterday
said a bid would be 'entirely unwelcome'. The group just two weeks ago took
steps to bolster its weak balance sheet with a Pounds 219m rights issue at
105p.
Enterprise was forced into its initial statement by the Takeover Panel,
which is believed to have asked several companies to state their interests
following recent heavy trading in Lasmo.
The high volumes sparked speculation that a predator was building a stake in
advance of a possible bid. However, it is believed that Enterprise has not
been buying Lasmo shares, leaving open the possibility of an alternative
bid.
A number of potential bidders have been mentioned, from British Gas to Arco
of the US. Since the beginning of the month Lasmo's shares have risen from
114p to last night's close of 162 1/2 p. Enterprise shares closed 6p lower
at 445p.
Enterprise said yesterday that if an offer were made, it was likely to be
pitched at less than Tuesday's 153p closing price. At that level, Lasmo
would be valued at Pounds 930m.
However, the company stressed that it was considering a number of options
regarding Lasmo and had not yet decided on a bid.
Analysts greeted the news of Enterprise's interest and the timing following
Lasmo's rights issue with some puzzlement. 'The question is whether
investors want to swap their Lasmo shares for another oil and gas play,'
said one. 'Enterprise would probably have to offer shares with a reasonable
cash alternative.'
The group is thought to have held back from launching a full bid earlier due
to the stringent requirements of the New York Stock Exchange where both
companies are quoted.
Enterprise is thought to be attracted by Lasmo's production profile.
Enterprise's production is set to flatten out by the mid- 1990s and the
acquisition of Lasmo would maintain production growth to the turn of the
century.
There is also the added impetus of the recent increase in the oil price.
'Banks might be more willing to fund a cash alternative given the fact that
sentiment in the sector is improving,' said Mr Graeme Gilchrist of brokers
Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
Lex, Page 26; LSE, Page 46

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940428

