FT943-12989

FT  22 JUL 94 / Former B&C chief Gunn faces bar as director


   By DAVID WIGHTON


Mr John Gunn, the former head of British & Commonwealth Holdings, faces
disqualification as a director after a highly critical Department of Trade
and Industry report.
The report, published yesterday, also censures merchant bank Barclays de
Zoete Wedd and accountants Spicer & Oppenheim over their role in B&C's
Pounds 400m acquisition of Atlantic Computers in 1988 which led to the
financial services group's collapse in 1990. However, N M Rothschild, which
floated Atlantic in 1983, escapes criticism.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, is making a court
application for the disqualification of Mr Gunn and five other individuals
involved.
B&C collapsed in 1990 with debts of Pounds 1.2bn after writing off Pounds
550m against its investment in Atlantic, a computer leasing company, which
the report concludes had probably never made a profit since it was formed in
1975.
The long-awaited report criticised Mr Gunn and two fellow B&C directors, Mr
Peter Goldie and Mr Rusty Ashman, for failing to alert other board members
or shareholders when they learned of a Pounds 160m 'black hole' in
Atlantic's accounts in April 1989.
They were also criticised for publishing a 'grossly misleading' set of
accounts following the discovery.
The inspectors added, however: 'We are satisfied that they were acting in
what they perceived at the time (albeit in our view erroneously) to be the
best interests of B&C and that they did not act dishonestly in the sense of
seeking to defraud any person.' Others facing disqualification are Mr David
McCormick, a director of Atlantic at the time of the acquisition, Mr
Nicholas Kennedy Scott, who was finance director, and Mrs Sien Yen Cheng Kai
On, who was a board member.
Mr Gunn said yesterday he was astonished at the report which was 'a shoddy
piece of work' containing material inaccuracies. He is to 'vigorously
defend' the disqualification action.
He attacked the charge that B&C had failed to investigate Atlantic
adequately before the acquisition. 'It was the only deal where B&C employed
outside advisers.'
He also defended the decision not to alert shareholders immediately problems
were discovered at Atlantic. 'We were running a company based on the
confidence of lenders and market participants and took a prudent approach.'
Mr McCormick, who was appointed chief executive of Atlantic after the
acquisition, said: 'Despite taking nearly four years to report their
findings, the inspectors have criticised me for failing to solve all of
Atlantic's problems in little over one year.'
Individuals mentioned in the report said that criticism of City institutions
in earlier drafts had been toned down.
Mr Vernon Davies, co-founder of Atlantic with the late Mr John Foulston and
a director and major shareholder until 1986, is criticised in the report but
is not facing disqualification.
Meanwhile, the administrators of B&C have launched legal action against
Spicer & Oppenheim, auditor to Atlantic and now part of accountants Touche
Ross.
A writ lodged in the High Court on Wednesday claims damages from the firm in
relation to negligent professional advice provided during its time as
adviser and auditor to the group. The administrators - from accountants
Ernst & Young - have also started litigations against BZW and against the
directors of the Atlantic companies.
The writ does not specify the exact value of a claim, but it may seek
redress for any compensation not available from the other actions up to the
total of Pounds 416m lost plus interest and costs.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
Hopes of resolving tangle, Page 18
Insight into auditing, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940722

