FT942-15760

FT  14 APR 94 / Portugal privatisation programme starts to run out of steam:
Lisbon must widen the appeal of sell-offs after a shortfall in forecast
revenues


   By PETER WISE


Measures to advance 'popular capitalism' in Portugal are driven by a
pragmatic need to rescue a flagging privatisation programme and ideological
moves to convert a nation of savers into investors.
Mr Eduardo Catroga, the finance minister sworn in after a cabinet reshuffle
in December, plans to alter the centre-right government's approach to
privatisation by offering small savers discounted shares in state-owned
companies.
He has shifted the emphasis of privatisation and departed from the tenets of
the programme, begun in 1989, which aimed to raise the maximum possible
revenue for the state. The minister, calling this detrimental to the
long-term success of denationalisation, has said it should be replaced by
more important objectives.
The new priority is to make privatised companies attractive enough to small
savers and to disperse the capital to a wide base of shareholders. This
would keep privatised companies in Portuguese hands, despite the weak
financial capacity of Portuguese business groups. It would also stimulate
the stock market, where privatisation operations have so far failed to
mobilise many small investors or significantly increase liquidity.
'The thinking behind the 'popular capitalism' proposals is more practical
than philosophical,' said Mr Alfredo de Sousa, economics professor and
president of a ratings company. 'The government needs to shift the country's
savings out of bank accounts into more risky investments in the economy. But
such measures face technical problems and are unlikely to be successful for
long.'
Mr Catroga plans to widen the appeal of privatisation operations following a
1993 shortfall in forecast revenues partly due to recession. Only Es70bn
(Pounds 270m) was raised against a predicted Es225bn. The government failed
to sell a bank, a cement producer and a steel company because the bids were
either too low or no offer was made.
The government hopes to earn Es200bn from the sale of state-owned companies
this year. But instead of focusing on the sale of indivisible blocks of
capital to companies and institutional investors, Mr Catroga plans to float
more shares on the stock market.
'He aims to convert the cautious Portuguese, sitting on their savings, into
small-time capitalists prepared to take bigger risks in the hope of bigger
rewards,' said a Lisbon stock market analyst. Potentially, huge funds could
be mobilised - Portuguese are among the biggest savers in Europe, hoarding
between 17 and 18 per cent of income.
Interest rates on deposit accounts, where most Portuguese savings are
placed, have been cut substantially over the past two years due to tougher
competition between banks and falling inflation. Some small savers have
moved tentatively into unit trust funds, where the gains have been much
bigger, but most remain wary of the stock market.
Over the next two years the government will try to encourage them to invest
in some of the biggest privatisation operations attempted in Portugal,
including sale of stakes in telecommunications and power utilities, cement,
banking and insurance. The government estimates privatised companies will
represent 50 per cent of stock market capitalisation by the end of 1994
compared with a current 37 per cent.
Mr Catroga's ability to offer shares at a discount will be determined by at
least two independent valuations as stipulated under the privatisation law.
'The legislation allows us to offer shares to small savers at the minimum
price evaluated,' he said, whereas the prices for companies, groups and
institutional investors would be closer to the maximum price fixed by the
valuers.
Analysts say the government would have to offer big tranches to smaller
savers to reinvigorate the bourse. Previously, business groups have paid
high prices for privatised companies in stock market flotations; and having
won control then showed they had no further interest in trading, offering
little hope of capital gains for small investors.
A hurdle facing the 'popular capitalism' proposals is that the stock market
is falling, making small investors reluctant to buy shares even at a
discount. Procedures to determine exactly who qualified for cheaper shares
could also be complex.
'The ultimate difficulty will be that, after a short time, big investors
will begin financing small savers to buy shares on their behalf and
undermine the whole scheme,' said Mr de Sousa.
The government believes mobilising small investors to participate in the
privatisation programme will also help keep companies under Portuguese
control, given that domestic businesses cannot match the financial capacity
of foreign competitors.
But Mr Catroga appears to have acknowledged that this is not sufficient
protection. He also proposes a variety of means, including 'golden shares'
carrying management veto rights, by which the state would be able to
maintain control of strategic companies.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       PRIVATISATION TIMETABLE
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               % to be
Company                        Sector      Date             privatised
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Secil/CMP                      Cement      April 1994            80/58
Rodoviaria da Estremadura      Transport   by July 1994            100
Uniao de Bancos Portugueses    Banking     by July 1994             20
Bonanca                        Insurance   by July 1994             25
Cimpor (1st tranche)           Cement      July 1994                20
Banco Pinto Sotto e Maior      Banking     August 1994              80
Rodoviaria do Sul do Tejo      Transport   by January 1995         100
Banco de Fomento e Exterior    Banking     by June 1995      undecided
Cimpor (2nd tranche)           Cement      by June 1995          20-25
Banco Portuguese do Atlantico  Banking     by June 1995             25
(4th tranche)
Rodoviaria de Lisboa           Transport   by June 1995            100
Portugal Telecom               Telecom     by June 1995          20-30
Electricidade de Portugal      Power       by June 1995          20-25
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940414

