FT942-15348

FT  15 APR 94 / UK Company News: Prestwick falls Pounds 1.15m into red but
sees improvement


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


Prestwick Holdings, the Scot-tish printed circuit board maker which in
January called in Postern, the corporate recovery specialist, suffered
losses of Pounds 1.95m before tax in the half year to January 31, compared
with profits of Pounds 106,000.
Mr Archie Coulson, an executive director of Postern who became Prestwick's
executive chairman, said, however, that the company's core businesses had
achieved improved profits since January, reaching record levels in March.
The directors expect the second half to show a 'significant turnround'.
Prestwick incurred losses of Pounds 3.9m in the year ended July 31 because
of the failure of the acquisitions strategy of Mr Wayne Osman, the chief
executive who resigned last June.
Directors blamed the interim losses on the decision to abort an acquisition
supported by Mr Osman and to the cost of Postern's services. In addition,
Pounds 652,000 has been included as an exceptional item following the
decision to close Northumbria Circuits, a purchase made under Mr Osman.
Turnover from continuing operations was unchanged at Pounds 17m in the half
year. Directors stated that customers had an 'impressive share' of the
mobile telephone market, and that the company supplied the European car
market through Ford and Siemens.
In the absence of distributable reserves no preference or ordinary dividends
can be paid. In 1992 there were preference payments of 3.6p per share and an
ordinary dividend of 0.5p. Losses per share were 9.44p (0.02p). The board
intends to restructure reserves later this year.
Mr Bill Young has left the board and is replaced as finance director by Mr
Paul Woodley of Postern. Mr Hugh Laughland, previously chairman, has also
left. Mr Kenneth Thompson, former group finance director of Royal Bank of
Scotland, and Mr Bill Junor, a company non-executive director with industry
experience, become non-executive directors.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940415

