FT941-12928

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (11): Draft directive offers no joy - Europe's
exporters fear that current negotiations will leave them competitively
weaker than Japan and the US / Brussels / Harmonisation of credit cover


   By PAUL MELLY


This spring promises to be tense for Europe's top project exporters and the
small companies that win business on their coat-tails.
Negotiations in Brussels will decide the shape and cost of government credit
cover central to their ability to win orders overseas, in the face of tough
international competition.
A draft European Commission directive is expected before the summer.
Official export credits play a key role in financing the sale of big capital
installations, such as bridges, power stations and metros. Government
insurance allows much longer repayment periods than a commercial bank would
offer, especially for important, but potentially risky markets in the
developing world and the former communist bloc.
The European Union is now aiming to harmonise existing national systems, so
that exporters in all member states enjoy broadly similar levels of state
support. But industrialists and their bankers fear that the new system may
leave them at a disadvantage vis-a-vis their rivals in Japan, Canada and the
US, who will not be bound by the EU agreement.
The most contentious suggestion is that national export credit agencies
should be limited to providing 95 per cent insurance cover for buyer
credits, leaving the exporter or his bank to take the remaining slice of
risk.
The UK, where the Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) currently
provides 100 per cent cover, has strongly opposed this idea, pointing out
that it will leave European businesses at a disadvantage as non-EU rivals
will probably continue to cover 100 per cent.
Banks and manufacturers already have to share the risk by arranging finance
of the initial 15 per cent front-end contract costs between themselves and
the foreign buyer.
A delegation of industrialists from six EU member states, organised by the
British Exporters Association, visited Brussels in mid-January to outline
their concerns. Commission officials agreed to pass details to the
inter-governmental commission which has been discussing export credit
harmonisation. The delegation included officials from some of Europe's
leading capital goods exporters, including Siemens-Plessey (UK and Germany),
Cegelec (France and Belgium), Dragados (Spain) and Daf and Philips
(Netherlands). Samuel Montagu, part of the HSBC group, also participated.
It pressed officials for a number of features to be incorporated into the
new directive. These included:
routine 100 per cent cover, rather than 95 per cent;
an independent system of risk analysis to reach common agreement on the risk
rating, and thus the premium level, to be accorded to each foreign market;
common rules on bank provisioning and capital adequacy cover;
common rules for the proportion of foreign components that can be covered;
and common rules for the scope and structure of insurance cover, exchange
rate risk cover and claims waiting periods.
The proposal to limit all cover to 95 per cent of insured business is a
worry not just for UK companies, who would see their cover drop from 100 per
cent, but also for French and Italian concerns at a time when many banks and
industries are due to be privatised and thus lose government backing.
Spanish business is also worried, because it has difficulty competing in
Latin America against US rivals who enjoy 100 per cent cover from the US
Export-Import Bank. The Germans had been initially preoccupied mainly with
the shift by Hermes, their official export credit agency, from the single
premium system to one which could set higher rates for riskier markets. But
they are now thought to be increasingly concerned about the structure of
cover as well.
Sources close to the negotiations concede that, because they have been held
under the aegis of the Council of Ministers rather than the European
Commission, they have been shrouded in a degree of confidentiality.
Consequently, consultation with industry may not have been sufficient.
The talks have been driven by finance ministry officials, with a tendency to
go for the lowest common denominator, pulling together the cheaper aspects
of the various national export credit systems. The end result, exporters
argue, is a set of harmonisation proposals that is rather less supportive
for industry than most of the existing national schemes.
The confidentiality issue notwithstanding, sources close to the negotiations
argue banks and industry have been slow to tell politicians and national
administrations what they wanted the harmonised system to look like. The
present attempt to reform export credit began in mid-1991 and both
governments and EU international trade commissioner Sir Leon Brittan are
anxious to reach an accord before long.
The chances of business forcing fundamental changes at this stage seem
limited, although some amendments can probably be made. It may be
particularly hard to win a change of tack on the 95 per cent issue, as only
the UK currently offers 100 per cent cover.
Samuel Montagu has calculated that the cost of taking on this extra five per
cent risk and making provisions against it could be as high as Pounds 1.5m
on a Pounds 25m export contract in a fairly high risk market. Even for an
export to a country which posed no big payment worries, the cost of
financing the extra slice could be Pounds 430,000. These costs would be
passed directly to the exporter in the form of extra charges.
The other issue at the heart of the Brussels talks is the level of premiums
charged by national export credit agencies for providing medium-term cover.
At present there are still wide disparities. At one extreme, Germany sets a
flat rate charge for covering exports to any country in the world. This is
in contrast to the UK's ECGD, which uses a sophisticated risk assessment
system to set premium levels for each individual market.
Some governments, such as Italy, continue to charge fairly low rates, even
for difficult markets, because they see export credit as a justifiable form
of state support for industry. In contrast, ECGD, with a mandate to break
even, had set fairly high charges; but over the past two years the UK
government has allowed it to make a series of cuts - the latest in the
November budget - which have brought most premiums close to the European
average.
High premiums for markets recently brought back on medium-term cover, such
as Argentina and Slovakia, have been quickly reduced; banks hope for a
similar approach to Vietnam, which is expected to be brought on-cover in the
near future. No one expects EU governments to agree a single set of premiums
to be adopted by all agencies; but negotiators do hope to set some
parameters, and Germany would certainly be forced to abandon its single
premium system - something Bonn was preparing to do anyway.
One widely canvassed outcome is to copy the French model of categorising
export markets into several risk groups. There would be EU-wide maximum and
minimum premium levels for each category, while individual governments would
be free to set exact rates within these bands.
The premium issue has become particularly important to exports because the
scope for other forms of subsidy has been gradually pruned back. For
example, the Consensus agreement embracing all OECD states has already
banned interest rate subsidies for export sales to developed and better-off
developing countries. Meanwhile, the scope to subsidise export bids by
incorporating official development aid into the finance package (as an
add-on grant or to soften loan rates) has also been limited by the domestic
budget strains in western exporting countries.
Most governments are not in a position to increase aid spending
significantly at present. With domestic demand squeezed by recession,
governments have been under pressure to help industry to capitalise on these
overseas project opportunities, which tend to be in the high tech sectors,
such as process plant and power engineering, where western companies can
still match competition from the new Pacific Rim industrial powers.
With little room for direct subsidy, governments have sought other ways of
helping exporters. Canada, for example, has been redrafting the terms of
reference for its Export Development Corporation (EDC). The aim is to allow
EDC more room for manoeuvre to develop flexible and competitive financing
packages that will help its export clients to win more business.
In the UK, President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine and Minister
for Trade Richard Needham have successfully persuaded the Treasury to
approve increases in ECGD cover for large and high risk markets of between
Pounds 2.8bn and Pounds 3.2bn for each of the next three financial years.
This represents a fundamental reversal of the policy which prevailed before
the last election, when both the Treasury and Mr Heseltine's predecessor,
Peter Lilley, were deeply sceptical about the value of official export
credit support. This has coincided with the relative weakness of sterling
and a sharp drop in both inflation and interest rates to put project
exporters in a much-improved competitive position.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940127

