FT942-14599

FT  20 APR 94 / Russia vents fury on Bosnia Serbs: Outraged politicians
claim agreements have been betrayed


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


Russian politicians yesterday turned in fury on the Bosnian Serbs, outraged
by what they see as a betrayal of agreements made between them which
humiliates Russia in the highest-profile foreign mediation undertaken since
the fall of the Soviet Union.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the foreign minister, warned the Bosnian Serbs 'not to
test the patience of the world community' - though he added that the Serbs
continued to promise him that they would not capture the besieged city of
Gorazde, would stop shelling it and would agree on security zones controlled
by the UN.
In a telephone conversation with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany,
President Boris Yeltsin said Russia was using 'maximum efforts' to stop the
escalation of the crisis. But it would continue to support 'peaceful
initiatives to resolve the conflict', a continuation of the Russian aversion
to the use of force against the Serbs.
Mr Vitaly Churkin, the special envoy to former Yugoslavia, had expressed
himself much more strongly on Monday, saying he had reversed his previous
position and was now prepared to advise Moscow to support the use of force
against the Serbs. 'Russia is now stopping all its attempts to mediate,' he
said yesterday.
A senior Foreign Ministry official, speaking anonymously, supported the
Churkin line yesterday, saying the Russian ambassador to Belgrade should be
recalled and that the Bosnian Serb leadership, including Mr Radovan Karadzic
and General Ratko Mladic, were 'mad'.
'The Serbs are cheating on the world community, and we can no longer believe
them,' said the official.
'This is exactly the situation at the beginning of the last two world wars,
when one of the two sides found itself faced with a choice between two very
bad alternatives.'
The Russian state duma, or lower house, debates Bosnia in a closed session
today, with the liberal politicians for once in the moral ascendancy against
the more numerous forces who generally side decisively with the Serbs.
The outrage expressed by Mr Kozyrev and Mr Churkin is in part aimed at
convincing parliament that the Foreign Ministry has tried its best and been
betrayed. They are trying to release the head of steam building up against
Nato for air strikes, and thus against the Partnership for Peace agreement
which Russia is delaying signing because of internal disagreements.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940420

