FT944-5949

FT  01 DEC 94 / People: Roger Bright - investing his authority in watchdog


   By WILLIAM HALL


Roger Bright, 43, a former high-flying civil servant in the Department of
Environment, is joining the new Personal Investment Authority, the watchdog
charged with protecting the private investor, as director of operations and
finance.
Bright's appointment, which takes effect next March, nearly completes the
PIA's new top management team under Collette Bowe, the chief executive. Bowe
was recruited from the Securities and Investments Board, as was Stuart
Severn, head of policy development at the PIA. Stuart Wiley, head of legal
services, comes from Lautro.
However, the PIA still needs to find a head of member relations to replace
Kit Jebens, 62, who retires at the end of the year. Jebens has been chief
executive of Lautro, whose regulatory powers are being absorbed by the PIA.
Jebens is joining Fishburn Hedges, a public relations consultancy, to help
its clients deal with regulatory bodies.
Bright joins the PIA from the Housing Corporation where he has been deputy
chief executive (finance and administration).
Before joining the Housing Corporation in 1991, Bright spent 18 years at the
Department of the Environment and had been principal private secretary to
two secretaries of state - Nicholas Ridley and Chris Patten. His last job
was heading the local government review team investigating the financing and
structure of local government.
Bright replaces Cyril Lanch who is retiring after seven years with Fimbra
and subsequently the PIA. Bright is the second deputy chief executive of the
Housing Corporation to quit in four months.
Greg Lomax, deputy chief executive (operations) left in August to be chief
executive of Thamesmead, a former GLC estate in south east London. He is
being replaced by Pam Alexander, 40, another DoE veteran, who joins in
January.
Bright's post, which is being retitled deputy chief executive (regulation
and finance) will be advertised shortly.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941201

