FT942-16372

FT  11 APR 94 / Arts: Kurt Cobain - Obituary


Kurt Cobain has taken the quick route to pop immortality - the 27-year-old
singer with the band Nirvana shot himself at his home in Seattle last week.
Cobain's death seems certain to place him alongside another premature victim
of excess, Sid Vicious of the Sex Pistols, who with a similar Nihilist
approach to Society, and an extravagant drug abuse, rushed headlong to the
grave.
Cobain, the child of divorced parents, had a difficult upbringing in
Washington State. By the late 1980s he was playing the guitar and helping to
pioneer grunge music, the sound coming out of Seattle. Grunge was directly
descended from the British punk of the mid 1970s - loud, discordant,
deliberately amateurish, and representing the alienated life style of youth,
at odds with a complacent, ordered, adult world.
Cobain formed a trio, Nirvana, in 1988 and for Dollars 600 produced an
album, Bleach, which won a cult following. The band was signed up by the
influential Geffen Records which in 1991 promoted Nevermind, combining the
energy and anarchy of grunge with some attractive tunes. It was the perfect
cross-over album and sold more than 10m copies; won many awards; and spawned
'Smells like teen spirit' which topped the American charts and broke Nirvana
in the UK and Europe. Another successful album, In Utero, was released last
year.
Like many young musicians from an underprivileged background Cobain could
not cope with success. He found refuge in drugs and violence, and the
extremism of his stage act followed him into his private life. His wife, a
neo-punk singer, Courtney Love, was also an heroin addict, and welfare
workers feared for their child, Frances. In Rome last month Cobain took an
overdose.
Cobain briefly had a tremendous impact on a large minority of youth. He was
producing music that appealed to young people who enjoyed the pretence of
rebellion. If he had wished, he could have followed the path of earlier
iconoclastic bands like Guns 'n' Roses into international arena touring and
the making of millions. But Cobain chose to stay outside the system - and
life.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940411

