FT941-3318

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (13): A
tricky balancing act for leading vendors - Telecom equipment suppliers


   By MARK NEWMAN


There is substantial uncertainty in the international market for public
telecommunications 'which is characterised by lower investment and
intensifying price competition particularly in the major industrialised
countries' - this was the gloomy prognosis for telecom equipment suppliers,
given by the Swedish manufacturer Ericsson, during its 1993 results meeting.
Five years ago this kind of outlook would have been deeply damaging for a
company like Ericsson. In common with its rivals in Europe - Alcatel and
Siemens - Ericsson placed a heavy reliance on the sale of switching
equipment to state-owned telephone companies in western Europe.
But Ericsson's focus has changed over the last two to three years. Mobile
communications is now its core business. And while Europe remains an
important market for sales of switching equipment, Ericsson is increasingly
tapping emerging markets such as India and China for new sales.
The telecom equipment market today is undergoing rapid change both in terms
of the products that are manufactured and the markets where they are sold.
Big business users are demanding high-speed broadband services to send
massive volumes of data backwards and forwards between their offices
scattered across the world. Radio is becoming the cheaper than copper for
access to long-distance networks. And the term 'multimedia' is causing panic
among equipment vendors. They will undoubtedly play a role in building
multimedia networks.
But software is the key to multimedia and if equipment vendors fail to reach
alliances with software companies, they may be left behind. The leading
equipment suppliers such as Alcatel, Siemens, American Telephone and
Telegraph and Northern Telecom are still making public switches.
But most state-owned telephone companies in western Europe and North America
are now reducing their investment levels. They have digitalised their
long-distance networks and modernisation of local networks for low-spending
residential customers is proceeding at a slower rate. Recession - first in
North America and now in Europe - has also taken its toll.
Increasingly, switch suppliers are targetting the emerging Asian markets.
China is the biggest prize and its requirements are so immense that there is
room for all suppliers. Ian Macleod, a telecommunications analyst at Natwest
Sellier in Paris, calculates that in 1992, total line deliveries (switch
orders are expressed in terms of the number of lines that can be connected)
to China came to around four million.
He estimates that the figure doubled to eight million in 1993, and that by
1996, orders could be running at 12m lines a year. To raise telephone
penetration to its planned level of 10 per cent by the end of the decade,
China will have to buy 100m lines between 1992 and 2000.
India's expansion programme will require the installation of 18m lines over
the same period. Major suppliers to Asia such as Alcatel and Ericsson are
gradually moving manufacturing facilities into local markets. There are
clear benefits to be had.
Production costs are lower than in Europe or North America. But this is not
the prime motivating factor. In many cases, governments insist on local
manufacture to provide jobs and prepare the way for indigenous production.
Some governments in eastern Europe make the acquisition of local production
facilities a pre-condition of contract awards. Otherwise, the local
manufacturers which supplied the national telephone companies during the
Cold War would inevitably face closure.
But it would be a mistake to imagine that western manufacturers are packing
their bags and heading east. Sales into developing markets are more of an
expansion than a re-orientation.
The riches are still in Western Europe and North America, although the
importance of public switching equipment is inevitably in decline. Alcatel,
the world's largest telecom equipment manufacturer, still relies on Europe
for 75 per cent of its sales.
Driven by a wave of liberalisation, the European telecommunications
equipment market will undergo radical change over coming years. The cosy
relationship between state-owned telephone companies and local manufacturers
will be forced apart as new operators attack the lucrative international and
business communications markets.
Closed markets will open as state-owned telephone companies begin to behave
like proper commercially-run companies. And national champions such as
Siemens and Alcatel will respond by selling their products to competitors to
Deutsche Telekom and France Telekom.
The UK telecommunications market is already the most liberalised in the
world.
Equipment manufacturers are widening their vision beyond BT and Mercury
Communications, and are facing immense pressure from both the new operators
and the incumbents to develop new technology that gives them a competitive
edge.
New international and long-distance telephone networks are being built,
wireless technology is being trialled for local telephone networks, and
cable television operators are being allowed to offer telephone services.
The requirements of big business users are setting the agenda for equipment
vendors. Coping with massive flows of data between sites has become a
headache for today's telecommunications manager.
A surge in demand for the interconnection of local computer-based networks
has led to the development of a fast packet-switching service for data
communications called frame relay.
Equipment vendors are facing stiff competition in frame relay from smaller
companies in the computer and networking sectors such as Cisco Systems,
Raycom Systems and StrataCom.
A bigger battle is being fought for dominance in Asynchronous Transfer Mode
(ATM), a technique for sharing the capacity of a telecoms channel between
those wishing to use it. ATM enables telephone operators to offer high
bandwidth services, such as high-speed data or video-conferencing, with
improved efficiency and greater flexibility.
ATM is already being touted as the backbone for multimedia and other
broadband services, and can be applied to both private and public networks.
All leading equipment vendors are positioning themselves for a share of the
ATM market. A group of 16 European operators in 15 countries is to conduct
an ATM trial this year, and all have awarded ATM contracts.
Familiar names such as Alcatel, Siemens, American Telephone and Telegraph
and Ericsson have won contracts along with Netcomm, a UK-based data switch
manufacturer.
Ericsson has prospered as a leading telecommunications equipment
manufacturer in a market which is undergoing rapid technological and where a
number of its rivals are stumbling. Alcatel, Siemens and Northern Telecom
all suffered profit setbacks in 1993.
They were hit by a fall in orders for public telecommunications equipment as
a result of the recession in North America and Europe. Meanwhile, products
based on ATM, and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy, its sister transmission
technology, are only now emerging from the laboratory and operators are
reluctant to commit themselves to major orders.
Lars Ramqvist, Ericsson's managing director, puts his company's strong
financial performance in 1993 down to a strategy which meant spending 15
times more on R&D than on dividends.
In a speech at the 1994 Innovation Lecture in London last month, Ramqvist
said manufacturers needed to forego short-term profit in favour of higher
R&D spending.
Ian Macleod at Natwest Sellier is confident that the combination of
liberalisation and new technologies 'promises a new phase of growth in the
world telecommunications equipment market.'
Leading equipment vendors are best-placed to benefit from the growth. But
they will have to get the balance right between selling old products into
new markets, and bringing out new products for their older customers in
Europe and North America.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940316

