FT941-5627

FT  05 MAR 94 / Lawyers welcome part-timer ruling


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


This week's landmark House of Lords ruling on employment rights for
part-time workers was an important confirmation of the rights of pressure
groups to challenge the compatibility of UK law with European legislation,
lawyers said yesterday.
Law lords rejected government attempts to limit those rights. The government
had argued that the Equal Opportunities Commission had no standing to seek a
judicial review and that such proceedings could not be used to get a
declaration that the government was breaching EU law.
Lawyers said yesterday that if either argument had succeeded it would have
been a very retrograde step.
Mr David Pannick QC, who had been examining the implications of the European
Court ruling, said the judgment reaffirmed the law as set out in the 1992
Factortame case. In that case Spanish fishermen successfully applied for a
judicial review seeking a declaration that the 1988 Merchant Shipping Act
was contrary to EU law. It also confirmed the liberalisation of the scope of
judicial review in recent years.
'It has never really been in doubt that if a person with a proper interest
can show the government is in breach of EC law they are entitled to use
judicial review proceedings to ask the court for a declaration that it is,'
said Mr Pannick.
Other lawyers said the judgment could lead to an increase in the number of
politically controversial cases brought by pressure groups.
Lord Lester QC, counsel to the Equal Opportunities Commission, said that
although the judgment was not ground-breaking in the strictest sense, it was
still a very important clarification.
The law had been thrown into doubt by the Appeal Court when it gave judgment
in this case last year. The judgment stressed the role to be played by
statutory and non-statutory lobbies in this area, he said.
In one respect the case did break new ground - it was the first time an
English court had reviewed the rationality of legislation rather than its
legality, Lord Lester said.
In the Factortame case the court looked at the domestic law and read it
against the EU law to see whether one conformed with the other. But in this
case the court was looking at the impact of the legislation - at the
economic and social justification for it.
Lord Lester said that role was typically played by constitutional courts,
such as the US Supreme Court, but was a new departure for English courts.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940305

