FT943-923

FT  27 SEP 94 / Arts: Pre-Raphaelites unbuttoned - William Packer admires
the exhibition of drawings at the BM


   By WILLIAM PACKER


The richness and scope of the collections in the British Museum's Department
of Prints and Drawings alone, to say nothing of the whole place, are an
unending source of surprise and delight. And it is gratifying to discover
that even in these lean times, the work of scholarly accumulation has
quietly gone on. Two new displays, drawn entirely from within the
collections, the one of English drawings and water-colours, the other of
French prints, neatly make the point. Both are comparatively modest in
scale, yet both are as comprehensive as one could wish.
But why are drawings still so much the province of the specialist and
connoisseur? Is it that they, vulnerable and fugitive, are altogether too
problematical for the ordinary collector? Is it that the market itself,
conforming to prejudice, is still reluctant to set an inherent rather than a
comparative value to works on paper, save with proven or rarer masters?
For myself, I would as soon be engrossed by drawings, old or new, as by any
of the more substantial works, to which, perhaps, they led. For with drawing
we find ourselves taken immediately into the intimate presence of the
artist, unselfconscious in his private engagement with his subject, his
interests and ideas. We are with him in his scrutiny of the figure or
object; with him as he teases image from imagination; ever following his
hand across the page.
In all of this the pre-Raphaelites are admirable companions. In their
youthful, mid-Victorian, high-minded earnestness, they can be quite as
off-putting as they are fascinating. We may admire the technical
accomplishment and beauty of the work, and yet recoil still from the
religiosity, the sentimentality, the priggishness. Or so we might say of the
full-dress paintings.
But here they are with their collars loosened, as it were, lively and
personal in their address and as light-hearted and funny as they are
serious. They work up their formal compositions as the merest sketches and
cartoons; they draw their models and lovers with easy familiarity and
affection; they sit in the field and paint the barns and houses as the sun
goes down.
And yet, for all the apparent informality or simplicity, these are works of
real achievement, and often the more so for being so slight or modest.
Millais' skinny lady delicately cuts a flower from the trellis, her little
boy up to no good by her side, an image that contrives to be at once ideal,
statuesque and a miracle of amused and accurate personal observation.
Rossetti turns incessantly to his adored Miss Siddal - now standing,
sitting, day-dreaming, now windswept on the beach with a gentleman friend.
Charles Collins' studies for his 'Railway Accident' combine poignancy with
reality, the lady anxious at the clerk's shoulder as the news comes through
on the telegraph. Ruskin paints the ivy on a rock, George Boyce,
exquisitely, a Streatley farmhouse, Henry Holiday two women in fancy-dress,
Burne-Jones a wistful Annunciation. Frederick Sandys' drawing of stunning
Ruth Herbert is magnificent. There are many such treats.
The Shadow of the Forest, in the same room, is a collection of prints by the
artists of the Barbizon School, more or less the pre-Raphaelites'
contemporaries. Barbizon is a village on the edge of the Forest of
Fontainbleau, south-east of Paris, which artists had been visiting since the
early 19th century. The ascription to it of a school of painters is more
convenience than hard art-historical fact, for artists came and went in the
loosest of fellowships. It is rather in their commitment to working close to
the landscape in the open air, in which they foreshadowed the
Impressionists, that the significance of Barbizon's painters lies.
They were by no means the first to do so, and the show makes no secret of
their influences, from Constable and Bonington to Rembrandt and Ruysdael.
Nor were they principally print-makers. But the print, the etching
especially, has always been attractive to artists for its convenience, given
a workshop, and directness. The multiple image largely met the problem of
permanence, and there was throughout the 19th century the ever-growing
attraction of publishing editions for the mass market.
But the engraved reproduction of paintings is a secondary business and less
interesting in this context than the artist's direct engagement with the
image, the plate and the processes of the print. A smaller edition could
always achieve a reasonable return. All the major figures are represented in
this way - Millet, Daubigny, de la Pena, Corot, besides Jongkind and Israels
from the Hague.
In every case, the closer they stay to the direct act of drawing, and to the
particular qualities of line and tone that only the etching can achieve, the
better. And Corot stands out among them all for the sheer bravura of his
line and touch. His use of the now obscure cliche-verre, that marries
etching to photography, could not be more sympathetic.
Pre-Raphaelite Drawings in the British Museum; Shadow of the Forest - Prints
of the Barbizon School: both exhibitions at the British Museum, Great
Russell Street WC1, until January 8.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940927

