FT943-12959

FT  22 JUL 94 / Hong Kong and Beijing let money do the talking: Monetary
developments on the eve of a debt issue that matures after the handover


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


Mr Joseph Yam, governor of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the colony's
equivalent of a central bank, pores over a chart showing the yields on Hong
Kong government bonds compared with other borrowers.
What they tell him is that whereas the yields on Hong Kong government debt
of less than three years' maturity are lower than, say US government paper,
yields on Hong Kong paper maturing after three years are higher.
'I suppose there is concern about inflation, the outlook for interest rates
and some residual worries with politics and policies,' says Mr Yam.
On Monday investors will be tendering for another HKDollars 500m (Pounds
41m) of the authority's bonds. What make these of special interest is that
they mature nearly a month after China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on
July 1, 1997.
As such, they, and the ones to follow, will become a bellwether of investor
confidence in the colony, along with its more visible stock market. If the
issue on Monday goes well, there are plans to introduce a five-year bond
later this year.
Hong Kong's government debt market is just four years old and already dwarfs
the colony's stock market. There are HKDollars 43bn bonds in issue, but
turnover approaches HKDollars 20bn on most days. This compares with a stock
market at its most active of around HKDollars 8bn a day and currently
languishing around HKDollars 3bn a day.
That this activity occurs at all seems to defy economic and diplomatic
logic. The Hong Kong government has no fiscal need to borrow; its budget has
been in surplus for as long as most can remember. Moreover, in the
Sino-British memorandum of understanding (MOU) which paved the way for Hong
Kong to build a new airport the colonial government was limited to borrowing
no more than HKDollars 5bn.
The logic that has been at work is the logic of the markets. Monetary reform
in 1988 necessitated the establishment of a short-term money market, after
which it was a short step to issuing instruments with longer maturities.
Mr Yam admits that the MOU has been disregarded on this score. He expects
that at the handover there will be, with the approval of the Chinese
government, at least HKDollars 40bn of debt still due to mature after the
change in sovereignty. 'It just shows you how pragmatic they are,' he says.
The authority has kept China informed of its plans every step of the way and
because of that it has won Beijing's support for the continuation of the
borrowing programme after 1997.
'This is not political reform but monetary reform and both sides recognised
that there was no problem. On the monetary side the scope for differences of
opinion is very small. Stability and prosperity is the aim and monetary
stability will contribute to it,' says Mr Yam.
He says he had qualms about the government borrowing when it was first
mooted five years ago, but he recognised that changes to the regulation of
banks made borrowing necessary. In 1988 the government took responsibility
for influencing the level of interest rates in the inter-bank money market,
hence the introduction of short-term money market bills.
After that it was just a matter of time before instruments with longer
maturities were issued. As the market has grown, so too has the
sophistication of the authority's role in Hong Kong's money market.
Last year it introduced a 'discount window' at which banks are able to make
good short-term cash deficiencies by selling a portion of their Hong Kong
government debt portfolios. Moreover, as the authority has issued
longer-term bonds, a retail investor market has developed.
No matter how good the authority's relations with Beijing, China nonetheless
presents special problems for an institution trying to establish Hong Kong's
separate identity in the world of international finance.
For one, there is Hong Kong's credit rating after 1997. Mr Yam lists a
string of arguments why Hong Kong should be treated differently from the
mainland, not the least being its guarantee of autonomy in financial
affairs. But he is having a difficult time persuading the credit rating
agencies.
Another issue is the ownership by mainland interests of a large part of Hong
Kong's money supply. Already more than 20 per cent of the colony's physical
stock of notes circulates in southern China.
Mr Yam's main concern, however, is the HKDollars 48bn (as of April) of Hong
Kong dollars deposited in the colony's banks by mainland banks. A rapid
conversion of this money to US dollars could put a large strain on the HK
dollar's link with the US currency.
'Who controls this money is of interest to us,' he says with some
understatement. 'If it's by individuals then I'm not worried. But if it is
by the centre (Chinese government) then, for policy reasons, they may want
to control it.'
If that were the case, then Hong Kong's promised financial autonomy would be
in jeopardy. On balance, however, Mr Yam does not believe these funds are
within the control of the Chinese government - 'I think it's a reflection of
economics rather than political activity' - but for a man whose prime task
is the preservation of currency stability he maintains a watchful eye on the
money flows.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940722

