FT944-14382

FT  24 OCT 94 / Coutts extends private banking services


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


Coutts & Co, the 302-year-old private bank, is to move upmarket in the UK to
become what its new chief executive calls 'a proper private bank'.
Mr David Went, who took over at Coutts four months ago, believes that by the
turn of the century the bank may require customers to have at least Pounds
500,000 - at today's prices - in assets the bank can manage for them.
Coutts, wholly owned by National Westminster Bank, believes that because of
the expected growth in private wealth this decade it can double the number
of UK clients from the present 25,000 by becoming more exclusive.
'The traditional image of Coutts in the UK has been of a posh retail bank,
but it will become a proper private bank,' Mr Went said. That would mean
focusing on asset management for wealthy individuals rather than retail
banking.
Mr Went said Coutts, which at present seeks customers with Pounds 150,000 in
investable assets, would tighten its criteria. It would require at least
Pounds 300,000 by the end of the decade, and he 'would be surprised' if the
minimum was not Pounds 500,000.
Coutts is also trying to expand overseas because the demand for private
banking is expected to grow rapidly in the next decade. More individuals
will inherit wealth, and many entrepreneurs in Latin America and Asia are
becoming millionaires.
The bank already operates in 14 countries outside the UK, and will announce
shortly that it is opening three offices on the west coast of the US,
including one in Beverly Hills in Los Angeles and another in San Diego in
southern California.
Mr Went said Coutts would not 'sling out' customers who did not meet its
tighter criteria, but it might encourage some to transfer to NatWest
accounts for high-income customers that offer a more personal service than
the average account.
He said the bank might also try to persuade customers who have a current
account and a credit card to use it as an investment manager.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941024

