FT944-5864

FT  01 DEC 94 / UK Company News: 3i may form venture capital investment
trust


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


3i, the UK's largest investor in unquoted companies, is considering setting
up a venture capital investment trust following the Budget announcement of
tax incentives for investors in these new vehicles.
Mr Charles Richardson, director of corporate affairs, said 3i was seriously
considering the new scheme, which seemed 'very interesting' to private
investors.
The new VCITs will issue quoted shares, like any investment trust, but will
make investments of up to Pounds 1m in unquoted companies.
Private investors will be allowed to invest up Pounds 100,000 in VCITs,
which are likely to be launched in the spring. These more than averagely
risky investments carry income tax relief of 20 per cent on purchase of the
shares. In addition investors will be able to defer capital gains tax
liabilities on the sale of almost any other asset, if those gains are
reinvested in VCIT shares.
This brings the total potential front-end tax break on investment in VCIT
shares to 60 per cent, on top of which investors will receive relief from
any capital gains or dividends from their trust shares.
Even if 3i does not set up its own VCIT, it will still benefit from the
enthusiasm for the new vehicles shown by other venture capital groups, such
as Electra and Murray Johnstone.
The FT-SE 100 group has a policy of taking a minority stake only in the
companies in which it invests. It therefore requires syndicate partners with
which to co-invest. But because 3i tends to invest in companies that are
smaller than most venture capital funds will look at, it has sometimes had
difficulty finding co-investors.
Managers of new VCITs will be anxious to minimise the cost of sifting
through a large number of small potential deals. Co-investing the funds
alongside smaller deals that 3i wants to back would be an attractive way to
find deals and invest relatively cheaply.
3i has an established network of offices around the UK with good contacts
with regional accounting firms - a source of deals of all sizes. Other
venture capital groups considering setting up VCITs would need to make a
greater proportionate increase in their staff levels to seek potential
deals.
3i is also likely to benefit from the Chancellor's relaxation of rules on
which investment trusts qualify to be included in personal equity plans.
Like many of the 21 other quoted venture capital trusts, 3i's shares can now
be included in a general Pep.
The old rules stated that 50 per cent of an investment trust's assets had to
be held in ordinary shares in order to be included in a general Pep. The
Chancellor has now allowed preference shares in unquoted companies to be
included as well.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941201

