FT944-2295

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: S African group to merge two
gold mines


   By MARK SUZMAN and NIKKI TAIT


   JOHANNESBURG, SYDNEY


Randgold, the smallest and least profitable of South Africa's leading gold
mining groups, plans to ensure the viability of its Durban Deep mine by
merging it with the neighbouring Rand Leases mine.
Durban Deep, which had been scheduled to close earlier this year, will
acquire all the issued shares in Rand Leases in exchange for 2.9m new Durban
Deep shares.
Mr Peter Flack, Randgold chairman, said the transaction would significantly
reduce running costs through the introduction of a single overhead structure
for the two mines, and that he hoped to refinance the enlarged company in
the new year.
Full details will be released in January. The transaction is subject to the
approval of Durban Deep shareholders, who will meet in February to assess
the plan.
Normandy Poseidon, via its industrial minerals division, has acquired a 9.1
per cent interest in Queensland Metals Corporation, writes Nikki Tait in
Sydney. The 10.8m shares comprising the stake were placed with the
Adelaide-based mining and minerals group at ADollars 1.30 each, for a total
consideration of ADollars 14m (USDollars 10.8m).
Shell Australia confirmed yesterday that it had completed the sale of a 30
per cent stake in the Worsley bauxite alumina joint venture in western
Australia to Billiton Australia, part of South Africa's Gencor. The deal is
part of Gencor's purchase of much of the Shell group's international metals
portfolio. Shell Australia said a further 6 per cent interest in Worsley had
been sold to Reynolds Australia Alumina, part of the Reynolds Metals
Company, and that it expected to complete the sale of its remaining 1.5 per
cent stake to Nissho Iwai, a Japanese trading and publishing company, by the
end of December.
MIM, the Queensland-based metals group, said it planned to increase
Australian copper sales by 50 per cent, to 90,000 tonnes next year. It said
it was aiming to fill some of the shortfall which is likely to arise when
CRA's Southern Copper refinery and smelter at Port Kembla close in January.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941216

