FT941-16940

FT  07 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Teething troubles nag at Mercosur market /
Assessing the chances of a four-nation South American trade venture


   By JOHN BARHAM and ANGUS FOSTER


Negotiators from Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, the four countries
that make up the South American common market Mercosur, are holding a series
of meetings over the next 10 days to try to restart their integration
programme.
The meetings of foreign and finance ministers and officials will end in
mid-January with a presidential summit in Uruguay. The encounters are an
attempt to relax growing tension between Argentina and Brazil over trade and
to seek a compromise over a common tariff structure.
Tariffs between the four are being gradually cut until they reach zero for
most products by December next. Goods will then circulate freely while
imports from outside Mercosur will be subject to common tariffs. Mercosur's
integration timetable says the external tariffs were to have been
established at the end of December.
But, in meetings last month, Argentina and Brazil failed to compromise on
the level of tariffs to be applied, and on which 'sensitive' products should
be allowed higher tariffs as protection from foreign competition. The two
countries are home to the region's biggest economies and their dispute
threatens Mercosur's future.
The disagreement boils down to a divergence over industrial policy. Brazil
wants higher external tariffs to protect such sectors as its high-technology
and capital goods industries. Argentina, which is less industrialised,
insists on low tariffs. Little Paraguay and Uruguay have been virtually shut
out of the debate.
Meanwhile, Argentina is retaliating against what it claims are 'unfair'
Brazilian exports. Mr Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy minister,
complains that Brazilian companies are dumping goods in Argentina. This
week, he introduced protectionist measures against Brazilian chemicals. Like
many other Brazilian products, these are increasingly competitive in
Argentina because of falling tariffs. The Argentine minister has already
imposed similar measures against steel, refrigerators, paper, agricultural
machinery and textiles.
Brazil, which is increasingly irritated by Mr Cavallo's statements, says its
exports are competitive because of Argentina's overvalued exchange rate.
Other problems divide the two. Brazil is struggling to stabilise its
economy, while Argentina has achieved low inflation and high growth.
Brazil's political scene is confused, while Argentine President Carlos Menem
is consolidating his power.
Meanwhile, he does not hide his interest in joining the North American Free
Trade Agreement. US President Bill Clinton has mentioned Chile and Argentina
as the next potential candidates for membership. But a US official said: 'We
do not want Brazil in its present situation.'
However, officals from both sides still stress that their relationship
remains a cornerstone of foreign policy. Mercosur is intended as a framework
for political co-operation between two countries which, until recently, were
viewing each other as adversaries.
In a similar vein, Mr Menem has called on Chile, a country on which
Argentina almost declared war in 1977, to join Mercosur. However, Chilean
President-elect Eduardo Frei has signalled that he has no intention of doing
so. He is probably intent on waiting for an invitation to join Nafta.
Brazil's deepening problems and trade disputes with Argentina are leading
both partners to question whether earlier hopes of full economic integration
can be achieved under the original timetable. They may be forced to settle
for a more realistic, less ambitious, customs union in which free trade
would only initially apply to certain sectors of products.
The four have agreed on common tariffs of 0-20 per cent for nearly all the
goods they import. But they cannot agree on tariffs for capital goods,
telecommunications equipment and computers. Brazil insisted originally on a
20-35 per cent tariff for these goods until 2001; Argentina demanded zero
tariffs.
Argentina wants low tariffs to encourage industry to modernise. Mr Jorge
Herrera Vegas, Argentina's under-secretary for economic integration, said
capital 'goods should be bought as cheaply as possible in the international
market. Argentina is preparing for a leap in exports. It needs the most
technologically advanced goods.'
But Brazil protests that it cannot compete against American, Japanese and
European goods imported duty-free by Argentina. The Brazilians also demand
preference for their goods in Argentina because the latter is using
privileged access to Brazil's much bigger market to provide its industry
with the economies of scale needed to raise international competitiveness
and become attractive to foreign investors.
Hope is dwindling that the upcoming meetings will lead to compromise. A
Brazilian government official said: 'The realisation is crystalising that
free trade will not be complete in 1995. Computers, telecommunications,
electronics and capital goods will probably be subject to different tariffs
in 1995.'
Even so, despite the inter-governmental friction, companies are trading
more, creating more joint ventures and alliances. Companies are increasingly
treating Argentina, Brazil - and Chile - as a single market.
Trade within Mercosur last year rose by a third to an estimated Dollars
8.15bn. Brazil is Argentina's biggest export market. Argentina is Brazil's
second largest market and an important oil supplier. Trade has become more
evenly balanced: Argentina has increased exports to Brazil, cutting its
deficit by two-thirds to Dollars 504m in the nine months to September 1993.
Perhaps for these reasons alone, integration seems set to continue, however
unsteadily. It seems equally probable that the backbiting between Argentina
and Brazil is set to become a permanent feature of the local scene.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940107

