FT942-12556

FT  29 APR 94 / New line-up packs few shocks: Most key posts go to the PM's
own party


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Born in uncertain circumstances, the cabinet formed by Prime Minister
Tsutomu Hata yesterday contained few appointments that might surprise or
disturb.
Most key posts went to members of the Shinseito, or Japan Renewal party, led
by Mr Hata and the former Liberal Democratic party political operator Mr
Ichiro Ozawa, who is thought to be the real power behind Mr Hata's gentle
facade.
With the departure of the Social Democratic party, Shinseito, which held the
reins from the start, has become the largest party in the coalition and won
eight cabinet posts, including those of chief cabinet secretary, finance
minister and international trade and industry minister.
Komeito, the Clean Government party, which is linked to the Buddhist Soka
Gakkai movement and has worked hand in hand with Shinseito, received six
posts as its reward. They include Posts and Telecommunications, Transport
and Construction.
Of particular interest to the international community will be the new
foreign minister, Mr Koji Kakizawa, head of the seven-member Jiyuto (Liberal
party), which recently joined the coalition after defecting from the Liberal
Democratic party.
Judging from his personal history, Mr Kakizawa (at 60 he looks at least 10
years younger) seems a natural choice for the post. He entered the Ministry
of Finance straight out of Tokyo University's economics department, a
beginning that virtually guarantees a shining career in status-conscious
Japan.
During his years as a bureaucrat, Mr Kakizawa, who speaks both French and
English, trained at the French Finance Ministry and served at the Japanese
embassy in Belgium. His contribution to Franco-Japanese friendship (he
happens to be a wine lover) brought him the Legion d'Honneur in 1989.
He entered politics in 1977 when, ironically, he ran for a seat in the Upper
House, under the banner of the New Liberal Club, headed by Mr Yohei Kono, at
present leader of the opposition Liberal Democrats. He won that seat and has
since been elected five times to the Lower House.
As a politician, Mr Kakizawa has directed his talents toward foreign
affairs. As parliamentary vice-foreign minister, a post he kept until last
year, he paved the way for deployment of Japanese UN peacekeepers in
Mozambique and acted as right-hand man to Mr Michio Watanabe, then foreign
minister.
His closeness to Mr Watanabe, known for his right-wing tendencies, indicates
his views are likely to be in line with those of Mr Ozawa, the brain behind
the coalition's policy.
Similarly politically correct is Mr Hiroshi Kumagai, former trade minister
and Shinseito member, who has become chief cabinet secretary.
Mr Kumagai, a career bureaucrat before turning to politics, kept a fairly
low profile as trade minister but is far from lacking in force.
He caused an uproar as trade minister when he unexpectedly sacked a senior
official at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry for promoting
another bureaucrat who was planning to run for parlia-ment.
Mr Kumagai is also known as being more vocal than most about Japan's need to
deregulate. As trade minister he was not afraid to stand up for Japan in its
confrontations on trade with the US.
The man who replaces Mr Kumagai at trade has more of a reputation for tact.
Mr Eijiro Hata, also from Shinseito, was at the helm of the Agriculture
Ministry during one of its most turbulent years, when Japan finally agreed
to open up its rice market to imports and was forced at short notice to let
in imported rice due to a shortage caused by cold weather.
If Mr Hata's career history is any guide, the Trade Ministry might expect
some changes. Known for his forward-looking approach, Mr Hata was
instrumental in the privatisation of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone in 1985
when privatisation was not the trend it is today.
Also of note is the appearance in the cabinet of Mr Kunio Hatoyama as labour
minister. A former education minister, Mr Hatoyama comes from one of the
most blue-blooded families in Japanese politics.
His great-grandfather was a former Lower House speaker, while his
grandfather was prime minister in the 1950s. His brother is a Lower House
lawmaker who once served as deputy chief cabinet secretary.
Other members of his family include former prime minister Kiichi Miyazawa,
and a former minister of education. Outside politics, other family members
include an honorary chairman of Daiichi Kangyo Bank and a nationally-famous
composer.
But Mr Hatoyama, 45, does not need to rely on the fame of his relatives. As
education minister he unleashed a heated nationwide debate by proposing to
scrap private business exams which he felt encouraged excessive competition
among schoolchildren.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940429

