FT942-12437

FT  29 APR 94 / Float values TeleWest at Pounds 1.7bn


   By PAUL TAYLOR


TeleWest, the largest cable television operator in Britain, yesterday
confirmed plans for a global share offering this summer which is likely to
place a value of about Pounds 1.7bn on the fast growing company.
The flotation, which had been widely expected, will be the first by a UK
cable group and highlights the sharply improved economics of companies
combining cable television and telephone service on one network.
Kleinwort Benson, which is advising TeleWest, has suggested that even on
conservative assumptions, the television side of the UK cable communications
industry should produce annual revenues of Pounds 1bn with
telecommunications adding a further Pounds 1.6bn by the end of the decade.
Mr Alan Michels, TeleWest's chief executive, emphasised yesterday that the
UK cable industry represents the first opportunity in the world to invest in
broadband networks that will act as 'information super-highways'.
These networks are expected to provide a highly cost effective delivery
system for a wide range of entertainment, communications, multi-media and
interactive services.
Under the proposals outlined yesterday new shares representing about an 18
per cent stake fully diluted in the expanded capital of TeleWest will be
sold through a placing and intermediaries offer on both sides of the
Atlantic. The placing is expected to raise about Pounds 300m in new funds to
continue building the group's franchise cable network.
TeleWest - a joint venture between TCI of Denver, the world's largest cable
operator, and US West, the American telephone company - expects to spend
Pounds 1.25bn by the end of 1998.
It owns and operates 16 cable franchises and has minority equity interests
in three other companies which own and operate another seven cable
franchises. In total the owned and affiliated franchises will eventually
cover 3.6m homes - with TeleWest's 'equity' interest set at 2.8m homes.
By the end of last year cable television was available to about 700,000 of
these homes of which roughly 25 per cent had signed up for cable television.
TeleWest intends to seek a full listing for its shares on the London Stock
Exchange and a registration of American Depository Shares on the Nasdaq.
A pathfinder prospectus is expected to be published in June and will be
followed by a three-week 'roadshow' presentation to institutions in Europe
and the US. Kleinwort Benson Securities and Goldman Sachs International are
acting as joint global co-ordinators for the offering.
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940429

