FT944-14509

FT  22 OCT 94 / UK Company News: EVC institutions reject claims by
Greenpeace


   By TIM BURT


City institutions handling the imminent flotation of EVC International,
Europe's largest PVC manufacturer, yesterday rejected claims that they had
over-valued the company and failed to warn potential investors of
environmental risks.
SG Warburg and Kleinwort Benson both accused Greenpeace, the environmental
pressure group, of using selective and distorted facts in a circular urging
fund managers to avoid the float, which is expected to value the company at
more than Pounds 400m.
In its first-ever approach to institutional investors, Greenpeace criticised
research on EVC by Warburg, joint global co-ordinator to the placing and
open offer, and Kleinwort Benson, lead manager on the issue.
'A valuation of EVC made on the basis of these reports would, in our view,
overstate the company's worth,' Greenpeace said.
The Dutch-based company, jointly-owned by ICI and Enichem of Italy, will
unveil its flotation price tag on Monday when its pathfinder prospectus is
published.
Researchers at Greenpeace, however, warned that the newly floated company
would face mounting environmental and safety pressures, prompted by concerns
over dioxins and other toxic emissions during PVC production.
'The increasing availability of viable substitutes will erode traditional
PVC markets in Europe and the US,' the pressure group added.
Warburg, which described the environmental pressures on EVC as 'limited',
said it stood by its views and was confident of support from fund managers.
Officials at Kleinwort, meanwhile, said: 'We have never glossed over the
environmental controversy surrounding PVC. But our tentative view is that
these pressures are past their worst.'
Environmental concerns and restrictions on the use of PVC, particularly in
packaging, contributed to combined pre-tax losses of Fl 827m (Pounds 304m)
at EVC over the last three years.
Although cost cutting is understood to have improved the joint venture's
financial performance in recent months, ICI - which publishes its
third-quarter results next Thursday - is expected to endure a Pounds 125m
write-down on its EVC assets in the final quarter.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941022

