FT942-12760

FT  28 APR 94 / Role for universities urged in urban renewal


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Universities should lobby the new government regional offices to make
themselves a main vehicle for urban regeneration, a report from the
Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals said yesterday.
Higher education is already taking a broader role in local business and
community development, moving away from the traditional ideal of a sheltered
academic environment, it said.
Universities should also aim to assert their role as large local employers,
according to the report. For example Newcastle upon Tyne's two universities
are the area's third and fifth-largest employers, accounting for more than
5,000 jobs between them.
But the University of Newcastle's Centre for Urban and Regional Development
Studies, which compiled the report, also warned that universities had
complex and differing management structures which impeded links with local
businesses and councils.
It made several detailed recommendations:
Universities should provide clear 'sockets' into which other local agencies
 -such as industry, planners or local government - could plug without
difficulty;
New housing developments needed to accommodate the recent sharp increase in
enrolment should be built in inner-city areas rather than 'greenfield'
sites. For example, Coventry University has built a 600-bed 'student
village' on the site of a former factory, while the University of Humberside
is converting a disused warehouse into a library;
Technology transfer to local companies should also be increased.
Universities' research funding is dominated by government funding councils
and by large companies. However, research contracts with local industry 'for
most institutions are relatively small-scale and few in number'.
Higher education is urged to expand this by publicising research-related
services. Rather than carrying out research for companies, universities
should allow small companies access to specific research equipment that they
would not otherwise be able to afford.
More than half of final-year students at Oxford and Cambridge universities
are so pessimistic about employment prospects that they have not applied for
any jobs.
The survey of 1,500 final-year students at the two universities found that
only 46 per cent of Cambridge final-year students, and 53 per cent of those
at Oxford, had applied to employers. Almost a quarter had decided to 'take a
year off' after graduating.
'Milk round' presentations to undergraduates, still held by more than 100
employers at the two universities, appeared to be ineffective, with fewer
than 40 per cent of students attending any events.
Management consultancy and merchant banking remained the most popular
careers, each attracting 17 per cent of the year's job-seekers.
Universities and Communities, CVCP, 29 Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9EZ.
Pounds 15.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940428

