FT944-11007

FT  08 NOV 94 / International Company News: Danske to take control of
Baltica


   By HILARY BARNES


   COPENHAGEN


Den Danske Bank, the leading Danish commercial bank, is to acquire a
controlling interest in Baltica, Denmark's largest insurance company.
The deal will make Danske a significant force in the country's life
assurance and personal accident insurance business.
Danske intends to sell off the parts of Baltica, including commercial and
industrial insurance, which do not fit in with the bank's strategy, said Mr
Knud Sorensen, Danske chief executive.
The move will cost Danske about DKr2.55bn (Dollars 426m), but no share issue
is planned, added Mr Sorensen.
Danske, which already held 32.3 per cent of Baltica's shares, will obtain
control through two agreements.
It has exercised an option to buy a 23 per cent stake in Baltica held by
Gefion, formerly known as Baltica Holding, for DKr1.7bn. This takes the
bank's holding to 55.5 per cent of the capital and 76.9 per cent of the
voting rights.
The bank also entered an option agreement with Denmark's second-ranking
insurance company, Codan, controlled by the UK's Sun Alliance, to acquire
Codan's 10.4 per cent stake in Baltica for about DKr850m.
This would take Danske's holding in Baltica to 65.9 per cent of the capital
and 91.2 per cent of the voting rights.
The agreements give Danske control of Baltica's life assurance company,
Danica, which before it was sold to Baltica for DKr4bn in a privatisation
sale in 1990 was known as Statsanstalten.
Danica has a 23 per cent share of the domestic life assurance market.
Together with the bank's Danske Life, Danske will control up to 30 per cent
of the Danish market.
Danica, however, is not permitted to pay a dividend for 25 years from the
date of the privatisation sale. This follows a Supreme Court ruling in
November last year which stated that Danica's profits were the property of
pre-privatisation policyholders.
The ruling has made it impossible for Danske to carry out a sale of the
entire Baltica group. This was its plan when it gained effective control
over Baltica in 1992-93 after it had put up the money to prevent Baltica
Holding (as it was then called) from going bankrupt.
Baltica's share of the domestic personal accident insurance market is about
16 per cent, according to Mr Hans Ejvind Hansen, Baltica chief executive.
Danske owns a personal accident insurance company, Phoenix, jointly with
Codan.
The bank will acquire the entire capital of Phoenix, which has only a small
market share.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

941108

