FT941-17143

FT  06 JAN 94 / Teacher unity shows signs of cracking: Dearing demands
development of Continental-style training options


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Teachers' unions yesterday appeared deeply divided in their reaction to Sir
Ron Dearing's report on the national curriculum, signalling that the
government had at last broken the profession's united front over the issue.
However, a repeated boycott of national curriculum tests, similar to the
industrial action which forced the education department to start Sir Ron's
review last April, remains a real possibility.
Last year the tests were boycotted by all the three main teachers' unions
while the two organisations for head teachers, who were contractually barred
from boycotting the tests, made no attempt to administer tests against the
wishes of their staff.
Mr David Hart, general secretary of the NAHT head teachers' union, said: 'I
fear the report will find the teaching profession disunited. Heads are
perhaps going to have to administer the tests this year with a profession
which is not necessarily united behind the boycott or behind the tests.'
He implored teachers to look on the report as 'a great professional
victory'. Mr Malcolm Hewitt, president of the SHA head teachers' union,
said: 'Now nobody can complain they haven't been consulted.'
But Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the biggest teaching union the NUT,
said: 'Sadly Sir Ron recommends no changes to the assessment and testing
arrangements for this year and beyond. The tests will continue to be used
for school comparison and league table purposes - purposes to which we are
fundamentally opposed.'
He said the NUT's boycott would continue because the tests and statutory
assessments 'cause additional and unnecessary work, are not supportive of
learning, and are of no value to parents'.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the ATL union, said, however, that if
teachers rejected the report 'we might never be consulted again'. He said:
'It is clear that the tests are now to be shorter and easier to administer.
There is absolutely no reason why the 1994 tests in English, maths and
science should not go ahead.'
A meeting of NASUWT's executive at the weekend will decide whether to lift
the boycott. The likelihood according to the union's general secretary, Mr
Nigel de Gruchy, is that some parts of the boycott will be lifted, but
NASUWT members may continue their action against tests in some subjects.
Mr de Gruchy gave the proposals a broad welcome, saying the curriculum as
proposed yesterday was 'virtually unrecognisable from the Byzantine
bureaucratic monster imposed by Kenneth Baker'.
He added that the NASUWT's dispute was always about excessive workload and,
unlike the NUT's, was 'never based upon a philosophical objection to
testing'.
Soundings of union members by their leaderships in the next few weeks will
be crucial. The NUT has a mandate for a boycott, members having voted by a
20-to-one majority to continue with the action last November. It will make
an 'in-depth' consultation with members over the next month, and may decide
to lift the boycott. The ATL must re-ballot its members before the boycott
can be called off.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940106

