FT944-5988

FT  01 DEC 94 / Watchdog expects flexible deals on rail network access


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


Railtrack and train operating companies will be expected to negotiate
flexible access agreements so that the privatised railway network can
respond to changing market conditions, Mr John Swift QC, the rail regulator
said yesterday.
He warned against the danger of inflexible long-term agreements inhibiting
improvements in efficiency and preventing the railway companies from
providing in-novative services and timetables.
The regulator's proposals were contained in a policy statement on access
charges published after several months of consultation. A statement on the
level of the charges will be published next month.
The regulator's rules will set the framework for the access agreements due
to come into effect next April and to apply for six years.
Mr Swift said Railtrack, which operates the signalling network, stations and
rail track, would be required to provide train operators with more
information about its costs.
The access charges agreed with passenger train operators also had to reflect
income from other sources such as freight train operators and property
income, he added.
The train operating companies were particularly concerned that under
existing temporary access agreements with Railtrack they would bear the
brunt of any economic downturn without being allowed to reduce service
levels. They wanted to share this risk with Railtrack, Mr Swift said.
They also wanted to be able to negotiate adjustments in access agreements if
market conditions changed because more than 90 per cent of their access
charges relate to shared general costs and were fixed.
Mr Swift said: 'Present arrangements do not help them identify changes in
access rights and charges which increase efficiency. My decisions will
greatly increase the information which is available to operators about what
they pay.'
The regulator is also to encourage Railtrack and the train operators to
agree adjustments to the initial package of access rights and charges which
they have signed 'where it is in both their interests to do so'.
Railtrack will have to change access agreements if these are sought by train
operators and do not put Railtrack at a disadvantage but there will be no
corresponding obligation on operators.
Only 9 per cent of the access charges vary directly with use depending on
the number of trains which run, time of day, and amount of electricity used.
Mr Swift said that since only a small percentage was directly variable this
should be made to reflect as accurately as possible the costs incurred.
One way of achieving this would be to base charges on the actual mileage run
by an operator.
Operators will be encouraged to fit meters to measure electricity use.
Railtrack's Track Access Charges for Franchised Passenger Services:
Developing the Structure. Office of Rail Regulator. 071-282-2001. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941201

