FT944-6094

FT  30 NOV 94 / London Stock Exchange: BTR active


   By PETER JOHN, JOEL KIBAZO and JEFFREY BROWN


Diversified industrial group BTR was the most active Footsie stock with 16m
shares changing hands following a trading statement aimed at clearing the
air after the company's disappointing interim results.
A clear two-way pull developed as several lines of stock in excess of 1m
shares passed through the market at prices ranging from 290p to 287 1/2 p.
At the close, BTR, which has underperfomed the market by 22 per cent over
the past three months, was up 2 at 287p.
The trading statement was modestly upbeat, with BTR expecting profits this
year to improve, but analysts said their briefing supplied little new
information, with the company staying tight-lipped about potential
management changes.
A flurry of tax-related trades known as bed-and-breakfasts appeared on the
trading screens ahead of the Budget. The trades were fronted by a large
block of shares in insurer Legal & General. A line of 6.7m shares were
placed at 410p, significantly below the market price, which subsequently
rose 10 to 430p on closing volume of 8.3m. The sudden jump in turnover
prompted a flurry of rather spurious bid speculation. But the rise in the
stock was mainly a reflection of recent underperformance, and some dealers
said Robert Fleming Securities was discussing the company's prospects.
Oil major BP, up 4 at 422 1/2 p, was heavily traded after the company
announced senior management changes. The move of Mr David Simon from chief
executive to chairman and of Mr John Browne from head of BP Exploration to
chief executive was not a dramatic surprise. But analyst Mr John Toalster,
historically negative on the company, said it signalled a continuation of
the trend of debt and cost reduction. And Mr Brendan Wilders of Hoare Govett
said the moves represented a 'natural succession which ensured a smooth
transition of power'.
Shell Transport responded to the strength of its Dutch arm, which has been
recommended by some leading US investment houses and has attracted retail
demand in the US. The shares ended the day 10 better at 706p.
British Gas rose 6 to 302 1/2 p in spite of the chancellor's refusal to back
down on the increase in VAT in fuel. Agency broker James Capel was said to
be recommending the stock.
The rest of the utilities were marked by profit-taking and continued
nervousness as dealers and analysts waited to hear if the chancellor would
make a much feared announcement on imposing a windfall tax. Powergen
surrendered 6 to 544p and Eastern Electricity gave up 8 to 783p. Midlands
eased 6 to 745p, while Northern Ireland Electricity rose 4 to 366p on
reports that the group is to increase its supply in the province. With the
threat of a windfall tax now removed, market watchers expect the regional
electricity companies to advance strongly over the next few sessions, as
several companies in the sector report interim figures.
Regional water and sewage company Severn Trent reversed an earlier advance
to end a penny lower at 540p, after it reported interim figures in line with
market expectations.
Mr Douglas Falconer at Yamaichi advised clients to switch into North West
Water, which last week cheered the market with an announcement of a link-up
with US group Bechtel. NWW gained 4 at 535p.
Hopes that the government would not raise excise duty - confirmed in the
Budget speech - powered the brewing sector. Whitbread added 12 at 552p,
while Bass advanced 8 to 539p, aided by a recommendation from SG Warburg.
Highland Distilleries rose 11 to 436p and Scottish & Newcastle, which
reports interim figures on Monday, closed 10 ahead at 517p.
Argyll Group hardened 1 1/2 to 272p ahead of today's interim figures. The
range of market forecasts is between Pounds 199m and Pounds 219m.
Analysts took a gloomy view on waste disposal groups after the chancellor
said that he would be raising 'several hundred million pounds' from a tax on
landfill. One analyst suggested that the tax could add Pounds 5 a ton to the
cost of disposal, which is sometimes as low as Pounds 15 a ton at present.
Shanks & McEwan fell 3 to 89p and Leigh Interests 3 to 174p.
Yorkshire Chemicals suffered as a result of what one analyst described as
'muted comments' from the company on trading prospects. Yorkshire has been
in the City talking about the effect of high raw material prices and the
problem of passing on costs, and forecasts have been coming down to below
Pounds 15m for the full year. The shares declined 12 to 362p.
Eurotunnel slipped 7 to 246p as news of a row between the company and a debt
trading house served to focus attention on the apparent disparity between
so-called debt and share price discounts.
The Channel tunnel operator's bank debt trades in the secondary market at a
discount of 40 per cent (60p in the pound), whereas the shares are within 30
per cent of their 1987 flotation price of 350p.
Submarine maker VSEL continued to improve on hopes of an increased takeover
offer from GEC, extending its three-day advance to 50 with a rise of 10 to
1545p. GEC was marginally firmer at 275p, while rival bidder British
Aerospace shed 7 to 448p.
News of the appointment of a new chief executive put fresh life into
Aerostructures Hamble, leaving the shares 5 better at 31p. They stood at
126p earlier this year.
Other statistics, Page 65

The Financial Times


London Page 68

941130

