FT942-12715

FT  28 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Beguiling, but not realistic


   From Mr GRAHAM R MACKENZIE


Sir, Dr Bryn Jones' letter (April 26) on the costs of EU proposals for
company consultative bodies is beguiling; Pounds 33,000 per multinational is
not the cost of this proposal. Dr Jones would know this were he to look at
the latest Commission proposal.
The EC publication European Participation Monitor stated that 'overall,
there seemed to be little difference in the transmission of strategic and
financial information between countries whether or not they have legislative
frameworks for worker participation'. Commission-funded research shows that
there is no benefit to be obtained from requiring multinational corporations
to introduce consultative committees.
The latest Commission proposal allows unlimited numbers of meetings of the
'European committee' and its 'attendant advisers', all of which must be paid
for by the company. The costs of such meetings, based on the Commission's
own assessment of their impact, is 'less than 10 Ecus per employee in a
business employing several thousands'. For each multinational with, say,
100,000 employees, the cost will be at least Pounds 750,000 per company per
year.
EEF research leads us to believe that these costs are significantly
understated. We estimate each meeting involving employee representatives and
advisers - with travel, accommodation, meeting facilities, translation
facilities, support staff and pay - will cost more than Pounds 100,000 per
occasion. The involvement of management from each member state will double
this cost. With employee pre-meetings and debriefings the cost escalates
even further, so Pounds 250,000 per meeting is foreseeable. The number of
meetings, which are at the employees' request, is unlimited.
Dr Jones should think again. With unemployment and competition on the agenda
throughout the EU, any suggestion that European business should increase its
operating cost simply to give trade unions an 'institutional significance',
but with no benefit to employees or to the business itself, is not in the
real world.
Graham R Mackenzie
acting director general,
Engineering Employers'
Federation,
Broadway House, Tothill Street,
London SW1H 9NQ

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940428

