FT943-13059

FT  21 JUL 94 / EU laws 'threaten London banking'


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


London's position as an international banking centre could be undermined by
protectionist European Union legislation, or by the adoption of common
banking supervisory standards around the world, according to research
published yesterday.
A study of London's position compared with financial centres such as New
York and Frankfurt concludes that it could be damaged by increased
regulation of the underwriting and trading of securities and financial
derivatives.
The study by Professor Harold Rose of the London Business School was
published together with a study of the growth of international banking as
part of the City Research Project sponsored by the Corporation of London.
Prof Rose says London's share of cross-border bank lending fell from 18 per
cent in the mid-1980s to less than 14 per cent today of a much higher world
total, largely due to the rise in importance of Asian centres including
Tokyo.
However, he argues that the chief competitive threats to London as a banking
centre are the liberalisation of markets abroad and the changes in
supervision which weakened London's previous advantage of being seen as
lightly regulated.
Prof Rose argues that London's position as the leading foreign-exchange
centre is likely to be reinforced by European Monetary Union (Emu). Losses
of trading among European currencies would be offset by European Currency
Unit trading.
However, he says that Emu could lead to business switching from London to
Frankfurt.
The second study by Professor Richard Brealey and Mr Evi Kaplanis of London
Business School argues that the post-war growth of international banking
depended largely on a 'catch-up' effect in the 1960s and 1970s.
Prof Brealey said yesterday that the most important issue was less a 'battle
between megalithic financial centres' for a bigger share of banking than the
question of whether the rapid post-war expansion would resume.
He said he was 'relatively pessimistic' about achieving the 20 per cent real
growth in international assets of banks achieved between 1960 and 1985.
City Research Project - Subject Reports XI, XII, XIII. Public Relations
Office, Corporation of London, PO Box 270, Guildhall, London EC2P 2EJ. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940721

