FT942-16180

FT  12 APR 94 / Store groups defy slow death: Sears' Pounds 50m plan to
revamp Selfridges in Oxford Street


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Retail analysts have long predicted the slow death of the department store,
killed off by the new generation of superstores and cut-price warehouses.
But the news that Sears is to spend Pounds 50m revamping its Selfridges
store in London's Oxford Street suggests they may be premature.
The evidence does not end there. Both the Allders and House of Fraser store
groups have enjoyed highly successful flotations. House of Fraser is
spending Pounds 50m on refurbishing its chain - including the flagship
Dickins & Jones on Regent Street - and its former owners, the Fayeds,
recently completed a five-year, Pounds 100m refurbishment of Harrods.
At Selfridges, work is already progressing on creating a new escalator well
at the store's west end, sweeping up from the basement to the top floor.
The escalators are so big they will have to be lowered into place through
the roof. Last year Pounds 12.6m was spent on similar escalators at the
store's eastern end.
In total Sears, which acquired Selfridges in 1965, will have spent more than
Pounds 60m on it in four years.
Mr Liam Strong, Sears chief executive, admits that this is a large sum for
one store, but he is confident of earning a return.
He says: 'Selfridges makes a better return on capital than other parts of
the business. And we see this as investment in the Selfridges brand. If we
can make Selfridges a pre-eminent store, we can exploit the brand in other
ways.'
The 450,000 sq ft store remains a tourist attraction. But sales densities
lag behind those of other Oxford Street stores.
One problem is the irregularly shaped building, with a mass of columns which
obscure eyelines. A system of infra-red sensors called Shoppertrak, which
monitors customer movements, found shoppers did not circulate easily.
Mr Tim Daniels, Selfridges managing director, says fewer than 5 per cent of
shoppers ever visit the top floor. Hence half the investment will be spent
on structural changes.
As well as the east and west escalators, new ones will be built at the rear
of the store and the central escalators will be rebuilt. Columns will be
ripped out to create a 12-foot wide gangway running the length of each floor
from east to west escalators.
The haphazard lay-out, with related products often scattered around six
floors, will be reorganised.
The first floor will be devoted to menswear, sporting goods, and a
children's department. The second and third floors will be devoted to
women's wear, and the fourth to furniture.
Further investment will go into new fittings.
Selfridges expects a substantial increase in sales. Last year's new
escalators alone brought an increase of 15 per cent more than the store-wide
average in departments near the escalators.
'This is the age of the department store,' insists Mr Daniels.
'People come to us because of our range and quality, and because we are a
very timeefficient way of shopping.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940412

