FT942-14499

FT  20 APR 94 / UN's odd couple: Humanitarian work and weapons make unhappy
partners


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


Everyone now agrees that UN troops in Bosnia are in an impossible situation.
They are called the 'UN protection force' (Unprofor) but they are unable to
protect themselves, let alone the 'safe areas' which they were mandated to
protect.
In a common-sense world one of two things would now happen. Either Unprofor
would be built up to a strength allowing it to fulfil its mandate, or it
would be withdrawn. Actually, neither of those things will happen, because
both are considered incompatible with its 'humanitarian role'.
Again and again we are told that Unprofor has saved thousands of lives, by
enabling aid convoys to get through to beleaguered populations, and by
securing a ceasefire at least in parts of the country. Its withdrawal would
put those lives in jeopardy again: aid would no longer get through, and
fighting would resume on a much broader front.
But, the argument goes on, giving Unprofor the troops and the orders to
resist Serb attacks on the 'safe areas' would also jeopardise those lives.
Until last week's crisis, 75 per cent of the aid was coming in through
Serb-held territory; and, if the UN became a belligerent in Gorazde, it
would no longer be able to maintain the ceasefire in Sarajevo or elsewhere.
Thus, yet again, humanitarian arguments are used to explain the failure of
governments to make clear strategic decisions. The question that has to be
asked is whether humanitarian work should have been entrusted to UN troops
in the first place.
Of course, troops do often play a useful role in disaster relief, even when
the disaster is a natural one and no element of coercion is required. Armed
forces are - or should be - well organised, disciplined groups of people,
available to governments at short notice, trained to perform arduous tasks
with calm efficiency.
But when people with weapons are sent into the middle of a war, there is a
natural presumption that they may be expected to use those weapons. If
relief work is being impeded by violence, then the obvious role of armed UN
troops is to protect the relief convoys and to remove, disarm or
'neutralise' the people who are obstructing the convoys.
Such was the mandate given to the UN force in Somalia. It was not to take
sides among Somali factions, but simply to ensure none obstructed famine
relief. That made some sense in that the threat to relief in Somalia came
from general anarchy and looting. Even so, the UN found it difficult to
remain neutral and got bogged down in a conflict with one of the factions.
Unprofor in Bosnia did not have such a clear mandate. But even if it had it
would probably not have worked. For in Bosnia the humanitarian problems were
not the result of a general breakdown of order. They were caused quite
deliberately by the determination of the Serbs (and for a time also the
Croats) to dismember the country and uproot a large part of its population.
If force had any role to play in relieving human suffering in Bosnia, it
should have been used to protect the population against the armed thugs who
were massacring, raping, looting and driving people away from their homes.
But that was never attempted. Instead the UN sought the consent of the Serb
and Croat leaders, at local as well as national level, for the passage of
relief convoys. Those leaders allowed aid through only when it suited them,
usually taking a large share for their own troops.
In those circumstances the advantage of having armed escorts for the convoys
is far from obvious. Many civilian aid workers say they never sought such
protection. If deals had to be made with local military and paramilitary
forces, they could make such deals themselves. Having Unprofor there, with
its ostensible (but unfulfilled) mandate to protect the population, has
simply made it harder for aid workers to convince anyone that they
themselves are playing an impartial and non-political humanitarian role.
That is especially hard for employees of the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees, but the problem also affects the Red Cross and other
non-governmental organisations (NGOs).
Many NGOs wish governments would leave humanitarian work to them, and
concentrate on the proper tasks of government, which are political and
military. In the former Yugoslavia, aid workers have been better placed than
anybody to see that humanitarian problems have political causes. They
deplore the fact that governments have failed to deal with those political
causes, and they see the use of Unprofor in a humanitarian role as a
disastrous cop-out, whereby governments give themselves the appearance of
'doing something' while failing miserably to do anything effective in the
politico-military sphere.
The point is eloquently put by Alain Destexhe, general secretary of MSF
International - perhaps the most thoughtful as well as the bravest of all
the NGOs - in a recent book.* 'No doubt,' he writes, 'Sarajevo and several
other towns have been fed. No doubt the impressive humanitarian deployment
has kept tens of thousands of people alive. No doubt the presence of blue
helmets on the ground has helped calm things down a bit. But can we be proud
of this? Must we congratulate ourselves because refugees whom we refused to
welcome, and who had nowhere to go, have not been allowed to starve to
death? Must we be proud of having doled out flour in refugee camps to people
whose style and standard of living used to be close to our own?'
Those are what linguists call rhetorical questions. They do not expect an
answer.
*L'humanitaire impossible (Armand Colin, 120 francs.)

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940420

