FT944-10907

FT  08 NOV 94 / Brazil warns Rhone-Poulenc on toxic waste


   By PATRICK MCCURRY


   SAO PAULO


Brazilian authorities are threatening to restart legal action against
Rhone-Poulenc, the French chemical company, unless an agreement is reached
over the decontamination of toxic waste deposits.
The public prosecutor in Cubatao, Sao Paulo state, alleges that Rhodia, the
company's Brazilian subsidiary, dumped 10-12 tons of toxic residues along a
100 km stretch of road near the port of Santos between 1966 and 1984.
He also claims that the company put workers at risk by exposing them to
residues at its Cubatao solvents plant, closed down by a court order in June
1993. The order was requested by the prosecutor because of fears about
workers' safety. The factory remains out of service and there has been no
appeal by the company.
Mr Geraldo Rangel, the prosecutor, said among the substances dumped was
hexachlorobenzine (HCB), which he said was considered a 'dangerous residue'
by the US Environmental Protection Agency.
Mr Lise Monteiro, Rhodia's environmental manager, accepted the company
dumped waste from 1976 to 1978 but says the practice was then stopped. He
denied that there had been any risk to workers' health from exposure to
residues at the plant.
The case has been under way for some time. In 1988, after pressure from the
state environmental agency, the company installed an incinerator to burn
contaminated earth that it had recovered from the deposits. Mr Monteiro said
90 per cent of the soil contaminated by HCB had been recovered and burned.
Rhodia said it acquired the plant in 1976 following a merger in France. A
shareholders list supplied by the public prosecutor indicates the plant was
controlled by Rhone-Poulenc from at least 1972.
The prosecutor's office suspended its action against Rhodia in February in
an attempt to reach an out-of-court settlement. Mr Rangel said this was
because a case could last five years.
The company, which had a turnover of Dollars 900m last year, has so far
spent Dollars 60m on decontamination measures. It has agreed to a request by
the prosecutor to pay for the medical examination and monitoring of 153
former plant workers who were found to have HCB levels of up to 16
microgrammes per decilitre of blood. Doctors consulted by the prosecutor's
office said more than 1 microgramme was dangerous.
Rhodia maintains the levels of HCB found in the workers' blood is not
dangerous. Mr Monteiro said the company carried out regular medical checks
of workers and no medical problems caused by the presence of HCB were found.
The two sides have not yet been able to reach an agreement on measures to be
adopted for decontamination.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

941108

