FT941-12781

FT  28 JAN 94 / Once more, with feeling


   By JOE ROGALY


Political discourse entraps the soul, or it is nothing. Nothing-politics
conveys no ethical sense, and therefore conveys no human meaning. Yet this
is what is on offer from growing numbers of parties in the west. Markets,
privatisation, the cult of the individual are all fine ideas, but without a
moral foundation all are empty. This is one consequence of the sudden death
of socialism. It has become fruitless to propound Marxist theory, and
pointless to rebut it. In many countries the passion has been drained out of
the process of choosing and dismissing governments. Democratic
representatives who formerly sought to improve the conditions of life of
those who elected them have become hacks, seekers after office. Voters are
turning away.
In Italy the old parties have dissolved themselves into fresh alliances,
with new names and restated programmes. Former communists may lead a
coalition to victory, but it is a market economy they will manage. If the
electorate's blood is up it is because it demands a change to cleaner
politics, not for the old left-right reasons. In Canada the Conservative
party has been all but obliterated. Germans are said to be once again toying
with the notion of a grand coalition of Christian and Social Democrats with
liberals and greens. At the 1992 US presidential election Mr Ross Perot took
votes away from both the Democratic and the Republican parties. In Britain
the disillusionment with mainstream politicians is palpable.
One reason for the general cooling of politics is that the old questions
about social deprivation are avoided, as if out of embarrassment. The 1994
edition of Britain's statistical annual Social Trends, published yesterday,
indicates that since 1979 the Tories have steadily mulcted the very poor. As
we all know, the rich have become far richer. There were no protest marches,
no riots in the streets, not even a measly squeak from the leader of the
Labour party when he questioned the prime minister about other matters. On
Wednesday, President Bill Clinton delivered a State of the Union message in
which he offered a hand up, but not a permanent hand-out, to America's poor.
Social-Democratic predecessors, like President Lyndon Johnson and his
vice-president Hubert Humphrey, must have turned in their graves.
This is not to say that the 'Great Society' solution to poverty, which was
to spend more money on it, necessarily works, or is the best way to reduce
dependency. In some circumstances it may be, in others not. The argument
will continue. The point about the nothing-politics of today is that it
feels vacuous because social justice is no longer a gut issue. Few
democratic politicians admit to a burning desire to take the 'underclass'
off the pavements, out of tenements and into jobs and decent houses. What we
have instead is dainty deliberation by fat pragmatists who believe that to
get elected they must show a willingness to reduce spending on welfare.
Something else will surely inflame us in the 21st century. One possibility
is that it will be a debate, infused with real feeling, about the limits to
economic growth. The world's population is expected to rise from 5.3m in
1990 to 8.5bn in 2025. The rate of increase of emissions of CO, the most
enduring greenhouse gas, is about 3 per cent a year, a figure less likely to
be decreased by the resolutions taken at the 1992 Rio conference than
increased by the rapid enrichment of China. The danger to the planet has not
receded; only the political response is, temporarily, in abeyance.
We might also be in for another resurgence of dangerous tribalism. This
observation is supported by a pamphlet from Demos*, an independent
think-tank. Its author, Mr Vincent Cable, is director of the international
econ-omics programme at the Royal Institute for International Affairs. He
developed the ideas in his paper as a member of group planning at Shell. We
can imagine them brainstorming about global scenarios.
There is little that is brand new in Mr Cable's essay. Protecting our tribe
and attacking the others has been a practice for shall we say, most of the
last 2,000+ years. He does, however, offer a stimulating account of the rise
in parties concerned with what he calls 'identity politics'. At its best
this produces 'cultural conservatism', by which the author means the
combination of a belief in the market economy with either a strong
religious, moralistic fervour, as in 'born again' Christians in the US, or
an exclusive, nationalistic approach to capitalism, as in Japan. At its
worst it produces Russia's rabidly nationalist Zhirinovsky.
Manifestations of identity politics listed by Mr Cable include the rise of
the Republicans in Germany and the National Front in France, the
preoccupations with Ulster and the Maastricht treaty in Britain, and the
emergence of a strong Hindu nationalist party, the BJP, in India. The
tragedy of the former Yugoslavia and the fragility of the new east European
democracies may also be called in evidence. Again, it could be that extreme
racist and nationalist parties in Germany, France, Italy and Belgium will do
well in this year's elections to the European parliament.
Set against tribalism is pure liberalism, which takes no account of class,
race, national origin or, saving the rule of law, any other impediment to
the freedom of the individual. Liberalism is strengthened by the
globalisation of markets; tribalism - sorry, 'identity politics' - is
weakened if humans everywhere become more like one another.
Contemporary arguments fall on either side of this line. Take, as one
example 'family values'. Libertarians stick by personal choice, Mr Cable
points out. Their opponents insist that family and personal relationships
reflect the disciplines of 'culture, tradition and faith'. This leads
democratic politicians into some murky waters.
The conclusion is that people concerned with politics must learn 'how to
satisfy people's yearning for a sense of belonging and identity without
unleashing destructive political forces'. Mr Cable has a point. Liberalism
is the way, but it requires enhancement. We must get some blood back into
politics, or blood will flow.
*The World's New Fissures: Identities in Crisis. Pounds 5.95 from Demos, 9
Bridewell Place, London EC4V 6AP

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940128

