FT944-2624

FT  16 DEC 94 / New Irish PM pledges to continue work for Ulster peace


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN and DAVID OWEN


   DUBLIN


Ireland agreed a new coalition government led by the conservative Fine Gael
party yesterday, ending a month of political uncertainty after a scandal
dragged down its Fianna Fail-Labour predecessor.
Mr John Bruton, the Fine Gael leader, supported by 85 votes to 74, becomes
Ireland's 10th prime minister, leading a coalition with Mr Dick Spring's
Labour party and the Democratic Left of Mr Proinsias De Rossa.
Mr Bruton, who succeeds Fianna Fail's Mr Albert Reynolds, said the
government's first national aim would be to sustain the Northern Ireland
peace process. In London, Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, said he had
sought an early meeting with the new Irish premier.
Mr Bruton is expected to have his first meeting with Mr Gerry Adams, the
leader of Sinn Fein, at today's session of the Dublin government's National
Forum for Peace and Reconciliation.
Mr Bruton told the Dail (parliament), his government would 'work ceaselessly
and sensitively to make peace a permanent part of our future'.
His election was welcomed by unionists in Northern Ireland. Mr Peter
Robinson, Democratic Unionist MP for East Belfast, said Mr Bruton had a
greater understanding of the Ulster Unionist position than most members of
the Irish parliament.
His desire to change articles two and three of the republic's constitution -
claiming territorial jurisdiction over Northern Ireland  - was a 'promising
backcloth' to his term in office, Mr Robinson said.
Mr Bruton conceded that the government was made up of parties whose 'origins
and policies' were very different. But he insisted that 'differences don't
have to pose a threat'. Fine Gael, a rurally based party with largely
middle-class support, will have eight ministers. Labour, which has projected
itself as a European-style secular party, will have six ministers - the same
number it had in the outgoing administration. However, Labour's Mr Ruairi
Quinn will take over the finance portfolio, the first time it has not been
held by the largest party.
Democratic Left, the successor of the Official IRA when the Provisional IRA
split to pursue the armed struggle in 1970, dropped its earlier insistence
on two cabinet positions.
The main points of the new government's agreed programme include moves to
keep public borrowing below 3 per cent of gross national product; tax cuts
for the low paid; a freeze on privatisation; a referendum on divorce; and a
commitment to the Northern Ireland peace process.
The breakthrough coincides with talks yesterday in Belfast between the
British officials and loyalist paramilitaries.
David Owen adds: In London, Mr Major said he was confident the new Dublin
government would wish to 'sustain together the work we have done over
Northern Ireland'.
Calm hand, Page 2
Government pledge satisfies unionists, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941216

