FT942-16291

FT  11 APR 94 / Relief tinged with bitterness that the action came so late:
The mood in Sarajevo where residents are exhausted by war


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


Driving across the United Nations-controlled Sarajevo airport yesterday, a
British military observer said he was looking forward to home leave. The
Bosnian situation had become more peaceful and the military operation was
being scaled down.
Two hours later, Nato F-16s dropped their 500-lb bombs on Bosnian Serb
positions, guided to their targets by SAS soldiers hidden in the mountains.
Sarajevo residents were relieved at the news that Nato had intervened to
save their beleaguered compatriots in Gorazde, but bitter that decisive
action had come so late.
For the inhabitants of the Bosnian capital, slowly coming to life now after
a ceasefire in February, the plight of the enclave has revived memories of
their own two-year ordeal.
'This shows the war could have been stopped two years ago,' said Ms Senada
Kreso, spokeswoman for the Bosnian government. Another Sarajevo resident who
has endured two years of bombardment claimed not to be bitter, but just
thankful that Nato had taken action: 'All Sarajevo will be celebrating
tonight. Every cafe will be full. It is a small step for Nato, but a great
leap for Bosnia.'
That sounds like an exaggeration. Sarajevans are still too exhausted by war,
too suspicious of apparent good news, to show much exuberance in a town when
electricity supplies are still intermittent and bursts of gunfire can still
be heard.
Some townspeople have been irritated by the way that UN spokesmen, including
General Sir Michael Rose, the British commander of UN forces, have been
playing down reports of the worsening situation in Gorazde. On the ground,
UN observers and relief workers had been describing a starkly different
picture, stressing the heavy loss of life.
As if seeking to humiliate Gen Rose, the Serb forces on Friday seized a
patch of high ground overlooking the town in direct violation of a 24-hour
ceasefire they had agreed with him only the night before.
Mr Charles Redman, the US special peace envoy, had displayed the same
complacent attitude as UN spokesmen until yesterday afternoon. Only then,
when speaking to reporters, did he admit that the situation was 'very
serious'.
It is unclear whether Mr Redman, at that point, was aware that his pledge
that 'they (the Serbs) are going to have to be dealt with' was about to be
fulfilled.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940411

