FT944-10963

FT  08 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: European farm total down 13%


   By ALISON MAITLAND


Farming in the European Union has become concentrated in far fewer hands
over the past decade and the trend is set to continue, according to the
European Commission.
The number of farms in the EU declined by 13.2 per cent between 1980 and
1990, says a report on the future for young farmers, to be presented to
agriculture ministers at the end of the year.
The decline was even more dramatic in individual member states, with Denmark
seeing a 34 per cent fall in farm numbers, Belgium 26 per cent and Ireland
24 per cent.
The amount of land in agricultural use in the EU remained stable at 115m
hectares, while average farm size increased by 11.2 per cent.
Mr Frank Leguen de Lacroix, a senior Commission official, said concentration
of farming would continue, given that 55 per cent of farmers were aged 55 or
over and many had no direct heir.
The trend would be particularly pronounced in Greece and southern Italy,
where farms had become fragmented and agriculture was not always the
farmer's main source of income.
'We need to rationalise if farms are to be economic propositions and if
farmers are to be able to apply the environmental constraints which are
being phased in,' he said. Mr Lacroix accepted that young farmers and
potential farmers were worried about their future, given the difficulty of
entering quota-capped sectors and the prospect of further changes to the
common agricultural policy.
But he said some fears were exaggerated.
'In the UK, there's a feeling that this (system of subsidies) can't last,
that it must end in 1996. But in other countries the pressure is such as to
keep the current system going. It's a fundamental issue of faith.'
The report, commissioned by ministers during the Greek presidency in May,
will highlight the extremes of farming across the EU. Average farm size in
Greece, for example, is 4ha, compared with 68ha in the UK.
Some 7.6m people were employed in agriculture and forestry in 1992. But
farming as a percentage of the workforce varied from 27 per cent in Greece
to 2.2 per cent in Britain.
Young farmers commonly started out in horticulture and the dairy sector.
Their level of indebtedness also varied enormously, from Ecu 1,807 in Spain
to Ecu 205,000 in Denmark.
'These figures. . . emphasise the differences of approach we may need to
take if we are to encourage young people to choose a career in farming,'
said Mr Leguen de Lacroix.
Citing examples of how member states aid new entrants, he said Denmark kept
29 per cent of its milk quota reserves for young producers, while France
trained young farmers and encouraged older producers to transfer tenancies
to young people outside their families.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941108

