FT943-1037

FT  26 SEP 94 / Germany passes law to compensate property owners


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BERLIN


The Bundesrat, upper house of Germany's parliament, has passed a law to
compensate former property owners in eastern Germany. The law, which will
speed up investment decisions in the east, follows three years of wrangling
over terms and funding.
Under the unification treaty, which laid out the settlement of property
rights in eastern Germany, owners are entitled to full compensation or
restitution for property confiscated between 1933 and 1945 by the Nazis, or
by communists between 1949 and 1990.
However, the unification treaty did not say how claimants should be
compensated, at what level, or how this compensation should be financed,
issues which have been the subject of lengthy disputes in the German
parliament.
The law provides compensation based on the valuation of land dating back to
1935. However, assessment will depend on the type of property and whether it
was owned or leased, and a different system will apply for land. For
example, those who had owned family houses and small businesses will receive
compensation, but the 1935 land valuation will be multiplied by seven, the
valuation for those who had rented property will be multipled by 4.8, while
the valuation for those who owned land will be multiplied 20-fold.
The former owners will receive bonds redeemable in 2004.
In addition to those whose land was confiscated by the Nazis and the
communists, the Bundesrat also agreed to grant concessions to those property
owners whose land was expropriated by the Soviet Union which administered
eastern Germany between 1945 and 1949, but who have no right to either
compensation or restitution. These former owners, who owned large estates in
eastern Germany, will now be entitled to buy back a percentage of their
property below the market price, and they will be able to rent their
property, again at a discount.
A further DM3.4bn has been put aside for the 110,000 'settlers', those
Germans who were expelled, or forced to flee eastern Europe but who settled
permanently in eastern Germany after the second world war. In addition,
DM2bn has been allocated to victims of the Nazis in eastern Germany.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940926

