FT942-12518

FT  29 APR 94 / Political pacts put away for the day: David Owen reports on
the council 'lovebirds' who will become election rivals


   By DAVID OWEN


Mr George Crowhurst, a 77-year-old Labour activist who has trudged through
more local election campaigns than some voters have had hot dinners,
explains the position succinctly: 'When you are canvassing, you don't say
anything good about anyone but yourselves.'
Mr Crowhurst is one of a quartet preparing to go knocking on doors and
doling out window-stickers in north Portsmouth.
All over the city, groups of Labour sympathisers have been getting back into
the habit of campaigning against the Liberal Democrats after running
Portsmouth City Council in partnership with them for three years.
It is a position that will be replicated across the country with increasing
frequency.
Similar partnerships between two or more of the leading parties have been
springing up, especially at county level, in response to election results
that have left an unusually high number of councils under no overall
control.
Most observers expect more councils to be in this position after polling
next Thursday.
In this traditionally Conservative port, with its centuries-old ties to the
Royal Navy, activists from both the Labour and Liberal Democrat camps insist
that their innovative partnership has neither changed nor cramped their
campaigning style.
They say there are enough policy disagreements on emotive local issues such
as waste management and leisure facilities to enable them to campaign on
distinctive platforms.
The contest is given further edge by the residual mistrust felt by some
Labour supporters for Mr Michael Hancock, leader of the Liberal Democrat
group on Portsmouth council, and Hampshire County Council leader. Mr
Hancock, a former Social Democratic party MP, was once in the Labour party.
There certainly was not much evidence of partnership in the city's
distinctive guildhall on Tuesday, where the last council meeting before May
5 meandered towards its conclusion. The meeting was marked by good-tempered
but strongly worded exchanges between the Liberal Democrats and the Labour
group, headed by Mr Alan Burnett, the council leader.
'It seems once again I have to be the referee between the two lovebirds,'
observed Mr Ian Gibson, leader of the Tory group whose members kit
themselves out in blue-edged black cloaks at council meetings.
The Labour top brass admits, however, that there have been accommodations as
a consequence of the enduring Lib-Lab partnership.
'It has meant we probably have not been as hard on the Liberal Democrats in
our literature and vice-versa,' says Mr Brian Pope, the council's deputy
leader. 'You cannot knock their record without knocking your own. It is very
difficult to attack them on their voting records.'
Under these circumstances, Labour is bringing the record of the Liberal
Democrat-led Hampshire council into play. 'We point out it is a Liberal-led
Hampshire County Council that put up its share of the council tax bill by 13
per cent,' says Mr Burnett.
Politicians from both camps report a marked increase in the electorate's
understanding of the consequences of tactical voting, possibly as a result
of their co-operation agreement.
'Four or five years ago, tactical voting was a very hard message to get
across, but now people accept it,' says Ms Julie Spurgeon, a Liberal
Democrat councillor.
'People weigh up who has the best chance of beating the Tories,' says Mr
Pope. He draws a distinction between Labour's prospects at a national level,
where he thinks the party could 'win on its own', and Portsmouth, where 'in
the short term, I don't think we can'.
As a pioneer of the sort of arrangement now catching on in hung councils
throughout the country, the Portsmouth Labour group has come under the
somewhat disapproving eye of the party's leadership. 'Walworth Road were not
very enthusiastic to put it mildly,' Mr Burnett said.
But in this part of the south coast at least, the new-style Lib-Lab pact
appears to be an idea whose time has come.
'A lot of people say they like what the coalition has done,' says Ms
Spurgeon, using a word that still makes many Labour officials cringe. 'If it
hadn't worked here we would never have got agreement to do it in Hampshire,'
says Mr Hancock.
With Labour defending eight of its 15 seats on the 39-member council - the
Tories have 17 and the Liberal Democrats seven - the arithmetic suggests
that the council will stay hung after May 5. In such an event, most
observers expect the Lib-Lab partnership to continue.
Committee chairmanships are divided in approximate proportion to council
seats, with the other party taking the vice chairmanship, but the
arrangement is looser than it once was. A code of conduct - 'framed out of
naivety' according to Mr Pope - was discarded some time ago.
But Mr Burnett disputes Tory suggestions that the partnership has become
increasingly fractious and could be on its last legs.
'We have our ups and downs. I hope we can carry on next year. Walworth Road
has come to the conclusion we are not flagrantly breaking their guidelines.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940429

