FT942-15479

FT  15 APR 94 / Bosnia truce hopes raised as UN faces war of nerves


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE AND AGENCIES


International mediators last night guardedly raised fresh hopes of a Bosnian
ceasefire, even though defiant Bosnian Serbs stepped up their war of nerves
with the United Nations.
Lord Owen, the European Union mediator, said that a general ceasefire in
Bosnia was 'back on the agenda'. Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian envoy to
former Yugoslavia, said he had won Serb approval in Belgrade for an outline
ceasefire agreement covering the whole of Bosnia.
Both men sounded a hopeful note about the prospects of a truce after holding
talks in the Yugoslav federal capital with Serb President Slobodan
Milosevic.
Mr Churkin told reporters: 'We have been talking mostly about an agreement
on a cessation of hostilities for the whole of Bosnia-Hercegovina. I can say
that what I have in my hands is a good foundation for such an agreement.'
The Russian envoy will go on today to Pale, the Bosnian Serb stronghold, and
then hopes to confer with the Moslem-led government in nearby Sarajevo.
Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the UN mediator, flew to Belgrade
yesterday from Pale, where they had talks with Bosnian Serb leader Radovan
Karadzic on Wednesday night.
While Lord Owen returns to London, Mr Yasushi Akashi, the UN official with
responsibility for former Yugoslavia, will meet Mr Karadzic in Pale this
afternoon.
Lord Owen said he hoped today's meeting would lead to a restoration of
relations between the Bosnian Serbs and UN forces, since the UN peacekeepers
would have to police confrontation lines in the event of a general
ceasefire.
He said the ceasefire might start in Gorazde and 'then spread right across'.
Earlier yesterday, Nato command and President Bill Clinton both issued stern
warnings to the Serbs not to treat UN or Nato personnel as combatants.
The warnings came after the Bosnian Serbs threatened a UN compound near
Sarajevo with a tank and after the Serbs were accused of shelling the
UN-designated safe haven of Tuzla. Bosnian Serb forces sealed off two UN
compounds outside Sarajevo last night in their latest moves to put pressure
on UN forces since air strikes were launched at Serbs advancing on Gorazde
earlier this week.
The UN said Serb forces moved in on French soldiers at a UN depot at
Krivoglavci, just outside Sarajevo, and tried to take back heavy weapons
surrendered in February as part of a deal to avert air strikes.
Nato officials said shelling of Tuzla died down after US, British, French
and Dutch aircraft buzzed the Serb positions.
The alliance warned it still had a mandate to make air strikes against heavy
weapons in the Sarajevo area. Nato aircraft were in the air and ready to
strike, one US official said.
Mr Clinton said the Bosnian Serbs would be making a mistake if they treated
the UN or Nato personnel as combatants. He accused them of trying to
'leverage their position' by detaining UN staff.
In Belgrade, the local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees reported mounting harassment, with Molotov cocktails thrown at its
premises.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940415

