FT942-12710

FT  28 APR 94 / Leading Article: Venezuela shoots a messenger


Venezuela's government took office in February facing a host of political,
economic and social problems for which it bore no responsibility. Now, the
administration of President Rafael Caldera is adding a few of its own
making.
The resignation this week of the head of the country's nominally independent
central bank is a blow to the credibility of monetary policy and a setback
to attempts to right the economy.
As central bank president, Ruth de Krivoy could not alone have solved
Venezuela's economic difficulties. But, while there, she was viewed as a
guarantor that at least monetary policy was on course. However well
respected, her eventual replacement will find it difficult to shake off the
perception that he or she is in the government's pocket.
The dispute that brought about her departure arose over the government's
desire to see lower interest rates to stimulate an economy now facing a
second year of recession. With little leeway in fiscal policy - according to
Consensus Economics, the average expectation of private economists is for a
public sector deficit equivalent to 5 per cent of GDP this year - the
government alighted on interest rates.
Banking crisis
One part of the government plan was to persuade banks to reduce the generous
lending spreads being charged on loans. However, many banks are attempting
to rebuild balance sheets to comply with a new banking law. This in the wake
of January's banking crisis, which led the government to take over the
country's second largest bank and shore up at least eight others.
The other element was apparently an attempt to reduce interest rates in
Venezuela's money markets. Mrs de Krivoy told the government that attempting
this would probably backfire. Venezuela's high interest rates were not a
cause of Venezuela's economic difficulties but a symptom of them: the money
markets were merely the message bearers.
The risk of artificially depressing interest rates is clear: more capital
flight into the dollar, which will accelerate the depreciation of the
bolivar and thereby fuel inflation.
Wider lessons
The Venezuelan experience holds wider lessons about the limitations of
central bank autonomy. It suggests that a strong central bank needs the type
of institutional backing that is lacking in many states in Latin America and
elsewhere. Legislation alone is no guarantor of independence, especially in
those places where the executive is unaccustomed to restrictions on its
exercise of power.
It also shows that unless there is a broad national consensus over the
importance of low inflation and over the means of achieving it, even a
nominally independent central bank will be relatively weak. Achieving that
national consensus takes either a long time or an economic crisis, such as
the hyperinflation which overtook Argentina in 1989.
Mrs de Krivoy understood this. In an interview last year, she described an
important part of her mission as 'having to explain that it's not just a
matter of forcing interest rates to come down in a way that doesn't reflect
the true situation of the country'. It is to be regretted that she failed to
convince those who most needed to be convinced: Mr Caldera and his
ministers.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940428

