FT944-5999

FT  01 DEC 94 / Labour votes for Clause IV rewrite


   By DAVID OWEN and PHILIP STEPHENS


Labour's National Executive Committee yesterday decided to press ahead with
plans to rewrite the party's constitution, including the commitment to
public ownership enshrined in the 75-year-old Clause IV.
A document outlining Mr Tony Blair's plans to update the party's guiding
principles was endorsed by its ruling body by 20 votes to four on what the
Labour leader described as a 'historic day for the Labour party'.
The move sparked an angry response from leftwingers, who regard scrapping
Clause IV as tantamount to declaring war on the heart of socialism.
Mr Dennis Skinner, the MP for Bolsover who voted against the changes at
yesterday's meeting, said: 'The Tories are on the run and for the life of me
I cannot understand why we have to start meddling with the constitution.'
Ms Diane Abbott, MP for Hackney North and Stoke Newington, said: 'The same
people who want us to drop Clause IV want us to break decisively with the
trade unions.'
Mr Blair's document accepts the market economy and calls for tougher
regulation of the privatised utilities instead of re-nationalisation.
Some union representatives on the executive joined the leftwing MPs in
raising objections to Mr Blair's efforts to have a rapid consultation period
followed by a special conference to endorse the new constitution next April.
The NEC will meet in two weeks to decide the timetable for consulting
Labour's grass roots and the trade unions before a new clause is drawn up
for agreement either at a special conference or at the party's annual
conference next autumn.
Mr Blair is said to be confident that he will secure agreement on an
accelerated timetable through the convening of the special conference.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's traditionalist deputy leader, has also been
working on the new document. Clause IV appears on Labour membership cards
and commits the party to 'common ownership of the means of production,
distribution and exchange'.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941201

