FT944-10979

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (1): Flexibility the
rule in volatile markets / Analysis of the testing conditions faced by
investors after the interest rate rise in February imposed by the US Federal
Reserve


   By BARRY RILEY, Investment Editor


Last winter it seemed that everybody was setting up hedge funds. In rising
markets the willingness to leverage aggressive positions through the future
markets can pay off spectacularly. But, since February, conditions have been
much more testing, and quite a few hedge funds have come to grief.
The deterioration of investment conditions in 1994 might seem odd given that
the global economy has improved considerably - at any rate, outside Japan.
But strong economic growth - which globally has probably reached 3 1/2 per
cent, and may go higher next year - generates a rising interest rate trend
which is an old enemy of the securities markets.
In fact, most of the weakness has been in the supposedly less volatile bond
markets. At the extreme, the US Treasury benchmark 30-year long bond has
lost about 20 per cent of its value this year as the yield has jumped from
6.3 to a peak of more than 8 per cent. In contrast, in equities the
FT-Actuaries World Index has actually climbed about 6 per cent when measured
in dollars, although Japanese investors see it rather differently, because
the World ex Japan index in yen has declined by 13 per cent.
Equity market movements have presented something of a mirror image of the
1993 pattern. Whereas last year the two biggest markets, the US and Japan,
which account respectively for about 33 and 28 per cent of global
capitalisation, were the most sluggish, and were shown a clean pair of heels
by many European and third world markets, in 1994 Tokyo and Wall Street have
held up comparatively well.
Where are these global investment shifts decided? According to
Technimetrics, which compiles institutional investor databases, Tokyo had
the biggest concentration of equity holdings at the end of 1993, at Dollars
1,160bn, but London moved into second place with Dollars 681bn, surpassing
New York's Dollars 657bn. Switzerland, adding together the different centres
such as Zurich and Geneva, was roughly of the same size.
Of course, these figures largely reflect domestic holdings. Rankings on the
basis of foreign equities only are different, with Tokyo and New York
dropping back, but London and Switzerland emerging as crucial players.
The year's turning point came quite early, with the quarter-point dollar
interest rate rise imposed on February 4 by the US Federal Reserve. Although
the increase was expected it triggered a spectacular crash in bond markets
worldwide. Stock markets have been struggling to avoid contagion, not always
with success.
The scale of the crash in bonds has raised serious questions about the
structure and stability of the global securities markets. At the top of the
boom last winter bonds were taking what has proved to be an excessively
optimistic view of future interest rates and inflation; in other words, they
were affected by a speculative bubble.
That the market fell is, with hindsight, not surprising; but why was there
such a sharp tumble? The common theory is that the rise in short-term
interest rates, with the threat of more to come, panicked hedge funds and
bank proprietary traders into unwinding leveraged positions, which were
being financed through short-term borrowings at 3 per cent on the scale of
possibly hundreds of billions of dollars.
For instance, Albert Edwards, global strategist at Kleinwort Benson, has
estimated that US banks may this summer and autumn have started offloading
Dollars 200bn of bonds into a weak market, to make room for a revival in
bank lending to the private sector.
A slightly different theory has been put forward by William Sterling, of
Merrill Lynch, who argues that non-Japanese investors borrowed some Dollars
120bn in Japanese yen at only 2 per cent in the second half of 1993, mainly
to finance securities market positions. The sudden shock faced by these
speculators was not the widely- anticipated rise in dollar interest rates
but the unexpected fall in the exchange rate of the dollar, which had been
forecast to be a strong currency in 1994.
Other explanations have been put forward relating to distortions within the
mortgage-backed securities markets which led to a sharp bond sell-off once
short-term rates turned. Certainly the mortgage-backed securities market has
been a great disaster area of 1994, and Kidder Peabody, one of its leading
promoters, has suffered dismemberment and sale by its parent General
Electric.
The fact that such different arguments can be advanced (and there may be
truth in all of them) shows how poorly documented the flows between global
securities markets are at present. The lifting of capital controls by many
countries over the past few years has encouraged cross-border flows but the
monitoring is poor. Now the rapid development of derivative markets is
speeding up the movements of capital and is encouraging speculation which
appears to be sometimes destabilising. But there is only patchy information
about what is going on.
However, the global strategy team at Baring Securities led by Michael Howell
has painstakingly built up the picture of global equity flows. They have
uncovered an extraordinary if erratic growth in cross-border investment,
rising from an average of about Dollars 30bn a year in the late 1980s to a
peak Dollars 188bn last year. The main influence behind this growth has been
a jump in US outflows from negligible levels until 1988 to Dollars 43bn in
1991 and Dollars 85bn last year.
A significant international diversification campaign by US pension plans is
the main explanation - although there has been rapid expansion in overseas
specialist mutual funds too. Greenwich Associates, the US pension
consultants, found in a survey of pension plan sponsors that the average
fund had doubled its exposure to overseas assets to 8 per cent in the three
years up to the end of 1993, and, moreover, that the proportion was expected
to hit 12 per cent by the end of 1996.
Emerging markets have proved a strong attraction for investors in the US and
elsewhere in the developed world. Third world economies are often growing
very strongly - at 5 to 7 per cent a year, at least twice as fast as the
developed countries.
International investors owned emerging market equities worth Dollars 200bn
at the end of last year, according to Baring Securities, amounting to about
15 per cent of their total cross-border holdings. In less favourable
conditions the flow of Dollars 61bn to emerging markets last year will not
be repeated in 1994, but the total could still approach Dollars 50bn.
Bond investors, however, are in a much less active mood. Japanese investors
have suffered such serious currency losses over the past few years that they
are refusing to recycle liquidity generated by the Japanese balance of
payments surplus into overseas bond markets, as they were much happier to do
in the late 1980s.
Bond investors in general have retreated to their lairs. For instance,
whereas foreigners bought a third of the net issuance of UK government bonds
in 1993, this year the overseas buyers have melted away.
The result has been a sharp rise in government bond yields around the world
and increasing talk of a global capital shortage, because developed country
governments are still borrowing enormously, while the flows being diverted
into the emerging markets are becoming highly significant.
For hedge funds that got these movements wrong the consequences have been
dire. For instance, the Dorje and Vaja funds run out of London by David
Weill (but based offshore) have halved in value from Dollars 1.2bn this year
and are being wound down. Last spring the group of US hedge funds run by
David Askin collapsed, victims of the debacle in mortgage-backed securities.
On the other hand, the large movements in various markets have in theory
offered considerable opportunities to those who have got it right with
focused strategies, for instance by leveraging positions in coffee or
metals, or chasing hot emerging markets such as Brazil. But it has been easy
to get things wrong, too, especially the dollar exchange rate, which has
proved an expensive trap for many a dollar bull this year. Global investment
managers have had to display enormous flexibility in adjusting to the
different market climates in 1994. But they can derive some modest
satisfaction from the fact that the politicians are starting to complain
about the power of international money, notably in imposing ever-higher
interest rates in government bond markets.
Money talks, and the global money managers are making their views known.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941108

