FT943-13077

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: 'Cheerful cove' picked as party
cheerleader


   By ROLAND RUDD


Mr Jeremy Hanley's appointment as Conservative party chairman was the
biggest surprise of the reshuffle.
More ministers were mentioned as potential candidates for the post than for
any other position. Mr Hanley was considered only to be an outsider  - and
as a member of the party's 'wet' wing whose promotion was blocked by Lady
Thatcher in the 1980s it is not difficult to see why.
A protege of the liberal-inclined Mr Chris Patten, a former party chairman
whom Mr Hanley served as a parliamentary private secretary, he is not an
obvious contender to unify a party which has being moving steadily to the
right.
Some Tory Euro-sceptics were heard muttering criticism of his appointment at
Westminster. One leading sceptic said: 'Mr Hanley would do well to fully
acknowledge the party's sceptical view of the European Union.'
Although he is a member of the anti-federalist European Movement, the new
chairman is best remembered by many sceptics as secretary of the all-party
group on Europe when he took an unambiguous pro-European stance.
But Mr Hanley was not appointed for ideological reasons. As the political
arm of the prime minister, he will not be expected to voice opinions of his
own.
After a string of election defeats the Tory grassroots are demoralised and
dispirited. Mr Hanley's widely acclaimed skills as a good communicator and
raconteur are seen as the essential tools for the job.
He also won the party managers' support for his performance as minister for
the armed forces when he chaired important reviews in the defence cost
study. 'It could so easily have gone wrong,' said one senior backbencher.
'When you are having to make billions of savings leading to the loss of
thousands of jobs the potential for mistakes is huge. Jeremy Hanley avoided
all the pitfalls.'
Sir Jerry Wiggin, Conservative MP for Western-Super-Mare and a defence
expert who watched Mr Hanley perform at close quarters, believes his ability
to make friends and get on with people will be crucial in forming good
relationships with party officials across the country.
'Never mind his views on Europe' said Sir Rhodes Boyson, Tory MP for Brent
North. 'He will be an excellent party cheerleader.'
Mr Hanley, 48, was described by another MP as 'a cheerful cove'. His friends
say his family's acting skills should enable him to bring a bit of
razzmatazz to the job. Mr Hanley's father was the actor Jimmy Hanley and his
mother is the actress Dinah Sheridan.
The new chairman is not without his critics. Once seen as something of a
rebel, voting against the government on the abolition of the Greater London
Council and arguing against an increase in water charges, his detractors now
accuse him of being 'crawlingly loyalist'. After expressing fears that the
privatised Thames Water would sell off valuable acreage around Barn Elms
reservoir he loyally voted for the bill in July 1989.
As Northern Ireland minister in 1990 he was criticised by some of the
participants in the round-table talks on the province's political future for
being a poor chairman. 'He found it hard to deal with a competitive agenda,'
said one participant.
Perhaps Mr Hanley's greatest political achievement has been in winning the
marginal Richmond and Barnes seat by 74 votes in 1983 and then holding it
under sustained attack from the Liberal Democrats.
With a majority of just 1,766 he remains vulnerable. MPs were yesterday
voicing concern that he might suffer the same fate as Mr Chris Patten who
lost his Bath constituency in the last election. However Mr Hanley will have
the advantage of defending a London seat in which even his opponents concede
he is a popular MP.
Hanley gets a handful, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

