FT943-875

FT  27 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Bass shares slip after statement


   By RODERICK ORAM, Consumer Industries Editor


Shares in Bass slipped 17p to 523p yesterday after it delivered a cautious
trading statement which indicated its breweries and pubs remained under
intense competitive pressure.
The group's beer sales fell 0.8 per cent in volume terms in the first 48
weeks of this financial year while the UK market fell 1.2 per cent.
Brewers had pulled back from the large trade discounts they were offering
last year and in this first half, but there was 'still a knock-on effect' in
pricing overall, said Mr Ian Prosser, chairman.
Bass's gross profit margins on beer were slightly lower in the second half
than the first, although this reflected in part an 11 per cent reduction in
the number of pubs in Bass Tavern's estate.
On a like-for-like basis, pubs managed by Bass reported a 3 per cent rise in
takings within which food revenues were up 8 per cent, indicating a decline
in drink sales. Mr Prosser declined to give a figure for the decline in beer
volume sales in Bass pubs but said the group 'had done better than the
market' which was down about 5 per cent.
Off-licence beer sales were up 6.4 per cent.
Bass's other activities showed progress in the year to date with Britvic,
the soft drinks business, benefiting from the UK's hot summer. Its volumes
were up 9 per cent in the first 48 weeks after being ahead only 3 per cent
at the half year.
Holiday Inns reported a rise in occupancy and room rates in the Americas. In
Europe, a slight deline in room rates was offset by higher occupancy.
Bingo clubs reported a 5 per cent increase in spending per head. Betting
shop turnover was up 4.3 per cent and the average stake was 2.3 per cent
higher.
Bass enjoyed a strong cash inflow in the second half after an outflow in the
first half. Bass Brewers, for example, was cash positive and is expected to
remain so for 'the foreseeable future.'
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940927

