FT943-13072

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: When a good butcher has to wield the axe


   By IVOR OWEN and PHILIP STEPHENS


Unexpected promotions, reluctant resignations, and the occasional outburst
by those who prefer to acknowledge the sack, have been a feature of
ministerial reshuffles down the years.
So, too, has clear evidence of prime-ministerial anguish at having to retain
a rival in the cabinet because of the fear that he would be even more
dangerous on the back benches.
David Lloyd George's dictum that a successful prime minister has to be a
'good butcher' does not seem to have made it any easier for most of his
successors to wield the axe.
Harold Macmillan did not relish dispensing with senior colleagues in spite
of the notoriety he gained in 1962 from the 'night of the long knives' when
he got rid of a third of the cabinet.
The loss of Orpington, a seemingly impregnable Tory stronghold which fell to
the Liberals in a by-election, caused the supposedly 'unflappable' prime
minister to panic.
Macmillan did not join the laughter when one Tory backbencher ironically
congratulated him on 'keeping your head while all about you were losing
theirs'.
In 1966 Mr Harold Wilson - now Lord Wilson - let it be known that a system
of promotion and relegation, similar to the football league, would be in
regular use to keep ministers on their toes.
In the event he found it difficult to apply his football doctrine. His anger
at colleagues who frustrated his proposals for curbing the power of trade
unions only resulted in one sacking. The victim was Mr Richard  - now Lord -
Marsh, who has recalled that Lord Wilson needed the best part of an hour to
explain that he was 'carrying out a re-organisation'.
The prize for the most disastrous reshuffle in recent times must go to the
then Mrs Margaret Thatcher's mid-term reconstruction in 1989 - at exactly
the same point during the last parliament as Mr Major's latest changes.
Her decision to force Sir Geoffrey Howe from the Foreign Office developed
into an unseemly row over his status as deputy prime minister and leader of
the Commons.
Mrs Thatcher managed also to offend both Mr Douglas Hurd, then home
secretary, by offering Sir Geoffrey the Home Office without bothering to
mention it to Mr Hurd; and the then Mr Nigel Lawson, then chancellor, by
compensating Sir Geoffrey with Mr Lawson's country house.
Celebrating her 10th year in office Mrs Thatcher had the audacity to dub her
reshuffled cabinet: 'The Right Team for Britain's Future'. Within months Mr
Lawson had quit, to be followed by a steady stream of other members of the
team. A year later the captain also was obliged to depart.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

