FT941-13143

FT  27 JAN 94 / Straw accused of undermining Labour spending promise


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


Mr Jack Straw, shadow environment secretary, was accused in the Commons last
night of undermining a claim by Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, that the
Labour party had no new public expenditure commitments.
Sir George Young, housing minister, insisted that Mr Straw's demand that
local authorities be allowed to use Pounds 5.5bn of accumulated capital
receipts to build new houses and acquire empty properties would add to the
public sector borrowing requirement.
Mr Straw said that the Pounds 5.5bn secured by local authorities from the
sale of council houses could enable a start to be made on tackling the
'crisis'.
When reminded of Mr Brown's assurance that Labour had made no new spending
commitments, he recalled that the government had permitted councils to use
capital receipts from council house sales in the current financial year.
Sir George said the accumulated capital receipts had been used to reduce the
overall indebtedness of local authorities and the public sector borrowing
requirement.
He said capital receipts were not simply stored in bank vaults 'for a Labour
chancellor to spend'.
Mr Straw said ministers had been 'up to their necks' in discussions about
the housing policy of Westminster city council, alleged by the district
auditor to amount to 'gerrymandering'.
He said there was no reason why the government could not condemn the policy
pursued by a 'flagship' Conservative authority even if it was not prepared
to comment on allegations made against individuals.
Sir Paul Beresford, MP for Croydon Central and former leader of Wandsworth
council, defended the council's housing programmes and accused the previous
Labour council of gerrymandering.
The Tory council housing sales policy pioneered by Wandsworth led to
allegations of 'homes for votes' when operated by Westminster.
Sir Paul said that Wandsworth, as a leading Labour local authority before
1978, had operated schemes which boosted the number of council properties.
'They were working with the Labour-controlled Greater London Council in
blatant gerrymandering,' he said.
Sir George released figures in a Commons written reply showing that
Wandsworth council featured consistently at or near the top of the league
table for discounted property sales in the London boroughs.
The figures showed that it sold houses and flats totalling more in value
than any other authority in every year from 1983-84 to 1991-92.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940127

