FT942-12781

FT  28 APR 94 / Lautro imposes record fine


   By ALISON SMITH


Lautro, the regulator for the life insurance industry, yesterday set a
record for the fines it imposes on life insurers for failing to meet its
standards - ordering Premium Life to pay a Pounds 300,000 fine.
The ruling follows a second routine inspection carried out by the regulator
last spring, at which Lautro's enforcement staff found that Premium had not
acted to correct problems identified on a first visit the previous year.
Particular concerns were failure to monitor effectively both the direct
sales agents and a number of the firms of appointed representatives through
which Premium sells its products; as well as a failure to check that its
direct sales staff were competent and of good character.
Premium also failed to supervise new entrants properly and to provide proper
training to supervisory staff, the regulator said.
Some 22 investors have been compensated by Premium as a result of losses
having been identified. Mr Colvin Rae, chief executive since December last
year, said the total paid out in compensation was between Pounds 10,000 and
Pounds 15,000. Only a couple of the payments were over Pounds 1,000.
Just last month, Lautro set a record for a fine at Pounds 225,000 levied on
Aegon life assurance for serious structural failures in its compliance
procedures.
That was the first imposed as a result of the second round of inspection
visits, which Lautro had warned life companies last year would lead to a
more severe range of penalties. Other life insurers are expected to be hit
by further significant fines shortly.
Mr Rae said substantial changes had been made and that Lautro was now
satisfied with Premium's compliance procedures.
The insurer had cut its links with a number of the firms of appointed
representatives through which it had previously carried out business; it now
had links with just 45 appointed representative firms comprising some 80
representatives.
He said the problems had related more to 'inadequate documentation than to
inappropriate advice' and emphasised that all the costs - including the need
to pay Lautro's expenses of Pounds 21,500 - had been fully taken into
account in Premium's 1993 results.
The regulator said that it would carry out a further, advisory visit before
the end of June to check Premium's training arrangements. Lautro is due to
be de-recognised as a regulator some time after the Personal Investment
Authority, the new watchdog to protect the private investor, is to become
operational in July this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940428

