FT942-14416

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: New Banesto owner due to be
named on Monday


   By TOM BURNS


   MADRID


Spain's banking authorities are likely to name the new owner of Banesto on
Monday, the deadline for delivery of the sealed bids.
Mr Miguel Martin, deputy governor of the Bank of Spain and chairman of the
eight-member committee which will award Banesto to its new owner, has told a
parliamentary commission the price will be the sole deciding factor in the
auction of the financially-stricken bank.
'The likelihood is that it (the sale) will all be sewn up next Monday' - the
day when the bids are to be delivered, the Bank of Spain said yesterday.
The three contenders are Argentaria, the state-controlled banking
corporation partially privatised last year; Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, a leading
domestic bank which has lent senior executives to run Banesto in a caretaker
capacity; and Santander, the smallest of the trio in terms of market value
but the most international and profitable of the domestic institutions.
The authorities say they will view favourably the acquisition of Banesto by
any one of the three.
At stake is the opportunity to acquire an institution with an estimated 10
per cent share of Spain's financial market, a banking presence in Argentina,
Chile and Uruguay, a stake in Banco Totta, a leading Portuguese bank, and an
industrial portfolio that includes some of Spain's best-known corporations.
The risk for the buyer is the burden of taking on a bank that required Bank
of Spain intervention at the end of last year to avert a bankruptcy which
might have endangered the entire domestic system. Independent audits have
established that Banesto had gross financing needs of Pta605bn (Dollars
4.3bn), part of which was met by a Bank of Spain rescue plan, and part
through the transfer of Banesto's entire reserves to provisions.
In a hint that fuelled speculation of a winning bid by Argentaria, Mr
Francisco Luzon, chairman of the banking group, has said that 'the price of
Banesto is a different one for the different banks'. Argentaria, which has a
smaller banking network than those of BBV and Santander, is viewed by
analysts as the most interested buyer of Banesto's 2,400 branches.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940420

