FT942-15916

FT  13 APR 94 / Tories to field more candidates in Scotland


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


The Scottish Conservative party has increased by nearly 30 per cent the
number of candidates it is fielding in next month's elections to regional
councils, despite the fact that the councils are to disappear in two years
with the reform of local government.
Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary, said at the launch of the party's campaign
yesterday that the party expected to win seats 'all over Scotland'.
The Conservatives control none of the nine regional and three island
councils, and stand at an all time low of 13 per cent in the opinion polls
for Scotland, compared with the 26 per cent they won in the 1992 general
election.
Mr Lang said: 'History is littered with dead opinion polls. I am very
confident the opinion polls are wrong, and we shall prove them wrong when
the time comes.'
The Tories are fielding about 350 candidates, about 100 more than in the
last regional elections in 1990. In that poll, they took 19 per cent of the
vote and won 52 of the 445 seats in the regions.
The more candidates a party fields, the higher its share of the vote is
likely to be, since the presence of a candidate enables party supporters to
vote for their party instead of voting for another party or staying at home.
A bill now in its committee stage in parliament will abolish the regions and
the 53 district councils in 1996 and will create about 30 single-tier
councils.
Elections to the new councils will be held next May, but the new councillors
will not take up office until 1996.
Tory regional election candidates will have to defend the plan to remove
control of water and sewerage from councils and create three state-owned
water authorities. Last month a referendum in Strathclyde region produced an
overwhelming majority against local authorities losing control of water.
Yesterday Mr Lang said there would be a 'considerable number' of elected
councillors on the boards of the new authorities. But he would not specify
what proportion they would comprise.
The Tory manifesto insists: 'The government is not privatising Scotland's
water and sewerage services by the back door, the front door, or any other
route. The new water authorities will remain in the public sector.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940413

