FT944-2869

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (9): Fresh opportunities abound -
Jordan's peace agreement poses a big challenge for banks


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON


This year's historic peace agreement between Jordan and Israel, signed on
October 26, poses a big challenge to the kingdom's banking and financial
sector. Fast-moving plans for regional co-operation and joint ventures,
along with increased competition for cross-border investment and trade
present huge opportunities for development.
Some Jordanian banks have already begun to respond to the new political
environment by opening branches in the rapidly expanding economies of the
West Bank and Gaza Strip; meanwhile, a number of Israeli bankers have begun
looking for custodians to carry out their business in Amman.
On both sides of the River Jordan many hope that peace will act as a
catalyst for faster economic reforms and liberalisation. A recent report by
the World Bank* urges the Jordanian government to push on quickly with its
economic reforms if it wants to capitalise on the benefits of peace. In the
banking and finance sector it says the authorities must loosen the
regulatory environment, while the kingdom's banks need to modernise their
operations and introduce new products and services if they are to catch up
with international banking standards.
'We've been running the banks in the form of crisis management for the past
few years with one eye on political uncertainty and the other on regional
instability,' explains Mr Tawfik Fakhouri, chairman of the Bank of Jordan
which was the first to re-open a branch in the West Bank this year. 'Now we
have a peace treaty, banks will be willing to expand and invest in the long
term stability of Jordan and Palestine,' he says.
Jordan's crisis management began in 1989 when the IMF was called in to deal
with an overwhelming burden of foreign debt. This resulted in a five-year
adjustment programme and strict foreign exchange controls. In the same year,
the central bank was forced to take over two troubled local institutions,
Petra Bank and Jordan Gulf Bank, for failing to comply with banking
regulations. The psychological impact of the Petra Bank scandal, in which
one of the kingdom's biggest and most innovative banks was unable to honour
its liabilities, is still felt by the 15 main commercial banks operating in
Jordan.
Although the regulatory environment has eased over the years, certain
stipulations remain such as credit/deposit ratio requirements, restrictions
on capital transfer, and a national currency which is fixed at a daily rate
against a basket of currencies by the central bank.
Mr Michel Martou, the deputy central bank governor, says that more
liberalisation is on the way with the central bank working towards full
currency convertibility and gradually moving away from direct controls to
open market operations - there has been a weekly auction of Certificates of
Deposit for nearly a year now.
He argues that Jordan's banks stand a good chance of benefitting from the
peace agreement, as long as they diversify their services in favour of
universal banking, and further strengthen their balance sheets.
Not that the banks have been complaining much about the central bank's
rules. The health of their balance sheets has improved dramatically under
the well-regulated regime of the past five years.
Total private sector deposits, excluding government and inter-bank deposits,
rose by 94 per cent from the end of 1989 to stand at JD4.6bn at September
1994, while overall assets were up by 91 per cent on 1989 at JD7.2bn.
The repatriation of savings from Palestinians returning from the Gulf in
1991, after Iraq invaded Kuwait, provided an exceptional boost to the
banking system with foreign currency deposits more than doubling in 1991. As
a result, the banks have been very liquid. In September, the average
liquidity ratio stood at 56 per cent.
On the lending side, credit lines remain very conservative. Although the
amount of lending has increased by 51 per cent since 1989, September's
credit to deposit ratio of 53 per cent is still well below the legal maximum
of 70 per cent. Most credit still goes to commerce, trade and the
construction sector.
Industrial investment this year was equivalent to only 6 per cent of total
deposits. Although some specialised institutions such as the Housing Bank
offer long term credit for mortgages, more than half of all Jordanian banks'
total credit lines are in the form of overdrafts. There is little in the way
of corporate finance and syndicated loans.
On the Amman Financial Market - one of the most well-regulated and active
stock markets in the Middle East - the banking and finance sector accounts
for 44 per cent of the Dollars 5bn total market capitalisation. Windfall
profits by banks over the past few years have greatly increased the value of
their shares. The share price index for the finance sector rose by 58 per
cent between the end of 1991 and September 1994, outperforming the general
index which was up 46 per cent over the same period. A recent report by
Baring Securities in London recommended the Arab Bank and the Housing Bank
as some of the best buys on the bourse - although it expressed reservations
over Arab Bank's lack of disclosure.
Although foreign investors have shown an interest in Amman's exchange, with
a number of leading merchant banks now offering Jordanian stocks to their
clients, they are concerned about restrictions imposed on foreign funds.
Foreign investors need permission from the prime minister to trade on the
exchange and strict limits are imposed on the amounts they can invest. Most
are waiting for the kingdom's long-delayed privatisation programme in the
hope of corporate finance deals and new investment opportunities.
A central obstacle to further reforms and liberalisation is the kingdom's
heavy burden of foreign debt which currently stands at around 125 per cent
of GDP (Dollars 6bn).
Although a number of creditor countries has promised to waive part of their
dues in reward for Jordan's peace agreement, servicing and repayment still
requires a net outflow of funds from the Treasury. Government officials
complain that until the debt burden is reduced, regulations have to remain.
'Jordan deserves a fair chance. If we don't get more debt reduction, then we
can't make the peace dividends possible,' argues Mr Martou at the central
bank.
* Peace and the Jordanian economy, The World Bank. 1994

The Financial Times


London Page 44

941215

