FT942-12166

FT  30 APR 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Herbal recipe for a healthy
company - Imports from China


   By CLIVE FEWINS


Robert Miller had been suffering from bronchitis for two months when he gave
up conventional medicine in favour of seeking a remedy in Boston's
Chinatown. He found a Chinese doctor who seemed to have the powers of a
fortune teller.
'He told me amazingly accurate things about my medical history, gave me a
revolting tasting herbal potion, and two days later my condition started
clearing up. After a week I was feeling 100 per cent,' said the healthy
six-footer from Ohio.
For Miller, it was the road to Damascus. With relief he sold the exhibition
organising business he had run since 1977 and which he blamed for the stress
at the root of his bronchitis. A few months after, in early 1980, he started
a herbal importing business.
In 1986 he moved to England, where he had spent time as a child, and started
East-West Herbs in a 400 sq ft converted stable block near the Oxfordshire
home of a friend.
Within a few months he had sold the US business and formed a partnership
with his friend, Michael McIntyre, a herbal practitioner whom he bought out
in 1990. Miller now holds the major interest but six of the 20 full and
part-time employees have a minor holding.
The growth of East West Herbs was at first unspectacular. Initial capital
was Pounds 20,000, shared between the partners. In the first year the
company turned over a mere Pounds 12,000. During the second year it acquired
a third member of staff and turned over Pounds 40,000.
The 1993 figures showed a net profit of just under Pounds 90,000, and the
business turned over Pounds 900,000.
The warehouse and laboratory now occupy 6,000 sq ft of former farm
buildings.
'Our progress has mirrored the increasing use of Traditional Chinese
Medicine (TCM) in this country,' said Miller, 43. 'But we have had to work
hard for our money and there have been reversals.'
The worst of these was the October 1992 exchange rate crisis, when Britain
left the ERM. 'I was slow to realise the effects of this. In February 1993 I
had to send out a letter to all customers adding a surcharge of 10 per cent
to wholesale prices and a surcharge on all prescriptions being mailed to
practitioners,' said Miller.
East-West Herbs weathered the storm. 'Life was hard last year. We had to ask
our suppliers for extended credit and our bankers, Coutts, were very helpful
with our overdraft facility, which I do not generally like to exceed Pounds
50,000,' Miller said.
The company nevertheless achieved nearly 30 per cent growth and expanded the
work of its research and authentication laboratory. In this department the
key figures are two Chinese TCM specialists. The core business remains
supplying more than 1,000 herbs, herbal preparations and herbal products to
about 1,000 customers in a dozen countries. In this, Dr Shouming Zhong and
Miss Hongwen Yu play a key role.
'In 1986, when we started, the oriental herb supply business was in the
cottage industry category,' Miller said. 'A lot of Hong Kong fraudsters were
able to pass off inferior preparations to unsuspecting non-Chinese speakers.
My aim has been to raise the whole standard of what this business is all
about in this country.'
Dr Zhong, a phyto-chemist, formerly a professor at the Chinese
Pharmaceuticals University in Nanjing, and Yu, who previously worked at the
London School of Pharmacy, concentrate on authentication.
'Many Chinese herbs traditionally undergo a long process of baking,
steaming, frying and mixing before they are ready for use,' Miller said. 'In
Hong Kong, unlike mainland China, there are no rules or regulations
governing the preparation of pharmaceutical products. Processing methods
there often contravene the guidelines of the Chinese Pharmacopoeia. At
East-West Herbs we have installed a stringent quality control programme and
now import our herbs directly from mainland China.'
At the company headquarters in the village of Kingham near Chipping Norton
the smell of herbs and herbal preparations emanates from the dispensing
area, where staff prepare prescriptions for TCM products and 150 western
herbal tinctures.
As well as being available by mail order, many of the company's products can
be bought at the East-West Herb Shop and clinic in London's Covent Garden,
and the company recently signed a contract with a large pharmaceutical
company to carry out research into a remedy for what Miller describes as 'a
common ailment in this country'.
'Overall, our net profit is under 10 per cent, but this is not my prime
measure of success,' Miller said. 'My main aim has always been to exploit
the growth potential of TCM in this country. In the US there is a Dollars
400m market, but the Germans are the biggest per capita users of TCM outside
China. The market there is estimated at Dollars 1.5bn.
'TCM provides primary health care for a quarter to a half of the world's
population. It is now possible to study TCM in this country, and more and
more British people are going to China to learn about it. It is also being
practised in half a dozen NHS clinics, so there is tremendous growth
potential. For East-West Herbs the really profitable phase is yet to come.'
East-West Herbs, Langston Priory Mews, Kingham, Oxfordshire OX7 6UP.
Telephone: 0608-658862.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940430

