FT942-12449

FT  29 APR 94 / Criticism brings extra poll day for some in S African
election


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN and MARK SUZMAN


South Africa's interim executive yesterday responded to widespread criticism
prompted by organisational problems in the first all-race election by
extending the voting into an unscheduled fourth day in several parts of the
country today.
Officials of all main parties expressed concern about shortages of ballot
papers and other election materials, particularly in many of the former
black 'homelands'. Judge Johann Kriegler, head of the Independent Electoral
Commission, the body charged with organising the elections, admitted that
there had been a 'substantial inadequacy' of voting supplies.
At his request, the ruling Transitional Executive Council gave permission
for an extra day of voting in the affected areas.
'We must be able to say that all South Africans who want to vote are given
the opportunity,' said President FW de Klerk. 'We've got to make this
election work for all the people.' Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the
Inkatha Freedom party, who on Wednesday had threatened to pull out of the
election unless the problems were solved, said the decision 'would go a long
way towards allaying the fears of many people about the election as a
whole'.
However, he maintained there were still 'many irregularities, gross
irregularities' and left open the possibility of later withdrawal from the
poll. 'It doesn't seem likely that it is going to be free and fair,' he
said.
Earlier Mr Nelson Mandela, the ANC leader, claimed the delays in
distribution were the result of 'massive sabotage' to prevent voting
supplies being delivered to black areas. ANC officials later played down the
comments, attributing them to frustration with the slow progress.
The areas most affected were the former homelands of Lebowa, Venda and
Gazankulu in the northern Transvaal, the Transkei in the eastern Cape, and
KwaZulu in Natal, where in many places some polling stations had still not
received sufficient ballot papers and other voting supplies by last night
when voting was scheduled to end. Polling booths in all these regions will
remain open all day today to compensate for the delays.
Counting of votes, which had been due to begin today, will now commence
tomorrow morning. Full results are not expected until Monday, though
computer projections may appear earlier.
Millions of newly printed ballots were airlifted out to remote areas in
military aircraft to meet the extra demand. But party officials and foreign
observers were uneasy about the adequacy of security for the distribution of
ballot papers, and stressed the need for an accurate tally both of ballots
delivered and votes cast.
In most of the country, however, the queues of Wednesday dwindled yesterday
as the electoral commission managed to sort out many of the problems. The
dramatic fall-off in inter-party violence was sustained.
Missing stickers and the miracle of KwaZulu, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940429

