FT943-13103

FT  21 JUL 94 / Balladur puts the squeeze on spending


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


Mr Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister, yesterday ordered ministers
to curb their spending requests for 1995 and said that the rise in total
government expenditure had to be limited to the expected inflation rate of
1.7 per cent.
His demand, made during meetings with government ministers, represents an
attempt to reassure financial markets that the government's plans to cut the
budget deficit will not be compromised by political pressures ahead of next
year's presidential election.
Mr Balladur warned that failure to stick to the government's five year
budget deficit reduction plan could threaten economic growth by putting
upward pressure on interest rates. Under the plan, the deficit is targeted
at FFr301bn (Dollars 56bn) this year and FFr275bn in 1995, compared to
FFr315bn last year.
Details of ministerial spending requests for next year have not been
revealed, but are thought to be substantially higher than the funds
available. Debt repayments and pay increases for civil servants mean that
most ministries will face spending cuts this year. The most difficult
ministries are thought to be defence and social security.
Political opponents, however, were unimpressed by Mr Balladur's statements.
The Socialist party attacked the rise in public sector debt. 'There has been
a significant deterioration which does not appear to have achieved
anything,' the Socialists said in a statement.
'Unemployment has grown in worrying proportions and the spending commitments
of the government are only met with difficulty through exceptional
receipts,' the statement said, in a reference to the centre-right
government's privatisation programme.
Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, the budget minister, said that letters would now be sent
to the various ministries outlining the ceiling for expenditure for next
year. The finalisation of the 1995 budget would then be negotiated in the
autumn of this year.
'There was unanimous agreement on the need to bring public finances under
control,' Mr Sarkozy said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940721

