FT944-2856

FT  15 DEC 94 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie poised to attack 3,000 after
bid move - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


The UK market shrugged aside a series of disappointing economic numbers from
both sides of the Atlantic, preferring to latch on to news of a probable bid
for Northern Electricity from Trafalgar House.
'A bid from Trafs for Northern seems certain to trigger a series of bids and
counter-bids in the sector, and will drive the market sharply higher by the
end of the year,' said the head of trading at one of the City's biggest
securities houses.
Speculation of stakebuilding and possible bids has been rife in the
electricity sector for a number of weeks. Northern Electricity shares began
to outpace the rest of the sector as long as a month ago as the stories
began to take hold. And Northern issued a statement to the market around
midday - two hours before the Trafalgar news broke - saying it knew of no
substance to the bid speculation of recent days.
At the close the FT-SE 100 Index was 34.2 higher at 2,980.6 and looking set
fair to attack the 3,000 level, dealers said. The bid news in the recs
ignited the rest of the market, where the second liners jumped for joy. The
FT-SE Mid 250 Index climbed 32.4 to 3,405.7.
The equity market was up and running long before the Northern/Trafalgar news
was released, with rumours of bids in the utilities, merchant banks and
other sectors being talked around the trading desks. Wall Street's steady
showing overnight gave added impetus to European markets.
The FT-SE 100 opened firmer at 2,950.2 and made rapid progress throughout
the day, pausing only to ponder what were seen as marginally disappointing
inflation numbers and average earnings.
A headline inflation figure showing a rise of 2.6 per cent on an annualised
basis compared with estimates of around 2.5 per cent, while average earnings
were in line with forecasts. The market was encouraged by the 1.7 per cent
fall in unit wage costs in the latest three months.
With Wall Street opening in good shape and up more than 13 points within
minutes in the face of consumer price index numbers and capacity utilisation
figures broadly in line with expectations, London gathered itself for
another sharp advance.
The Northern Electricity news, plus a good opening by Wall Street, which
jumped 13 points on the Dow Industrial Average in spite of slightly
disappointing inflation news, injected a massive dose of enthusiasm into
London, which raced ahead during the afternoon.
One dealer said that although the market had been full of bid speculation,
the actual timing of the Northern news caught marketmakers on the wrong
foot. 'The market was generally short and got caught,' he said, adding that
the feeling was now that the bid fever would probably feed into other
sectors. He also pointed out that the expiry on Friday of a whole series of
derivatives instruments, in the UK as well as Germany and the US, would
trigger all sorts of exaggerated market swings; 'We are going to see some
fun and games and possibly some jiggery-pokery in the market on Friday,' he
added.
Another senior dealer said he envisaged 'open season in the recs and the
merchant banks which will drive the market higher; the only worry for London
comes from Wall Street, which many see as heading for a fall'.
There were plenty of other stories circulating in the market. Dealers said
they expected firm details on the SG Warburg/Morgan Stanley merger
discussions to emerge on Monday, with Warburg shares racing up again. BP
shares performed exceptionally well after a well received presentation to
analysts.
Standard Chartered was one of the Footsie's most disappointing performers,
the shares being upset by yet more hints that Lloyds Bank's 4.7 per cent
stake may soon be on the move.

The Financial Times


London Page 56

941215

