FT943-13070

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: Aitken brings splash of colour


   By KEVIN BROWN


Mr Jonathan Aitken, the new chief secretary to the Treasury, will provide a
much needed splash of colour in the grey ranks of Mr John Major's cabinet.
Few other ministers have campaigned for the decriminalisation of cannabis,
stood trial at the Old Bailey, and insulted Baroness Thatcher in print.
But there is more to Mr Aitken than a knack for making headlines. If he has
the profile of a maverick outsider, he also has the authentic air of a
Conservative grandee. Indeed, the question on the lips of observers at
Westminster is not so much why he has been promoted to the cabinet as why it
took him so long to make it.
Mr Aitken has the ideal curriculum vitae: great-nephew of Lord Beaverbrook,
son of a Tory MP, graduate of Eton and Oxford, wealthy merchant banker. But
after entering the Commons in 1974 for Thanet East (now Thanet South) he
spent 18 years on the back benches before becoming a junior defence minister
in 1992.
Explanations for his tardy progress are as varied as the lunch menu at his
elegant Lord North Street home, once the residence of Brendan Bracken,
wartime intimate of Churchill.
Some put it down to his campaign in the 1960s for the de-criminalisation of
the offence of possession of cannabis, which he once compared to a minor
motoring offence. Others ascribe it to his background in journalism, which
culminated in a sensational report about British arms supplies to Nigeria
during the war against Biafran secession.
That report led to an appearance at the Old Bailey in 1970, where he was
charged with breaching the Official Secrets Act. He was acquitted, and has
since been both a role model for aspiring 'investigative' journalists and a
campaigner for less secrecy in government.
The other explanation is that Lady Thatcher, prime minister from 1979 to
1990, simply did not like him very much. He took little trouble to disguise
his own view of Lady Thatcher as prime minister.
Politically, Mr Aitken is a thoughtful free-market rightwinger. His
promotion to the cabinet is in part a reward for loyalty to Mr Major during
the tortuous parliamentary passage of the Maastricht bill. Unlike some
Euro-sceptic ministers, he refrained from giving arms-length support to the
rebels.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

