FT941-4058

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Drawn to the alphabet - Patricia Morison admires the
letters in a very exclusive edition


   By PATRICIA MORISON


It has taken ten years and four more years of painstaking printing on iron
hand-presses, but the result is being hailed as a triumph. Ornamented Types
is a two-part limited edition of early 19th-century decorated alphabets
produced by Ian Mortimer of IM Primit of Hackney in London. Printed in a
limited edition of 200, copies of this masterly production of the printer's
art cost Pounds 1,650.
If that is beyond your means, for the next three weeks the alphabets can be
seen in the exhibition, Ornamented Types at St Bride Printing Library in
London.
St Bride Printing Library, owned by the Corporation of London, houses a
magnificent collection devoted to every aspect of the history and technology
of typefounding and printing. The Library has inherited the collection of 32
decorated alphabets, beautifully engraved letters on pieces of end-grain
boxwood. Apparently never used, they are extremely rare survivals.
Commercial type-foundries threw away quantities of old alphabets during the
decades when ornamented letters like these were rejected as 'Victorian'
rubbish. Only the Betjeman faction proclaimed its affection for the
fat-faced, slab-serif alphabets of the early 1800s. With their quaint
decorations, they were designed to appeal to a fairly unsophisticated public
and to stand out boldly on hand-bills, theatre-programmes, auction-notices
and stage-coaches.
The St Bride collection nearly perished when a wartime bomb destroyed the
premises of the Monotype Corporation, which bought them when the Caslon
foundry closed in 1936. However, James Mosley, librarian at St Bride,
succeeded in identifying the mysterious type as coming from the foundry of
L. J. Pouchee.
A little-known but intriguing figure, Pouchee was first a butcher and
coal-merchant. In the 1800s, he seems to have scented a killing to be made
in printing and set up a type-foundry. By paying printers more than
competitors offered, he succeeded in breaking their cartel. He also seems to
have invented the technique known as stereotype casting, in which wooden
original letters were 'dabbed' in hot metal and a cast was made.
Pouchee's ornamented alphabets show an exuberant vein of fantasy. Some are
laden with grapes, covered with swags of flowers, or made into naive
barnyard scenes with wooden-looking milkmaids and cows. Perhaps the most
splendid letters, several inches high, are covered in fashionable florists'
flowers; lilies, camellias, roses.
Most remarkable of all, however, is the Masonic Alphabet. Pouchee was a
freemason - indeed, the records of the Grand Lodge provided Mosley with much
of what he has succeeded in unearthing about Pouchee. Masonic dinners in the
1820s probably had menu-cards printed with his accurate evocation of 'the
Craft'. It is just one of the exhibition's intriguing glimpses of the
commercial and social world of Regency London, conjured up by Pouchee's
fantastical, fat, self-confident alphabets.
Exhibition until March 24 at St Bride Printing Library, Bride Lane, Fleet
Street, London; 071-353-4660.
For Ornamented Types, contact IM Primit, 219a Victoria Park Road, London E9
7HD

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940312

