FT941-12827

FT  28 JAN 94 / Bank seeks code for debt sales


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


The Bank of England is to try to develop a voluntary code of practice to
regulate how banks sell debt in troubled European companies, Mr Pen Kent, an
executive director of the Bank, said yesterday.
Mr Kent's proposal follows a growth in the sale of debt at a fraction of its
face value by banks. They have increasingly chosen to dispose of it rather
than risk losing value when the finances of the company concerned are
restructured.
Although the market in London is less developed than in the US, many of the
buyers of debt have been US venture capital funds seeking high returns if
the company recovers.
Sale of debt in London has grown rapidly in the past year.
Mr Kent said yesterday that he would explore with banks in the next few
weeks whether they could establish a code of practice requiring buyers of
distressed debt to comply with the Bank's approach to debt restructuring.
He said that banks might also agree to a 'closed season' during company
restructuring talks when debt would not be sold.
Mr Kent told a conference in London organised by the Association of
Corporate Treasurers that he wanted to continue developing the 'London
Approach', a set of principles for company restructurings established in
1990.
He said that in spite of concerns that distressed debt sales might undermine
the London Approach, this had not occurred in the small number of cases
involving debt sales which the Bank had helped to co-ordinate.
Among other ways of developing the London Approach, Mr Kent suggested:
Trying to promote greater trust among parties to a restructuring by full
sharing of information. He said that it was important that all banks
involved 'put their cards on the table at an early stage in the
negotiations'. Involving creditors other than banks in negotiations. Mr Kent
said that a weakness of only banks taking part was that they were 'generally
protecting their own positions at the expense of other creditors and
shareholders'.
Encouraging investors to put fresh equity or mezzanine debt - structured
finance which has a higher claim to company assets than equity - into
troubled companies. This was currently avoided by risk-averse investors.
Trying to marry statutory insolvency procedures under the 1986 Insolvency
Act with the voluntary London Approach.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940128

