FT944-14448

FT  22 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: Fixed rates gamble


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Conventional wisdom is under attack in the savings market. As an
illustration, try this two-part quiz:
1. When interest rates are rising, is it a good time to fix your deposit
interest rate?
2. If base rates are 5.75 per cent, should you leave your money with someone
offering up to 12 per cent?
A prudent investor would answer 'no' to both. After all, if interest rates
are increasing, it is better to leave savings free to climb up on the back
of rising base rates. Besides which, if someone is offering a return that
seems too good to be true, it probably is. Yet, a number of high street
banks and building societies are offering comparatively high fixed deposit
rates.
The table, provided by Moneyfacts, shows the most competitive on offer. The
terms are between three to five years, but whether the interest rates end up
being a good deal depends on the behaviour of base rates over the period.
Simon Briscoe, UK economist at SG Warburg, expects three rises in base rates
 -of half a percentage point each time - by the end of next year. This would
take them to just over 7 per cent. He believes the usual cycle of sharp
interest rate rises is over for now and that the UK economy will have a
lengthy period of relatively low growth.
John Marsland, senior UK economist at UBS, is less optimistic about a low
interest-rate era. While he thinks the economic basics point to base rates
of 7 to 8 per cent next year, he believes the relative weakness of sterling
actually will propel them to 10 per cent by the end of 1995.
Taking a fixed rate is a gamble although those on offer suggest that, even
if you do lose out, it should not be by much. The question remains: which is
best - a flat fixed rate or an escalator bond, paying pre-determined rates
which increase over the term of the investment? In general, the escalator
bonds pay a higher annual rate - but your money is tied up for longer.
The highest annual average of 9.3 per cent gross comes from Julian Hodge, a
small, privately-owned, Cardiff - based bank. For those who prefer building
societies, the annual average rates are 9.2 per cent at Portman or Stroud &
Swindon, 9.08 at Woolwich, and 8.85 at West Bromwich.
The main drawback with fixed-rate deposits is the withdrawal penalties.
Indeed, Woolwich does not allow any early withdrawals on its three-year bond
and none in the first two years of its escalator bond. After that,
withdrawals cost you 90 days' loss of interest.
There are other products offering high fixed rates of interest; the Highest
Rates for your Money table shows the Confederation Bank is paying 9 per cent
on its fixed-rate Tessa. But this is available only to those who put up
Pounds 8,900 (to be drip-fed into a Tessa) compared with just Pounds 500
required by Portman or Stroud & Swindon.
The Tessa has the important advantage of being tax-free as long as capital
is not withdrawn during its five-year term, whereas the fixed-rate bonds are
taxable.
Higher-rate taxpayers may prefer to invest in tax-free National Savings
certificates. The 42nd issue pays a tax-free 5.85 per cent a year compound
when held for five years, a return which is equivalent to an annual 9.75 per
cent gross for a 40 per cent taxpayer.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941022

