FT944-2917

FT  15 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Development costs push PhoneLink Pounds
1.96m into red


   By PAUL TAYLOR


PhoneLink, the Birkenhead-based electronic information services company
which was floated on the USM 18 months ago, yesterday reported a first-half
pre-tax loss of Pounds 1.96m reflecting the planned cost of bringing the
group's Tel-Me product to market.
At the same time the group announced that it had signed an agreement with WH
Smith Office Supplies to develop and provide an on-line office supplies
catalogue.
The system, which is due to be launched in early 1996, will enable business
customers to select and then order office supplies from a screen, and will
mark the first use of the Tel-Me system for direct electronic trading.
The group has also signed an agreement with Expotel, a UK hotel reservations
specialist, which will allow Tel-Me subscribers to make hotel reservations
'at favourable negotiated rates'.
PhoneLink's loss for the six months to September 30 compares with a Pounds
301,000 deficit in the comparable period and came on turnover up by 36 per
cent from Pounds 586,000 to Pounds 797,000.
Losses per share were 5.5p against 0.8p a year earlier. The shares closed 2p
lower at 218p.
The group's DataCare telephone directory service for database users
generated most of the first half turnover, although the Tel-Me service was
launched in May after three years' development with marketing beginning in
September.
Mr Trevor Burke, chief executive, predicted 'explosive growth' for Tel-Me,
which is based on a simple-to-use but highly sophisticated information
retrieval software package, and is aimed at the business market.
Tell-Me enables personal computer users to call up business information such
as company reports, telephone numbers, maps and news to their screen quickly
and cheaply.
PhoneLink has already signed agreements with a number of data providers
including BT, the Automobile Association and British Rail.
The group ended the period with net cash of Pounds 4.09m after capital
expenditure of Pounds 1.1m on completion of the infrastructure required for
the Tel-Me service.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

941215

