FT942-14929

FT  18 APR 94 / Equity Markets: End-users left behind by change in
derivatives - Risk & Reward


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


News of further corporate losses on derivatives in the last few days has
reawakened concerns about the way companies use these complex financial
instruments.
Last week, Procter & Gamble, the US consumer products company, took a
Dollars 100m after-tax hit on two 'geared' swaps. In Japan, Kashima, a
privately held oil company, admitted it had accumulated a massive Y150bn
loss on currency derivatives.
Only a few months ago, the German industrial giant Metallgesellschaft had to
seek help from its banks after losing around Dollars 1bn on oil derivatives
trades by a subsidiary.
In the light of the recent spate of losses, the Group of Thirty's survey of
practices among dealers end-users makes interesting reading.
The G30 survey was conducted a year ago, and formed the basis of the
Washington-based think-tank's detailed recommendations on tracking and
controlling derivatives.
The survey has just been published, and although some progress in
implementing the G30 recommendations may have been made, the findings
suggest that the speed of the market's development has in some cases left
behind less sophisticated end-users.
The end-users surveyed are mainly companies, or public sector entities, with
only a small proportion - 3 per cent - of institutional investors.
According to the survey, 29 per cent of end-users said there was little
understanding of derivatives at board level. While 53 per cent claimed 'a
sufficient understanding relative to the use of derivatives' by their
organisation, only 18 per cent felt there was a good understanding.
More encouraging was the finding that 39 per cent of end-users had at least
one board member with relevant on-the-job derivatives experience.
However, below board level, 29 per cent said there was no organised training
available to management on how derivatives can be used and should be
managed.
The survey also showed up some weakness in the support functions, where 21
per cent felt the training provided was not adequate to ensure that business
is conducted effectively.
The findings among derivatives dealers themselves also left some room for
concern: 65 per cent said that their board of directors had some knowledge,
but there was a heavy reliance on the next level of management.
However, in one important area - the level of disclosure in public financial
statements - end-users are leading the way: 58 per cent state the total
notional amount of derivatives outstanding, and 51 per cent divide it by
product type.
Among the dealer community, this falls to 36 and 40 per cent respectively.
However, since the survey was conducted, there have been notable advances
led by the US banks, but filtering down to the normally secretive German
banks - perhaps in an attempt to forestall the regulatory enforcement of
such disclosure.
Another interesting revelation from the end-users is their heavy
concentration on over-the-counter derivatives: 92 per cent said they use OTC
more than exchange-traded derivatives.
Although the survey reveals some areas for concern, perhaps the most
interesting finding was the extent to which derivatives are now viewed by
end-users as an essential tool for risk management, aside from any
position-taking or profit-earning aims.
All the end users surveyed described the value of derivatives as important,
very important or even imperative (42 per cent); not one said they were of
little value or not very important.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940418

