FT942-16008

FT  12 APR 94 / Fertile soil for economic reforms in Morocco: Prospects are
brighter for people living from the land, though the political climate
remains grey


   By FRANCIS GHILES


Since last autumn, the heavens have been kind to King Hassan. Never has so
much rain poured from the Moroccan skies in a quarter of a century.
This should ensure bumper crops and would be good for the half of Morocco
that draws a living from the land.
Two consecutive years of drought have taken their toll. Gross domestic
product contracted by 2.9 per cent in 1992, after farming output fell by 29
per cent, and was static last year.
Recession in Europe, Morocco's biggest trading partner, along with a fall in
the price of phosphates, one of the country's main exports, have also
contributed to lower growth.
But other sectors have recently been growing by about 3 per cent a year and
most estimates agree that GDP growth overall could reach 7 per cent in 1994.
As government ministers from all over the world assemble in Morocco this
week for the signing of the Uruguay Round global trade liberalisation
accords, the country has much to be proud of.
After 10 years of liberalisation moves, the dirham has been made convertible
for current account transactions and prices are essentially free of control,
the banking sector is slowly being recapitalised and privatisation is under
way.
Meanwhile, the strict fiscal austerity Morocco has followed since 1984 has
brought the budget deficit down from 12 per cent to 2 per cent of GDP.
Key changes are being enacted this year in the banking sector and the
privatisation programme launched last year speeded up.
The political climate, however, in keeping with the heavens, remains grey
and may not encourage the broad support the Moroccan government needs to see
through the reforms.
Last November the pro-labour Union of Socialist and Popular Forces (USFP)
and the nationalist Istiqlal (Independence) opposition parties alleged that
the second round of the general elections had been manipulated by the
powerful minister of the interior, Mr Driss Basri.
They declined the king's offer to join in a coalition government with other
pro-government parties.
King Hassan professed to be 'bitterly disappointed' but said he would
continue to seek a dialogue with the opposition.
Ministers in the government of technocrats headed since last November by the
veteran conservative prime minister, Mr Mohamed Karim Lamrani, who has long
been one of King Hassan's trusted advisers, are finding the new intake of
deputies far more combative and questioning of government decisions than
before.
Parliament thus provides a truer reflection of society at large - mindful of
the advantages of a strong monarchy but keen to speak its mind more freely
and win a real say in decision-making.
Mr Mohammed Sagou, finance minister, had an unusually rough ride when he
presented the budget earlier this year.
All parties are mindful of the violence racking neighbouring Algeria but so
far the king's religious authority has been enough to avert serious Islamist
opposition.
Moroccan leaders know they must speed up the pace of economic reform and
industrialisation if their country is to take full advantage of the trade
and aid partnership it is negotiating with the European Union and satisfy
the needs of most of the hundreds of thousands of new entrants to the labour
market every year.
The population has risen faster than average real GDP growth since 1989.
The World Bank notes that Morocco, along with Tunisia, has been caught
between competitors who had been more successful in broadening their
industrial base and exports, and others who enjoyed cheaper labour costs,
notably in textiles.
Reforms are being introduced into the banking sector.
Mr Mohamed Seqqat, governor of the central bank, is phasing in over this
year a set of stricter prudential lending rules.
Bankers in Casablanca say these rules are forcing them to limit their
exposure to any one group of companies to 7 per cent of their capital and
will force a reorganisation of their loan portfolios.
They will have to make higher provisions for loans they extend to companies
whose financial position is not considered sound.
The authorities are also gearing up for the launch of a market in government
securities and private bills.
The IMF and the World Bank are pressing the Moroccan authorities to lift the
monopoly which the central bank has so far enjoyed in the sale and purchase
of foreign currencies.
The development of a free foreign exchange market would give Moroccan
companies access to international capital markets.
Mr Jaloul Ayed, general manager of Citibank in Casablanca, points out that
'more and more Moroccan companies boast high technology, modern management
and marketing but are handicapped by the absence of a modern financial
system such as enjoyed by their peers in Europe and Asia.'
The privatisation programme launched last year is meanwhile being speeded
up.
Receipts from the sale of state holdings in Moroccan companies is expected
to increase 40 per cent to reach Dollars 350m this year.
By late spring, the state will have completed its disengagement from oil and
gas distribution companies nationalised in the 1970s - most have reverted to
their foreign owners.
Power generation is being opened up to the private sector for the first time
as international companies submit bids for a new thermal power station.
The government then plans to start privatising four financial institutions.
They include Banque Marocaine du Commerce Exterieur, in which the state has
a 70 per cent stake and which holds a quarter of all domestic deposits.
The others are Banque Nationale du Developpement Economique; Credit
Immobilier et Hotelier, which finances hotels and housing, and Banque
Populaire du Maroc, a co-operative bank which holds a third of all deposits
and which is expected to be sold to its regional bank shareholders.
The new minister of privatisation, Mr Abderrahmane Saadi, a former partner
of Price Waterhouse and chairman of L'Economiste, Casablanca's most lively
economic weekly, says the government decided to retain only a 5 per cent
'golden share' in each of the four institutions.
Two broad challenges face Moroccan leaders as they enter this crucial stage
of reform.
The first is to redress the huge imbalance which exists in the standards of
education, health and income between different social groups in the cities
and between the towns and the countryside.
The second is to tackle constraints younger Moroccans seeking to set up
companies face - the high cost of industrial land, what many entrepreneurs
describe as the 'piranha-like behaviour' of customs and tax officials, and
an unreliable judicial system, notably in the field of business.
Such moves are vital if Morocco is to avoid, in the longer run, the
resentment and revolt which elsewhere in the Arab world have proved fertile
ground for supporters of radical Islam.

The Financial Times


International Page 6

940412

