FT943-830

FT  27 SEP 94 / Government Bonds: Treasury gains eroded ahead of Federal
Reserve meeting


   By FRANK MCGURTY and MARTIN BRICE


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US Treasury bonds dipped yesterday afternoon in cautious trading ahead of
today's meeting of the Federal Reserve's policy-making arm.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  5/32 lower
at 96 17/32 , with the yield slipping to 7.794 per cent. At the short end,
the two-year note was unchanged at 99 17/32 , to yield 6.492 per cent.
It was a quiet session in which activity was constrained by impending
decisions on monetary policy.
Traders appeared satisfied with previous adjustments to their positions,
though no clear consensus had emerged on whether the Federal Reserve would
opt to lift interest rates at the Federal Open Markets Committee (FOMC)
meeting.
Some analysts argued that the strength of recent economic data, especially
August industrial production figures, would encourage the central bank to
tighten credit conditions immediately to keep ahead of inflation.
Others believed that the Fed would wait until the release of another month's
data before making its move.
The approach of the November congressional elections was a consideration
which would discourage an early rate increase, analysts said.
Amid such speculation, a shred of news suggesting economic weakness cast a
positive tone over the morning's activity.
The National Association of Realtors said sales of existing single-family
homes had fallen 1.8 per cent last month to an annualised rate of 3.9m.
The data suggested that the economy was not growing as fast as some traders
had feared, though the report, viewed in isolation, was not seen as being
especially convincing.
With conviction in such short supply, the slim gains eroded as trading
slowed to a crawl during the afternoon.
European government bond prices drifted yesterday as nervous markets waited
the impact on US interest rates of today's meeting of the FOMC. Trading
volume was very low and most markets were largely unchanged on the day, with
only Italy and Spain reacting to domestic events and providing a slight rise
to relieve the torpor.
German bunds slipped in the morning but recovered to close largely
unchanged, with the December bund future around 88.94 in late trading, down
0.04 on the day.
Mr Adrian Owens, European economist at Yamaichi in London, said a key factor
in the bund market this week would be the meeting on Thursday of the
Bundesbank council.
While he said he did not expect a change in interest rates this week, he
added, 'If things continue as they are, there may be one final cut in
interest rates later this year.'
Mr Kit Juckes, at SG Warburg, said: 'The US is the driving force behind
European markets at the moment.'
UK gilt prices were unmoved yesterday as Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
and Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, held their regular
meeting on monetary policy.
Few in the market expected that meeting to result in an increase in base
rates so soon after the September 12 rise of 50 basis points. Mr Ifty Islam
at Merrill Lynch said: 'They will probably agree to keep policy on hold.'
The main event in the gilt market this week after today's FOMC meeting is
likely to be the 10-year gilt auction on Wednesday. Mr Islam said he
expected to see good demand for the bonds, with the auction likely to be
covered between 1.5 and 2 times.
Yields on Italian government 10-year bonds fell by 5 basis points to 11.86
per cent yesterday on hopes of progress on pension reform, which would cut
the government deficit.
Spanish government bonds rose slightly yesterday, buoyed by the conclusion
of the budget.
Mr Simon Maggs at UBS said: 'This removes any political risk for the
foreseeable future.' The yield on the 10-year bond fell 5 basis points to
11.14 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940927

