FT944-2506

FT  16 DEC 94 / Stern warning for Balladur on public deficit


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


The Bank of France yesterday warned the Balladur government that it must
stop slipping behind its plan to reduce the public deficit, even if it means
raising taxes, to meet the Maastricht criteria for monetary union by 1996.
This sharp warning came as the newly independent French central bank set
monetary goals for 1995. It renewed its pledge to keep annual inflation
below 2 per cent and the franc stable, and to allow M3 - the broad measure
of money - to grow by 5 per cent a year over the medium term, permitting
non-inflationary growth of 2.5-3 per cent in the economy.
Reacting to the slight weakening of the franc in recent days, Mr Jean-Claude
Trichet, the Bank of France governor, said 'speculators (against the franc)
will lose, as before'. He claimed 'in my eyes there is the potential of the
franc appreciating, rather than depreciating'.
France's inflation rate, now running at an annual 1.6 per cent, had been
better than that of Germany and the Netherlands for the past three and a
half years, and, with the exception of one half year, better than that of
the US since 1987.
Exploiting his central bank's one-year-old statutory independence, Mr
Trichet urged the government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur and its
successor after next May's presidential election to 'undertake a decisive
reduction of public deficits'.
In November 1993, France joined Germany in announcing a joint convergence
programme which, in the case of France, was supposed to bring down total
public deficits to 5.1 per cent of gross domestic product this year and 4.2
per cent next year to meet the Maastricht guideline of 3 per cent in 1996.
The outturn of this year's public deficits is 5.3 per cent, and the
government's prediction for 1995 is deficit spending equivalent to 4.6 per
cent of GDP.
Mr Trichet, who negotiated Maastricht for France when he headed the
Treasury, said 'the target of 3 per cent in 1996 will have to be met'.
'It would be unimaginable for France, representing what it does in Europe,
not be within the Maastricht criteria in 1996,' he said. Monetary union in
1997, while difficult, was possible through 'will and continued effort'.
He urged that extra tax revenue from economic growth - which Insee, the
statistics agency, yesterday predicted would be at an annual pace of more
than 3 per cent in the first half of 1995 - 'be devoted to cutting the
deficit'. Non-productive public spending had to be squeezed further, too.
If these two measures were not enough, 'then extra revenues will have to be
raised', though privately the central bank acknowledges that is only likely
after a new president has installed a new government in May.
While vaunting its success in reducing the central government deficit, the
Balladur government has used recent windfall gains in tax receipts to meet
new spending commitments. Under Maastricht accounting rules, the government
cannot use privatisation receipts to plug the deficit gap because the sales
of public companies are subtracted from the state's assets.
Mr Trichet also warned unions to keep their wage demands low and urged
companies to invest and to build new industrial capacity so that, allowing
for a catch-up from the 1993 recession, the economy could grow by 3 per cent
or more without inflation increasing at the same time.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

