FT943-12781

FT  22 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Latin Americans hope to heal
divisions over banana quotas


   By DAVID SCANLAN


   SAN JOSE


Latin American banana producers, long divided over import quotas in Europe
and distressed over falling world banana prices, took a step toward burying
the hatchet in a day-long meeting here on Wednesday. Representatives from
eight banana-producing countries agreed to set up a working group and meet
again in Nicaragua on August 3 to end the dispute and try to boost banana
prices.
One of the options the group will be considering is a cut in production to
reduce supply and raise prices. The group will also try to improve
efficiency within the banana industry, officials said.
'We're optimistic,' said Costa Rican president Jose Maria Figueres, 'that we
can find a consensus position'.
Unlike the other Latin American staple export - coffee - bananas have been
floundering at 10-year price lows on the international markets. In the US,
banana prices have been hovering around USDollars 4.30 for an 18.14kg case,
the lowest in a decade. Prices were about Dollars 5.50 at this time last
year.
In Europe meanwhile prices are at 5-year lows of about Dollars 6 a case,
down from their usual Dollars 13 to Dollars 15 range. Producers blame
oversupply and dwindling demand for falling prices.
The falling prices have helped bring the Latin American banana producers
together, despite a bitter dispute over import quotas imposed by the
European Union in 1993. The EU imposed the measures as part of the Lome
preferential trade convention, under which the EU imports bananas from
former colonies of Britain and France in Africa, the Caribbean and the
Pacific. Producers in the former colonies can't compete with their Latin
competitors, who run more efficient, mechanised plantations.
Germany, Europe's largest banana consumer, has been particularly angry about
the quotas and filed a complaint earlier this year with the European Court
demanding a free market in bananas.
This year's import quota was 2.1 tonnes. It rises to 2.2m tonnes in 1995.
Four Latin countries accepted the quota system - Costa Rica, Colombia,
Venezuela and Nicaragua. The remaining countries opposed the limits,
including Guatemala, Ecuador, Mexico, Honduras and Panama.
But Ecuador's foreign trade minister Mr Diego Paredes said on Wednesday that
he was optimistic the that Latin countries could find common ground on the
quota issue in coming weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940722

