FT941-16869

FT  07 JAN 94 / A break in the siege mentality: Israel's economy is poised
to hasten the journey to the market, and reap a peace dividend


   By JULIAN OZANNE


While western Europe is looking anxiously for signs of economic recovery
this year, Israeli policymakers are arguing not about the possibility of
growth but about the level of growth the economy can prudently sustain.
The intensity of the debate has been revealed by the war of words between
the two main economic bodies - the finance ministry, committed to returning
to the 6 per cent growth rates achieved in 1991 and 1992, and the central
bank, worried about a surge in inflation. But the fact that the argument,
sparked last week by an increase in interest rates to 10.5 per cent, has
been ignited in public is a sign that Israel is pondering the problems of
economic success, not failure.
The country now has the potential to be both the main beneficiary and the
driving economic force of a Middle East which, if a comprehensive peace with
all its neighbours is finally concluded, could be radically reshaped. But to
exploit the potential of a comprehensive regional peace accord, Israel must
undertake profound structural changes to speed up liberalisation and enable
it to reach out to new markets.
Despite the difficulties that are bound to confront attempts to reduce
unemployment and push through privatisation policies, there is a mood of
optimism among Israeli businessmen and bankers. Even before the
Israeli-Palestinian peace accord was signed in September, foreign investors
had reason to be sanguine. Although GDP growth slowed last year to 3.5 per
cent, mainly as a consequence of reduced house construction, the peace
process and the gradual deregulation of the state-dominated economy suggest
further expansion over the next two years. Officials are forecasting a
return to growth rates approaching 6 per cent.
Mr Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, has spoken of a future in which
Israel might become the financial and commercial capital of the region. Gas
and oil pipelines would criss-cross the area, from Qatar across Saudi Arabia
to an export terminal at the Mediterranean port of Ashkelon, for example.
Roads and railways through Israel would connect the Middle East to Europe.
Israel would slash its 18bn shekel (Dollars 6bn) defence budget which
consumes 17 per cent of the annual budget in favour of investment in
infrastructure and social policies.
But not all Israelis scan the horizon with such optimism. The pessimists say
continuing Arab hostility towards Israel will severely limit the extent and
the timing of any peace dividends. Trade, they say, will be limited because
neighbouring Arab economies are significantly smaller than Israel's,
including, for example, Saudi Arabia. Regional infrastructure projects, even
if feasible, would take years to be developed. And defence savings are not
expected to be big in the short term because of the costs of redeployment
and updating military technology to maintain Israel's edge over old foes.
Assuming the peace negotiations make progress, the reality should fall
somewhere between these two visions. A recent report by Bank Hapoalim,
Israel's leading commercial banking group, said: 'Even the most cautious
evaluation finds that Israel will reap economic gains from the current peace
process; a more optimistic evaluation states that there will be a sharp
change in Israel's economic environment, ensuring fast expansion of its
economy for the next few years.'
The sector most likely to benefit in the immediate future is tourism. The
ministry of tourism expects arrivals to double from about 2m last year to 4m
by the year 2000. This year Israel is expected to earn more than Dollars 2bn
from tourism, representing about 25 per cent of foreign exchange receipts
from services. Any progress in achieving physically open borders would have
a rapid impact on tourism through the development of regional packages,
projects and promotion.
Second, on the trade front, Israeli economists say gains will accrue from an
eventual loosening of the Arab boycott against Israel, which has denied it
direct trade links with Arab states and also discriminated against
international companies trading with the Jewish state. Even limited Israeli
exports to Arab countries, and developments such as Israel being allowed to
import oil and gas from Arab states other than Egypt, would contribute to
economic growth by extending markets and reducing the transport costs of
hydrocarbons.
Third, an international perception of greater stability in the region would
lower Israel's risk rating as an investment centre. Israelis claim that
companies which have shied away are now interested in investing, and
possibly establishing regional headquarters in Tel Aviv.
So will Israel rise to the challenge offered by the peace process and
further reduce the traces of state domination of its economy?
There are several reasons for optimism. The hyperinflation and economic
instability of the early 1980s appear firmly in the past. A programme of
trade liberalisation, financial reforms and privatisation of state-owned
companies is being intensified, albeit at a pace that some find too slow.
Future growth should still be fuelled by the impact of US loan guarantees
worth Dollars 2bn a year over five years, which were provided to help ease
the absorption of half a million skilled Russian immigrants since 1989.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has placed responsibility for the economy in
the hands of committed reformers such as Mr Avraham Shochat, minister of
finance, Mr Jacob Frenkel, governor of the Bank of Israel, and Mr Aharon
Foegel, finance ministry director-general.
The three are determined to steer the economy firmly towards the market.
Until Mr Rabin's election in 1992, growth was stimulated substantially by
the government's policy of building Jewish settlements in occupied Arab
land. That has now changed. Most of last year's 3.5 per cent growth is
largely a result of a 7 per cent increase in private consumption and a 10
per cent increase in exports in real terms.
'This year marks a significant change in the structure of our economic
growth,' said Mr Foegel. 'This type of growth is much more sustainable in
the long run than public sector-driven growth.'
Progress is also being made on the macro-economic front. Provisionally the
budget deficit is estimated to have been reduced to 3.2 per cent of GDP last
year from 4.9 per cent in 1992; unemployment last year decreased to 10.2 per
cent from 11.2 per cent in 1992; inflation came down to 11.5 per cent from
12 per cent, still too high for the central bank; and the value of shares
sold in privatisations rose to Dollars 1.3bn last year, from Dollars 450m in
1992.
The government wants to cut the budget deficit to 3 per cent of GDP this
year, curb inflation at 8 per cent and bring unemployment down to 9.4 per
cent. It also plans to extend its capital market reforms, continue to
liberalise foreign exchange policy towards full convertibility of the
shekel, speed up privatisation and tackle the rigid labour market.
Privatisation poses the most difficult challenge because of stiff opposition
from employees. Mr Foegel, however, says the government intends this year to
sell shares in three of the biggest state-owned companies: Bezeq, the
telephone company, Israel Chemicals and El Al, the state airline. The sale
of controlling stakes in four top Israeli commercial banks should also be
completed by mid-1995.
Opposition to reform is deep-seated, however, and the chances are high of
continuing labour unrest over privatisation. The former rightwing Likud
government, while theoretically more committed than Labour to the private
sector, baulked at a full-blown confrontation with the unions and would be
quick to seize on any troubles for Mr Rabin.
Plans to curb government spending could also prompt a backlash in a country
with a 45-year history of generous welfare provision, protectionism and
fragile coalition politics. Spending cuts would entail a review of Israeli
welfare and education programmes and confrontation with the large social
lobby in the Knesset (parliament).
'We are still an excessively regulated and taxed economy,' said Mr Danny
Gillerman, president of the Israel Chamber of Commerce. 'We have to reform
Israel in line with the rest of the world, moving from a society of Marx and
Engels to a society of Marks and Spencer.'
Now that the main external obstacles that made Israel a virtual siege
economy are falling away, a real chance exists to create a society of Marks
and Spencer. Israel appears to be grasping the nettle and Labour may prove
the party that finally leads the country to peace with its neighbours. But
it has a lot to do before it can claim to have changed its own economic
philosophy, and with it the prospective living standards of its people.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940107

