FT942-15289

FT  15 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Early losses reduced in erratic
trading session - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The largely unexpected cut in German Discount rate gave little inspiration
yesterday to UK stock markets which were unnerved by weakness in US bonds
and by erratic trading in UK government securities. Shares remained on the
downside throughout the session although the FT-SE Index recovered more than
half of the 32 point fall suffered as traders hurriedly repositioned trading
books following the Bundesbank's move. Trading was also disturbed by reports
that two US helicopters had been downed in the Middle East; fuller details
of the incident did not arrive until late in the session.
Equities opened lower, unsettled by weakness overnight in the New York bond
markets. An attempted rally was helped by a trading programme from a leading
securities house but was then reversed when gilts turned sharply down,
following the US bonds trading in Europe.
The stock market paid little heed to the narrowing in the UK global trade
deficit for January. Share losses were sharply extended, despite the rate
cut from Germany, as equity dealers struggled with the extreme volatility in
the bond markets. Uncertainty over what had happened in Iraq helped depress
the market.
However, once the dust had settled died down, strategists suggested that
little had changed in the market equation. 'The Bundesbank is continuing to
reduce rates in an orderly fashion,' said one specialist. 'But the renewed
worries about US Federal bonds indicates that talk of Europe decoupling from
the US bond market may have been premature.' However, published minutes of
the regular meetings of the UK chancellor of the exchequer and the governor
of the Bank of England served to steady hopes for a cut in UK base rates in
the not too distant future.
The second attempt at recovery was checked at first when Wall Street opened
13 Dow points off but resumed when the New York market moved up to show a 3
point gain on the Dow in London trading hours.
At the close, the FT-SE 100 Index was a net 14.1 down at 3,131.7. Dealers
sounded subdued and warned that volatility in bonds was causing pressures
for many trading houses as well as restraining the equity market.
Stock index futures played an important role in driving the underlying
market. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, lacking involvement with the Footsie
future, closed 9.1 off at 3,792.1.
At least one other trading programme was identified in the second half of
the session, and the day's Seaq total of 629.7m shares compared favourably
with Wednesday's 885.7m, which was swollen by substantial deals in several
individual stocks.
Retail, or customer, business in equities was worth Pounds 1.52bn on
Wednesday but this total was inflated by the move through the market of
Transamerica International's 21 per cent stake in Sedgwick, Britain's
largest insurance broker. Although retail business in shares has been good
recently, it has been focused on share deals and placings, and pickings have
been slim for houses not involved.
Futures markets looked optimistic at the close but traders warned that
London would watch the US bond markets carefully overnight and that
attention would be focused on the US economic statistics on industrial
output and capacity utilisation due to be announced today.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

940415

