FT944-2985

FT  15 DEC 94 / Book Review: Breaking up is hard to do


   By BERNARD SIMON


   BREAKUP


The Coming End of Canada and the Stakes for America
By Lansing Lamont
WW Norton and Co, Pounds 19.95/Dollars 29.99, 267 pages
So you thought that Canada was a stable, peaceful place where civility and
compromise were the order of the day? Think again, advises Mr Lansing
Lamont.
In this provocative book, Mr Lamont raises the spectre of bloody riots on
the streets of Montreal, disaffected aboriginals blowing up one of North
America's biggest hydro-electric projects, and Quebec gunboats intercepting
US tankers on the St Lawrence River - all within the next seven or eight
years.
The unrest would be the precursor to the ineluctable disintegration of the
world's second biggest country. Much of what is now English-speaking Canada
would end up as part of the US, leaving a newly-independent Quebec as a
lonely - and increasingly impoverished - outpost of French language and
culture.
Mr Lamont, a former correspondent for Time magazine and a frequent visitor
to Canada, suggests that foreigners have for too long looked at Canada from
the wrong angle.
Instead of puzzling over why such a nation apparently blessed with such rich
natural and human resources should want to tear itself apart, the real
question is how Canada has managed to stay in one piece for 127 years.
Mr Lamont says the chasm between Canada's French and English is as deep as
between Ireland's Catholics and Protestants. But he identifies many other
tensions that threaten to tear apart the national fabric.
The 5m inhabitants of the prairie provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and
Manitoba 'carry on their shoulders a chip the size of Labrador. They have
all the goodies, but somehow the benefits always seem to land in the laps of
rapacious easterners.'
The 10 provinces are forever trying to wrest powers from the federal
government in Ottawa. Aboriginal communities have become increasingly
militant.
The pervasive influence of US television is weakening Canada's fragile
indigenous culture. Meanwhile, immigrant groups are encouraged by a policy
of 'multi-culturalism' to make the preservation of their own identities a
higher priority than a united country.
Economic forces are also melting the glue that has held Canada together. The
1989 free trade agreement with the US has focused Canadian business on
markets and competitors to the south - a trend exacerbated by internal trade
barriers between the provinces.
Towering debt and budget deficits channel a growing proportion of government
revenues to foreign creditors, limiting the ability of Ottawa and the
provinces to meet their own citizens' demands.
'At its birth as a British dominion in 1867,' Mr Lamont concludes, 'Canada's
existence was predicated on its fear of annexation by the United States; its
pride and security in belonging to the mightiest empire since Rome's; and
the need for a protected economy to ward off its omnipotent southern
neighbour. As none of these reasons apply any longer, and having no new
ideological underpinnings to help validate its national purpose, Canada is
becoming increasingly vulnerable to fissure.'
In the second section of Breakup, Mr Lamont makes 'an informed surmise of
what could happen in the worst circumstances' as the fissures widen. He
postulates a last-ditch National Commission to Rebuild Canada in 1996, the
failure of which leads to Quebec's stormy unilateral declaration of
independence four years later. The four Atlantic provinces, cut off from the
rest of Canada by the secession, would have little choice but to seek a
future with the US. The much richer western provinces would also tighten
their already-close links with the US north west.
Mr Lamont's disquieting scenario may well come to pass. The success of
regional parties from Quebec and western Canada in last year's general
election is a reminder that the centre is an unrewarding place to be in
politics when grievances fill the air.
Quebeckers elected a separatist government in September. Earlier this month,
it unveiled plans to draw up a new constitution early in the New Year as a
prelude to an independence referendum. The province's aboriginal communities
have vowed to resist the drive towards sovereignty. Many western Canadians
wish Quebec good riddance. Can it be long before even hotter heads come to
the fore?
Don't write Canada off just yet. Mr Lamont researched much of his book at a
time when, even by recent Canadian standards, the national mood was
unusually grumpy.
The recession was at its deepest. Voters had rejected the Charlottetown
Accord, an effort by politicians to write a constitution that would
accommodate the demands of Quebec as well as, in Mr Lamont's words, every
other special interest group except left-handed dentists.
Although almost every page of Mr Lamont's book contains a good reason for
Canada to break up, it also gives some cause for hope.
He notes, for instance, that Quebeckers are 'still essentially a cautious
people used to walking on ice in winter. That . . . suggests that they will
not make the final leap to independence.' Recent opinion polls indicate that
only about 40 per cent of Quebeckers support independence.
The economy is enjoying a robust recovery and the mood in the country at
large has mellowed appreciably since Mr Jean Chretien's Liberals took office
just over a year ago.
Moreover, for all their complaints, most Canadians would rather see their
country survive than be shattered apart or absorbed by their southern
neighbour. It is still possible that Canada will muddle through in a
typically Canadian way - not united but also not irrevocably split.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

941215

