FT942-12694

FT  28 APR 94 / IBM to sell its crown jewels


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


International Business Machines is to sell its 'crown jewels', the
microprocessor chips that are at the core of its future mainframe and
parallel computer products, to Hitachi of Japan, its long and bitter rival
in the mainframe computer market.
The move is an extraordinary alliance of former enemies. For years, IBM
feuded with Hitachi and other Japanese computer makers over allegations of
stolen trade secrets. Instead of fighting to protect its technology, IBM is
now willing to sell it, even to one of its largest competitors.
Mr John Thompson, IBM senior vice president, explained the move saying:
'There is, quite simply, a very strong business case for us to do this.
'We will make more money by licensing our technology, than we would by not
doing so.' The benefits to IBM include better use of its semiconductor
manufacturing capacity, and the potential to expand the market for large
scale systems, he said.
The agreement also means IBM has effectively neutralised the threat of
competition from Hitachi. 'Each Hitachi sale will mean revenue and profit
for IBM,' said Mr Thompson. 'IBM will gain access to Hitachi's customer
base, especially in Japan.'
IBM will supply Hitachi with future versions of its System 390
microprocessors. These chips represent the core technology of a new
generation of IBM mainframe computers that will not require the elaborate
cooling systems of today's mainframe computers.
The chips will be modified to include Hitachi's specifications, IBM said,
and will be used in computers being developed by Hitachi for introduction in
1996.
IBM will also supply Hitachi with its latest Powerparallel computers, to be
resold by the Japanese company. These computers were introduced only a few
weeks ago and represent a new generation of large scale computers which IBM
believes will play a central role in computing in the next decade.
Hitachi plans to develop its own products for this sector of the market,
based on IBM's PowerPC microprocessors.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940428

