FT941-4161

FT  12 MAR 94 / Crime can make it nasty in Nice: Efforts by police and
politicians to combat Mafia infiltration along the south coast of France


   By DAVID BUCHAN


One of the more ominous French words for organised crime is la pieuvre - the
octopus - and one of the more ominous fears in southern France is that its
tentacles are spreading.
Last month's gangland-style assassination of Mrs Yann Piat in the sunny
resort of Hyeres is the incident that has most shocked the French - because
she was a woman, because she was a UDF deputy in the National Assembly,
because she had the courage to campaign openly against corruption and
because she left behind a letter pointing the finger of suspicion at several
fellow-politicians if anything should befall her.
Mr Charles Pasqua, the interior minister, who has promised to get to the
bottom of the affair, sent a top Paris policeman and magistrate down to
Hyeres to head a massive inquiry. Two local men have been detained, but
dozens of others have been questioned, including some of those in Mrs Piat's
letter, such as Mr Maurice Arreckx, a senator and president of the Var
department's conseil general.
It is this possibility of home-grown political involvement in the Piat
killing that probably most shocks the French. But there is a wider
international context to her death, extending right along France's southern
seaboard. In Perpignan in the west, the local procureur (prosecutor) said
recently: 'I would dearly like to put my nose into the activities of a bank
and certain businesses based in a newly independent state bordering the
eastern Pyrenees', by which he meant Andorra. To the east, hard by the
Italian border, the city of Menton now routinely insists that Italians
wanting to buy a business or develop real estate produce a certificate from
the Italian authorities showing they are clean of the Mafia.
This week, top French and Italian investigators met to exchange information
on fighting organised crime. They gathered in Aix-en-Provence, whose
procureur general, Mr Claude Salavagione, warned publicly in January that
'Mafioso penetration is not just in drugs, but in all sectors'. This was
indeed the theme of a report last year by a National Assembly committee on
which Mrs Piat sat.
The report urged that France should act before the Mafia took deep root on
its mainland, as it has done in Corsica, where there have been 11
assassinations this year. But it spoke of 'worrying signs of a growing Mafia
presence in France', citing a few instances of its involvement in casinos in
the south-east, golf clubs in the Var and the Alpes of Haut Provence, and
more generally in real estate.
Perhaps its most disquieting revelation concerned the poor response of banks
in France's south-east to a 1992 decree requiring them to report suspicions
about drug-money passing through their vaults to a body within the finance
ministry in Paris, called Tracfin. 'Since February 1992, Tracfin has
received about 40 declarations of suspicions a month, which is few compared
with the thousand which Scotland Yard processes monthly,' the report said,
adding that it was astonished that 'the share of declarations of suspicions
coming from banks in the south-east was virtually nil'. Part of this is
because of the lack of any formal co-operation from Monaco.
Only one French city, however, pins its problems solely on the Italian
Mafia. This is Menton, where the mayor, Mr Jean-Claude Guibal, had the
effrontery in 1989 to refuse to let an Italian company manage the municipal
casino. 'We lived through hell,' says an aide to Mr Guibal. 'Our children
were threatened, we found crushed birds on our doorsteps, and a wheel came
unstuck when the mayor was driving his car.' After a tip-off from Paris in
1990 that the Mafia might try to take by force what it could not by
intimidation, the mayor ordered the casino surrounded by municipal garbage
trucks. Now the casino has a French manager and the city is calm, but the
mayor's office say it faces constant pressure from Mafia attempts to buy and
develop local real estate.
Further west along the Cote d'Azur, there are countervailing fiefdoms
keeping direct Mafia influence at bay. This was certainly true of Nice while
the Medecin family reigned in its hotel de ville. This long reign came to an
end in 1990 when Mr Jacques Medecin fled to Uruguay, where he is now
appealing against an extradition order to face tax and corruption charges
back home. But though a prison, a police station and a tax office were
mysteriously bombed in January 1993, the city remains relatively free of the
Mafia.
Certainly, Mr Jacques Peyrat believes so. He has no reason to do the Nice
political establishment any favours. He is running as the Front National
candidate in tomorrow's final round of voting in a Nice parliamentary
by-election, against the Gaullist mayor, Mr Jean-Paul Barety. Among the
charges levelled against the FN by its opponents, corruption does not
figure; by almost never gaining power, the FN (to which Mrs Piat once
belonged) has never sullied its hands in this way.
'I am certainly calling for a clean sweep in Nice,' Mr Peyrat says, noting
allegations by local Socialist councillors of impropriety by the mayor's
running mate, Mr Bruno Miraglia, in land dealings. Mr Miraglia denies any
wrongdoing. 'But this has nothing to do with the Mafia, who might have some
residences in Nice but have never tried to grab power here,' adds Mr Peyrat.
However, he sees real estate temptations for all concerned as Nice expands.
Growth has certainly brought graft to the Var department, now dubbed the
'Var West'. Once a rural backwater between Nice and Marseille, tourism has
given the department the second-fastest population increase in France.
Hyeres is much changed from the quiet resort described in Simenon's 1952
book Mon Ami, Maigret; it has had three murders and half a dozen bombings in
the past two years.
Mrs Piat had apparently intended to make opposition on environmental grounds
to full-scale development of the town's Giens peninsula a feature of her
campaign for the mairie next year. But the Var chamber of commerce, based in
Toulon, says her assassination is 'catastrophic' for the image of the
region, to which it has been trying to attract new industry to offset
shipbuilding's decline.
One theory is that Mrs Piat may have been killed in revenge for her alleged
involvement, perhaps with rival Marseille gangsters, in the assassination a
year ago in Italy of Mr Jean-Louis Fargette, a Toulon underworld figure.
Many Var politicians turned out for Mr Fargette's funeral, at which the
priest said: 'He forgot certain moral values, but I know he would never
touch drugs or prostitution out of respect for his mother.' Mr Fargette
figured in Mrs Piat's 1992 letter, as did Mr Arreckx and his departmental
vice-president, Mr Joseph Sercia, both of whom have been interrogated by
police.
UDF, the centre-right federation, is strong along the south coast. Mr
Arreckx and Mr Sercia belong to it - as does Mr Francois Leotard, the
defence minister, who has had to weather allegations of real estate
impropriety in his mayoralty of Frejus - and both men see in their police
interrogation a bid by Mr Pasqua's RPR Gaullists to discredit its coalition
partner and even the notion of decentralisation.
Certainly, the past 10 years of decentralisation have placed temptation in
the way of French regional and city bosses. It has boosted their budgets
(the Var's rose by 25 per cent over 1990-93) and powers to award contracts.
But reversing this is probably politically impossible and democratically
undesirable. Mr Francois d'Aubert, a UDF deputy and chief author of the 1993
Mafia report, believes regions or cities with political leaders who are
involved in corruption should be put under temporary direct rule from Paris.
Such an idea goes too far, says an aide of Mayor Guibal. But he suggests
that the interior ministry should provide cities like Menton with speedier
intelligence on doubtful applicants for city building permits.
Yet he concedes there are some requests that Paris cannot meet. 'We recently
received an application from an Italian company for a construction licence,
but the ministry has told us that the company has 300 partners and they
cannot possibly check all of these for Mafioso connections.
'Of course, the company will give us an anti-Mafia certificate, but that may
not prove much. So we'll just play for time, insist that their proposed
doors are 50cm too narrow or too wide, and eventually they will abandon the
project.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940312

