FT942-15744

FT  14 APR 94 / Californian senator defeats gun lobby


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


The US gun lobby has suffered a political setback with the failure of its
determined attempt to unseat a veteran Californian state senator.
Mr David Roberti had been the target of the National Rifle Association
because he sponsored a 1989 law to ban the sale of assault rifles in the
state. But, on Tuesday, he easily won a recall election, the first against
any Californian legislator in 80 years. The recall failed by 59:41 per cent.
The NRA only endorsed the campaign against Mr Roberti last month, but then
moved into high gear. He received particularly staunch support from Mrs
Sarah Brady. The new federal law on gun control - the Brady law - is named
after her husband, Mr James Brady, who was shot and seriously wounded during
an assasination attempt on President Ronald Reagan, whose press secretary he
then was.
Even so, Mr Roberti will have to leave the Californian senate this year
under a new state law to limit the number of terms any elected
representative may serve.
He is running for state treasurer, however, and will have been lifted in
that contest by the Tuesday result.
In Texas on Tuesday, Mr Richard Fisher, a wealthy businessman and former
associate of Mr Ross Perot, the Texan billionaire who ran for the US
presidency in 1992, beat Mr Jim Mattox, former state attorney-general, in a
Democratic party primary election. It was to choose a candidate to run for
the US senate against the Republican incumbent, Mrs Kay Bailey Hutchison, in
November.
Mr Fisher's campaign, like that of Mr Perot, was largely self-financed. But
he will need more than deep pockets to beat Senator Hutchison, now
considered virtually unbeatable after corruption charges against her were
dropped this year.
Last year, she easily won the special election to fill the Senate seat
vacated by Mr Lloyd Bentsen when he became Treasury secretary.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940414

