FT941-17153

FT  06 JAN 94 / Power bidding system drives pool prices down


   By MICHAEL SMITH


Prices in the electricity trading pool in England and Wales fell yesterday
by about Pounds 250,000, or 1 per cent of the total, as a mechanism aimed at
reducing power bills began to take effect.
The fall will be welcomed by the pool executive and electricity companies
which introduced the system, known as demand-side bidding, in spite of
protests from large energy users, including Imperial Chemical Industries,
which claimed the system was unnecessarily complicated and of limited value
to the large companies whose participation was necessary to make it work.
Professor Stephen Littlechild, electricity industry regulator, last month
rejected their appeal for the scheme to be replaced by one which gave
greater incentive to take part.
The pool's system, intended as a three-month experiment, was introduced on
Christmas eve with five companies taking part.
The demand-side bidders agree to cut their intake of electricity if the
price rises above a certain level, which they specify.
The National Grid treats demand-side participants as if they were generators
when it works out pool prices for the day ahead. Demand-side bidders have an
effect if their bid price is the 'most marginal' on the system, that is when
their bid is the most expensive of the generating units or the equivalent
needed to keep the system working.
Yesterday demand-side bidding made an impact in two of the 48 half-hour
periods for which pool prices are determined daily, the pool said.
The Pounds 250,000 saving was shared pro rata among all consumers.
Some large energy users had argued against the system because they thought
demand-side participants should have been given a larger share of the
benefit than electricity users that did not bid.
The system which the pool has introduced provides participants with an
availability payment if the bid they make does not affect prices. The pool
said the payment for an average company bidding in each of the 48 half-hours
yesterday would have been about Pounds 500.
The participating companies are Allied Steel & Wire and Alphasteel, both
based in south Wales, Cleveland Potash, Bridgewater Paper, in the Wirrall,
and Hays Chemical Distribution, in Cheshire.
The pool said yesterday that ICI and Sheerness Steel had applied to become
demand-side bidders. Present arrangements allow up to 10 companies to take
part in the experiment, although the pool hopes to expand this number.
The price changes will have an immediate effect on large companies which buy
their electricity directly from the pool. Household consumers will see no
change in their bills as their supplies are covered by long-term contracts
protected by hedging arrangements.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940106

