FT942-14819

FT  19 APR 94 / Investors vent anger over late tax concession


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR, Personal Finance Editor


Private investors and private client investment managers yesterday expressed
anger over the timing of last week's government concession on capital gains
tax, which could benefit higher-rate taxpayers by up to Pounds 4,000.
The proposal - to allow taxpayers to continue temporarily to take account of
inflation when calculating losses for capital gains tax purposes - is
expected to be debated in today's Commons report stage debate on the Finance
Bill.
Investors and investment managers welcomed the concession, which followed
pressure from Conservative backbenchers and angry private investors. But
they said they might have acted differently had they known of the
government's proposal before the end of the tax year.
The announcement came on Friday - nearly two weeks after the end of the
1993-94 tax year on April 5. The relief is applicable to the 1993-94 tax
year as well as to the current 1994-95 year.
'It is a disgrace that they couldn't make their minds up a fortnight ago,'
said Mr Foster Swetenham, investment manager at Williams de Broe, which
manages around 1,100 portfolios totalling Pounds 300m-Pounds 350m.
Some investors may have sold shares unnecessarily in order to keep net
1993-94 capital gains down to the Pounds 5,800 exemption limit. In his
November Budget, the chancellor said indexation could not be used to
increase capital losses or to turn nominal profits into losses.
The delay in the decision has also created for managers what Mr David
Rosier, chairman of Mercury Asset Management, described as an administrative
'nightmare'.
The firm, which handles about Pounds 2bn of UK private client money, was
about to send its 2,000 clients details of their investment portfolios and
capital gains tax liabilities as at April 5. It must now either reprogramme
its computer or go through all 2,000 accounts manually to check what
difference the transitional relief may have made.
The Treasury said the subject had been debated in committee on March 15, and
the timetable may have been too tight for the announcement to be made in
time for investors to respond before the tax year ended.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940419

