FT942-14366

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (17): Asia-Pacific is the big growth
area - Golden opportunities in the region


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Earlier this spring, posters inviting would-be Japanese travellers to the
bright blue beaches of Bali went up to enliven often dreary public sites in
Tokyo's concrete jungle.
The colourful posters, announcing a new direct route from the Japanese
capital to Bali, in Indonesia, are seductive. They are also symbolic of the
surging interest in Asia-Pacific travel that is being fuelled by the
spectacular economic success the region has enjoyed in recent years.
In all the gloom that has surrounded the world's aviation industry, the
Asia-Pacific region has remained a shining exception. The region is expected
to continue outpacing other parts of the world in growth in air travel and
the trend has encouraged airlines, both from within and without the region,
to boost their operations and take advantage of the golden opportunity.
However, much of the region's promise depends on its ability to solve
infrastructure and capacity constraints which have become an increasing
problem for travellers in the region.
In the past few years, the surge of business activity in Asia, from the
south-east Asian countries of Thailand and Singapore to Korea and Taiwan on
the east, has encouraged an enormous increase in the number of people moving
not just in and out of the region, but within it as well.
While the rest of the international market for leisure and business travel
grew just 5 per cent last year, the market in the Asia-Pacific region rose a
firm 15 per cent, according to the World Tourism Organisation.
'Countries such as Singapore, Taiwan and Korea did not see air travel levels
fall even while Japan did during the recession,' says Mr Yoshio Koteda,
general manager of international relations at the Japan Travel Bureau.
As a result, the proportion of people who left the country in 1992 to the
overall population was as high as 35 per cent for Hong Kong and 25 per cent
for Korea, compared with just 9.5 per cent for Japan, according to
statistics by the Japan National Tourist Organisation.
The growth in air travel in Asia has been so strong that in fiscal 1992
Qantas, the Australian airline, for the first time earned more revenues in
Asia than in its home market.
But the boom in regional air travel has not offered as effective a boost to
profits for all airlines with a stake in the pie. While most are benefiting
from the expansion of business in the region, the explosion of the market
has brought uneven blessings to the region's airliners.
Qantas, for example, is one of the more enterprising airlines which have
aggressively taken advantage of growth markets in the region.
The airline, which had just four flights a week out of Japan in 1985, has
aggressively expanded its routes and now has 32 flights out of the country,
which has become its largest source of revenue outside its home market.
Qantas has also actively promoted flights from regional Japanese
destinations, such as Fukuoka on the southern island of Kyushu and Sapporo
in the north, to regional sites in Australia. Last month it opened a route
from Tokyo to Darwin, in the Northern Territory, and plans to add five more
flights a week when the new Kansai International Airport opens in September.
For their part, south-east Asian carriers are putting in considerable effort
into cultivating regional traffic as well, and JTB's Mr Koteda says that
airlines such as Singapore Airlines and Thai International are very popular
among Japanese travellers.
Meanwhile, in the trans-Pacific market between the US and Japan, US airlines
have managed to build up a formidable presence on the strength of their
lower costs. Aggressive pricing has enabled them to take about 70 per cent
of the market even as passenger growth has been seen mainly from Japan
rather than the US.
The rising fortune of Asia-Pacific and US carriers in the region has largely
been at the expense of the Japanese airlines, which have suffered under a
high-cost structure that has been aggravated by the yen's recent
appreciation.
As they face rising competition from neighbouring airlines, the Japanese
carriers are also worried that the country's aviation accord with the US
gives low-cost US carriers unfair advantages that will limit their own
chances of capitalising on the spectacular growth of the Asia-Pacific
market.
They are angered by US moves to take advantage of their beyond rights to fly
from the US via Tokyo to a third destination in the increasingly popular
Asia-Pacific region. Northwest Airlines, for example, was accused by both
the Japanese and Australians of taking business that was rightfully theirs
when it flew a flight from New York to Sydney, through Osaka, which mostly
carried Japanese travellers between Osaka and Sydney.
Furthermore, there is rising concern that the high costs of landing at
Kansai International, a new international airport in western Japan, will
discourage airlines from taking up their landing rights there, and shift
business to other airports, such as a new one being built in Korea.
'For a lot of (Japanese) people, in many ways it could be more convenient to
fly via Kimpo airport in Korea, rather than through Kansai or Narita even,'
Mr Koteda points out.
Such worries are justified. The strength of the Asia-Pacific market is
expected to continue for the foreseeable future, with the region likely to
show stronger growth than other markets. Estimates range from 8 to 10 per
cent growth to the year 2000 and Qantas expects the Asian market to account
for 51 per cent of all international traffic by the year 2010 compared with
31 per cent in 1990.
But the ability of countries within the region to draw a significant part of
that traffic through their doors will depend to a considerable extent on
increasing capacity. There has been a rush to do so with new airport
facilities planned not only in Japan but in Thailand, Taiwan, Korea and
Singapore as well.
While growth in the Asia-Pacific market is sure to come, and the Japanese
will certainly enjoy their share of that growth, national aviation policy
and the efforts of the carriers over the next few years will be crucial in
determining where much of that growth is finally channelled.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940420

