FT941-3481

FT  16 MAR 94 / Management: The power to choose - How companies can now
control electricity costs


   By MICHAEL SMITH


Keith Smith, buyer of utilities at the McDonald's fast food chain, is
beaming at a chart of one restaurant's electricity consumption. He likes the
power it gives the company's restaurant managers.
'Look at that,' he says. 'They've done all the right things there. The
consumption falls when it should; the store workers have switched off the
cookers and lights when they do not need them. It's a perfect example to
show to other stores.'
The chart comes courtesy of Eastern Electricity which, from next month, is
to supply power and associated services, including diagrams showing past
consumption, to 500 McDonald's stores in England and Wales.
Eastern's willingness to supply power and other facilities as part of the
service, yet still undercut offers from rival power companies, was one
reason why it won the business.
In the past few months throughout Britain big companies like McDonald's have
been evaluating for the first time a range of offers for power supplies as
they and the suppliers gear up for the next phase in the liberalisation of
the market.
From April 1 any electricity consumer using more than 100 kilowatt hours at
the peak of its demand will be able to buy its supplies from any registered
supplier including the 14 mainland UK distributors and the two England and
Wales generators. Until now they have had to buy power from their local
distributor.
The previous limit of 1 megawatt, 10 times the new threshold, encompassed
only about 5,000 consumers. From April about 50,000, including businesses,
schools, hospitals and leisure centres, will be able to shop around and many
are taking advantage.
More than 7,000 in the 100kW to 1MW market, a fifth of those eligible, have
already made arrangements to take their supplies from a company other than
their regional electricity supplier. The industry expects the figure to
reach about 15,000 within the next year.
Price cuts have reached 20 per cent for a handful but the majority which
have switched are estimated to be making annual savings on their electricity
bills of between 4 and 10 per cent. Many of those which have stayed with
their regional distributor have also gained financially.
But the benefits of the liberalised market are not just in the price.
Companies, or at any rate the large ones, are finding they are in strong
position to demand a tailor-made service which can improve their energy
management.
As a large company, with all the advantages which that brings for bulk
buying, McDonald's was better placed than most prospective buyers - yet it
received offers for the whole country from just four suppliers of the 14
approached.
Smith was impressed by only one company other than Eastern. 'It was apparent
that several suppliers were poorly prepared. There was not the expertise to
deal with the market. One company, for example, had a very good salesman but
poor back-up.
'Several of the offers we received had hidden costs,' says Smith. Some were
able to offer charts showing consumption in each store by the half hour but
they wanted to charge extra, on top of the prices they had quoted, and that
was already more than Eastern's quote.
Smith says McDonald's has become much more conscious of energy costs in the
past two years and now sees the half-hourly breakdown of consumption as an
essential management tool. 'It gives the manager of a store a picture of
what has been happening in the store even at times when he is not there.'
McDonald's estimates that it will save Pounds 1.4m on its energy bill each
year as a result of the deal with Eastern, which is worth about Pounds 18m.
A separate deal in Scotland for the company's 20 stores there is leading to
savings of more than 30 per cent.
Another company taking advantage of the newly competitive UK electricity
market is Stakis, the hotels and casinos group. Stakis will make significant
savings on its electricity bill after a deal with Scottish Hydro-Electric
involving the 25 of its 52 hotels and six casinos which are big enough to be
able to shop around for supplies. It expects its Pounds 2.3m-a-year
electricity bill for the 31 units in the Hydro deal to fall by about Pounds
250,000. Like McDonald's, Stakis was not spoiled for choice. Bill Gunn, in
charge of utilities purchasing for the group, says only the two Scottish
power distribution companies were prepared to make an offer covering hotels
throughout the UK.
Stakis's main requirement was simplicity. 'Electricity bills seem to us to
be far too complicated with different charges for maximum demand, for supply
and for different times of the day. We wanted a uniform price for each unit
of electricity which is the same for all hotels and for that price to
include everything.
'We have limited resources and a single price makes billing far easier to
double check. It is also useful for comparison purposes. If one hotel is
using far more units than another with similar occupancy rates we will know
there is something wrong. Perhaps they leave everything on in the kitchen
overnight.'
Both Hydro-Electric and Scottish Power were able to meet Stakis's request
for uniform prices but Hydro's tender was lower.
Not all companies, however, have found it easy to shop around. At Fowler &
Holden, John Hardy, managing director, badgered electricity suppliers for
several months before he received an offer he considered may be acceptable.
'At first I could not get suppliers to compete,' he says. 'They seemed only
interested in making decent offers to large companies. But large companies
are my competitors and if they are getting big cuts in their electricity
bills I want them too.'
The first six offers made to Fowler would have resulted in its power bill
remaining at about Pounds 26,000 a year. It was only this week when one
company, Powerline, the Midlands Electricity subsidiary, revised an earlier
proposed deal to produce annual savings of about Pounds 2,000.
The lateness of the proposed offer means Fowler will be unable to change
supplier until after April 1, since the electricity authorities need 20
working days' notice. Hardy says the delay has been worthwhile. 'Unless we
had been prepared to wait, the introduction of competition would have meant
virtually nothing to us.'

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940316

