FT941-13055

FT  27 JAN 94 / Court revolutions: A possible way of increasing the
independence of the Bank of England


   By PETER MARSH


As MPs debate independence for the Bank of England tomorrow, attention is
turning to the role of the Bank's court, or governing body. Though the
government is unlikely in the near future to give the Bank autonomy over
interest rates, the question of how the court might develop over the longer
term is exercising policymakers.
Mainly comprising captains of industry, plus six senior Bank officials, the
18-strong body meets every Thursday in the Bank's 18th-century 'court room'
to discuss general economic trends, the business outlook for the City and
internal staff matters such as training. No formal decisions are taken, but
the meetings channel outside views to the Bank officials, led by governor Mr
Eddie George.
Some believe that a more formal role for the court may be a necessary step
if the government is ever to move towards giving the Bank control over
interest rates.
While the bill before MPs tomorrow - introduced by Tory backbencher Mr
Nicholas Budgen - has little chance of becoming law, the debate will be
another boost for those who argue that removing politicians from monetary
decisions would lead to more stable economic policies.
The bill does not mention the court; Mr Budgen wants to concentrate on the
main political and economic issues. But discussion about greater autonomy
for the Bank is intrinsically linked to the future of the court, which has
met virtually every week during the Bank's 300-year history.
Gatherings of the court are highly confidential, with minutes released in
full only a century later - a lengthy delay even by British standards of
official secrecy. Each court member receives Pounds 500 a year plus a weekly
lunch, invariably consisting of smoked salmon and roast lamb. Members
include Sir David Lees, chairman of engineering group GKN, Sir Christopher
Hogg, chairman of Reuters, Sir Colin Southgate, chairman of Thorn EMI, and
Sir 'Chips' Keswick, chairman of Hambros Bank.
One person with firm views about what the court should do is Sir Peter
Middleton, a former Treasury permanent secretary who is chairman of the
Barclays de Zoete Wedd investment group. In October, he told MPs he was in
favour of the court taking on people with a greater commitment than the
current court to keeping prices down.
There are two broad ways the court could evolve. It could act as 'joint
arbiter', sharing decision-making with the governor, or as 'cheerleader',
leaving most judgments to him but helping the Bank sell its message and
shielding the governor from policy attacks by outsiders.
The cheerleading approach would be the less ambitious option, but the court
would still play a more public role than now. One court member says it is
already taking a more pragmatic line: 'We are getting ready to stand up and
be counted behind the governor, should our support be needed.'
But the 'joint arbiter' model appears to be gaining the support of more of
those who back Bank independence, partly because sharing out decision-making
would make policy judgments more transparent. Mr John Watts, chairman of the
Commons treasury and civil service committee, says: 'Swapping the judgment
of the chancellor of the exchequer for that of the governor, no matter how
good he is, is not an attractive option.'
One idea for ensuring accountability would be for court members in any new,
independent Bank to testify every few months to a parliamentary committee.
Others make the point that bringing more people into the arguments over
interest rates would mean more appropriate decisions being reached in the
complex business of setting monetary policy.
Such an approach would put the Bank on a similar footing to the US Federal
Reserve, the German Bundesbank and the newly independent Bank of France -
which all share decision-making between full-time officials and selected
outsiders.
Sir John Banham, a former director-general of the Confederation of British
Industry and chairman of the Local Government Commission, says the governing
body of an independent Bank should be analogous to the corporate boards of
directors, which have responsibility for overseeing long-term strategy.
As to who Britain might pick for a revitalised court, the newly independent
Bank of France might show the way. This month it selected the nine-strong
body that will set monetary policy. It comprises three full-time Bank
officials, two industrialists, a former government minister, a journalist, a
financier and an economist. Mr Warwick Lightfoot, a former Treasury adviser,
even suggests that, in the cause of attracting 'serious players', the court
could be opened to foreigners such as Mr Helmut Schlesinger and Mr Paul
Volcker, former heads of the Bundesbank and Federal Reserve respectively.
Such an approach might go some way to assuaging the fears of those sceptical
about moving towards Bank independence. It would offer a means of removing
political interference while ensuring the process of decision-making was
transparent, spread over a relatively large group of people and appropriate
to the needs of the UK economy.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940127

