FT943-12855

FT  22 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Slender thread in Strasbourg


Mr Jacques Santer, narrowly confirmed yesterday as the next president of the
Brussels Commission, has been trying to muster support from a wide variety
of quarters. Last week he declared his attachment to decentralised
decision-making and EU enlargement. This week, speaking to the European
parliament before yesterday's vote, he emphasised his backing for economic
and monetary union and EU social policy.
Since he was nobody's first choice, it is not surprising that Mr Santer's
espousal of well-meaning Euro-orthodoxies failed to fire parliament's
full-hearted enthusiasm. After the mismanagement of the succession to Mr
Jacques Delors, governments should now be in no doubt of the flaws in the
method of selecting the person who represents Europe within the continent
and on a wider stage. When Mr Santer's successor is chosen, presumably in
1999, it must be through an open rather than a closed elective process.
By upholding Mr Santer's appointment, yesterday's vote has none the less
rescued European leaders' credibility. This will have been a particular
relief to Chancellor Helmut Kohl. The chief champion both of Mr Santer and
of giving the parliament more influence, Mr Kohl could have been badly
damaged had the cup used to anoint Strasbourg with power been flung back in
his face.
Yet the narrow margin also emphasises the slender thread on which the EU's
constitutional arrangements are hung. Having won 'co-decision' rights with
the Council of Ministers, the parliament has much more say over European
legislation. It is still only at the beginning of learning how to deploy
this extra clout. In view of increased parliamentary fragmentation after
last month's elections, its difficulties in acting predictably and
cohesively should not be underestimated.
The assembly has still a long way to go in making itself less remote from
and more accountable to European electorates. These aims will not be served
if it gives further evidence of the sort of debatable judgment already
displayed in its veto on Tuesday of telecommunications liberalisation. More
clashes with governments may be in store, for instance in the budgetary
field, where many MEPs' desire for more spending to combat unemployment may
collide with finance ministries' attempts to cut fiscal deficits. Unless
MEPs reserve their displays of muscle for issues of genuine merit,
parliament could become its own worst enemy.
A test of Strasbourg's mettle centres on the preparations for the 1996
conference to review the Maastricht treaty. Since no government at present
wants to take a high-profile role here, parliament has an ideal opportunity
to map out an agenda that would take account of electorates' scepticism
about some Maastricht aims, yet would also allow the EU to become both wider
and more integrated. Taking the lead in the 1996 debate would be the best
way for parliament to play a constructive part in shaping Europe's future.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940722

