FT942-15882

FT  13 APR 94 / One way to tread water: A scheme to develop a problem site


   By DAVID LASCELLES


In mid-April, an eight-lane swimming pool will be opened at Spitalfields,
the former fruit and vegetable market on the fringes of the City of London.
A few months later, the site will get a second new facility: an opera house.
This is rather strange, because the owner of the 13-acre site was hoping to
transform it into a big office, shopping and housing complex. It was
diverted by the recession - but, in the process, it has shown that a
thriving industry exists in what might be called 'interim use' development.
The owner, the Spitalfields Development Group, is a consortium consisting of
two construction companies, Costain and BICC, and London & Edinburgh Trust,
a Swedish-owned property company. It acquired a 150-year lease on the site
in 1987, intending to turn it into an extension of the 1980s City
development at nearby Broadgate. It spent Pounds 24m moving the vegetable
market to new premises in Leytonstone, east London. But before it could
begin work on the site, the recession struck, and what had been billed as
Europe's largest inner-city project ground to a halt.
The consortium, hit by heavy losses, decided it had to do something rather
than watch the property decay on its hands. At least it possessed the market
building - an attractive Victorian structure with potential. The consortium
asked its architect, Benjamin Thompson and Associates, to draft plans to
turn it into a temporary shopping arcade, and invited outside companies to
tender for the work.
The UK 'interim use' industry consists of a group of small companies which
specialise in managing problem sites. The best known is Urban Space
Management, which began more than 20 years ago with Camden Lock, a once
derelict north London canalside site, now a successful urban market.
Urban Space Management won the contract and in 1991 set up a joint company,
Spitalfields Space Management (SSM), with the consortium. Together they
contributed a total of Pounds 300,000. The money came with a five-year lease
on the site, extendable to 2000.
Mr Alan Masterton of Spitalfields Development Group says the aim was
threefold: to attract City workers into the site, to mend fences with the
local community after the loss of the market jobs, and to earn a bit of
cash.
Three years later, Spitalfields has dozens of shops, seven restaurants and
several indoor sports areas for soccer and tennis. At weekends it houses the
country's largest organic food market. The Pounds 200,000 swimming pool is
nearing completion in a hole originally intended to be the basement of a new
office block. When the opera house, seating 540, is completed, it will be
London's first new one for 200 years. Of the 140,000 sq ft available to SSM,
fewer than 2,000 remain unlet.
This is the sort of result that gladdens urban planners' hearts. But is it
commercial, and could it be replicated elsewhere?
The project is not commercial in the sense that it reflects the full costs.
SDG has contributed the site effectively free of charge, and its members
have taken big write-offs on their original investment: over Pounds 75m
between the three of them.
But while SSM got its main asset cheap, it operates as a normal
profit-seeking enterprise. There are three aspects to its business strategy.
The first is to cut costs ruthlessly. Eric Reynolds, the director, views any
price tag as only the starting point. 'Cost is a cast of mind,' he says.
'People have an idea of how much they expect something to cost, and they'll
accept anything near that.'
The first quotation the company received for the swimming pool, for example,
was Pounds 750,000. But it cut that by nearly three-quarters by driving hard
bargains and picking cheap suppliers. The swimming pool's clear plastic roof
was found in Israel. Similarly with the opera house; this is currently
budgeted at Pounds 500,000, though the price is 'not yet fully driven down',
says Reynolds. Prince Charles sponsored a personal seat for Pounds 900, and
other private sponsors are being sought.
The second step is to draw on grants where possible. Reynolds persuaded City
Challenge - a state-funded urban renewal initiative - to provide Pounds
195,000 towards the pool, because there were 14 schools within a mile which
would benefit from it, as well as a large Bangladeshi community living
nearby. 'The interim uses satisfy both business and leisure needs,' says
Lesley Klein, chief executive of Bethnal Green City Challenge. 'What we have
here is a commercial operation able to offer low costs.'
The third step is to make the development user-friendly by attracting
stallholders and craftsmen, and nurturing the street culture, as at Camden
Lock.
Reynolds stresses that his company aims to make a profit, though it also
performs a social role: for example, his company's efforts have restored 400
jobs to a site which lost 2,000. 'What we're doing here doesn't make a
return on what the land is worth. But it's better than shutting the whole
thing up.'
But being temporary, the plans have to be made with a view to the site's
ultimate use. SDG has been advised demand for office space will probably be
strong enough to restart development work by 1996-97, though it has agreed
to extend Urban Space Management's contract to 2000. Then, the swimming pool
will have to be filled in, or moved. The opera house is being built where it
can be accommodated in the long-term plan.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940413

