FT941-16825

FT  07 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Dixons sticks to sound game plan -
Undeterred by the whims of youth the retailer is intent on growth


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


After Dixons' surprise announcement in September that it had offloaded its
lossmaking US Silo chain onto US retailer Fretter, yesterday's news of poor
trading in its UK business was the last thing that the City wanted to hear.
'The nightmare was always going to be, if, after they dealt so well with the
Silo problem, the UK was to go wrong,' said one analyst.
The disappointment that Dixons' profits were not going to increase as
expected was reflected in the 15 per cent slide in the share price. But as
the dust settled, analysts suggested that the poor performance over
Christmas and lacklustre first-half results were caused more by external
factors and market conditions than of problems with underlying strategy.
Christmas trading suffered disproportionately from poor sales and price wars
in the computer games sector, which seriously damaged margins. That sector
had sparkled over Christmas 1992 when it helped Dixons to a 17 per cent
sales increase.
Meanwhile, gross margins came under pressure in the first half, thanks
partly to increasing price competition, but also due to higher import costs
following the devaluation of sterling.
In a brown goods market which did not grow at all in value, and a white
goods market which grew only 3 per cent, Dixons did well to increase market
share and record like-for-like sales increases in its three main chains.
Dixons has earned much respect for the way it has developed its UK retail
business and turned around the Currys chain.
An important part of its strategy has been a move away from its price-led
'pile it high, sell it cheap,' style of retailing of the 1980s, with a
strong own-brand element, to become a more upmarket, service and brand-led
business.
Customer service was a notorious weak point in the late 1980s and Dixons has
improved both pre and after-sales care through better training and the
introduction of repair centres into many stores.
Another important move was to reposition the businesses. Dixons, which will
remain a high-street chain, is designed to attract a high-level of impulse
purchases, by more technologically-aware customers, and its product range
has a high-tech bias.
The size of the chain is likely to change little from the present 357
stores.
Currys is aimed more at planned purchases by customers less confident of
technology, and is biased towards larger goods, such as televisions,
refrigerators and washing machines. Currys is gradually being shifted away
from the high street towards out-of-town superstores.
The high street chain shrank by 16 stores to 346 in the first half, while
the superstore chain added 12 stores to reach 145. It is the latter that has
been driving retailing profits growth in recent years, and Dixons plans to
accelerate expansion towards 250 stores.
Since last February, a final part of the strategy has been PC World, the
computer superstore chain acquired for Pounds 8.5m from Vision Technology
Group. Dixons would have entered the market anyway, but the acquisition
provided it with a tried-and-tested format and a headstart on competitors.
Three PC Worlds opened last year in Cardiff, Bristol and Leeds, taking the
chain to seven, and six more are planned.
Analysts believe the chain could generate Pounds 1m annual profits per
store, and there could be 20 stores in place by 1995-96.
Meanwhile, Dixons needs to find the next big thing to take over from the
flagging games consoles market. Mr John Clare, chief executive, says there
are a number of candidates, including mobile telephones, lap-top computers
and personal organisers - even if they lack the youth appeal of the Super
Nintendo and the Sega Megadrive.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940107

