FT942-15394

FT  15 APR 94 / Property: Happy returns - Vanessa Houlder on the reasons
behind the improved investment outlook in the UK


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Returns in the UK property investment market posted their fastest recovery
on record last year, according to the annual review of the sector by
Investment Property Databank, a research group. Investment returns reached
18.1 per cent, a 22 percentage point improvement on the previous year.
After sinking so low, it is perhaps unsurprising that the investment market
would rebound vigorously. But the factors driving this strong upturn are
more complicated than first meet the eye.
The IPD report suggests that the recovery took place in spite of, not
because of, the behaviour of two crucial components of the market: tenants
and institutional investors. Although there was some improvement in demand
from tenants, it was insufficient to stop the fall in rents, which dropped
by an average 8 per cent over the year. Meanwhile, net institutional
investment totalled just Pounds 466m last year, the lowest for 13 years.
Instead, the main underlying causes behind the recovery can be traced to the
behaviour of the bond markets: when bond yields fell sharply last year, they
dragged property yields down with them, thereby improving property values.
The reason for the close correlation between bond and property yields last
year was that property started to resemble a fixed-income investment -
valued on the strength of its existing income rather than its potential
income growth.
This was because an increasing number of properties were 'over-rented' - the
term used to describe properties whose tenants are locked into leases that
require them to pay rents at above the market rates. Since the rental income
from these 'over-rented' properties is unlikely to increase for several
years, the value of the properties will depend on the security of the
current stream of income.
The IPD statistics, which are based on property amounting to 75 per cent of
all institutionally-owned buildings (valued at about Pounds 40.4bn),
underlines the extent to which this type of property has become
'over-rented'.
After the sharp fall in rents of the past few years, 44 per cent of all
institutional tenants paid above market rents at the end of 1993, according
to IPD. Even institutional portfolios spread across all sectors and regions
are, typically, 'over-rented'. Among such properties, the gap between rents
paid and the market rate is in excess of 30 per cent.
The consequence of this 'over-renting' was that property assumed some of the
characteristics of bonds. And as bond yields fell, property yields tumbled
in tandem, from 10.7 per cent to 9.2 per cent over the year, according to
IPD.
One outcome of the increasing similarity between property and bonds was that
all the sectors of the market produced similar returns: retail returns were
19.6 per cent, industrials 19.3 per cent and offices 18.3 per cent. Those
properties with the greatest degree of 'over-renting', such as City of
London offices, enjoyed the greatest benefit from the movement in yields.
'Over-renting' had least impact in the retail and industrial sectors. In
these sectors regional variations in performance continued to reflect rental
trends, with the Midlands and the north generally recording smaller falls in
rental values, and thus higher returns, than London and the south.
Retail property posted a 1.7 per cent drop in rents, less than a fifth of
that recorded for either offices or industrial property last year. By
contrast, office rents dropped by a further 13.7 per cent in 1993, taking
the total decline in office rents to 42 per cent since 1989.
As in the retail sector, office rents fell further in the south than in the
north. However, this north-south rental divide was masked by heavy
'over-renting'. Some of the highest office returns were in the most
'over-rented' markets, such as the City which produced a 20.4 per cent
return in 1993.
The dominant role played by bond movements in increasing property values
last year was reinforced, in some sectors, by the pressure of investors'
demand. The best-performing sectors - such as retail and distribution
warehouses which produced returns of 34 per cent and 30 per cent
respectively - owed their strong returns to a particularly sharp fall in
their yields, which stemmed from strong net investment.
However, for most of last year, the net impact of institutional investors on
the market was subdued, according to IPD. Although institutions are
currently among the most enthusiastic purchasers of property, their renewed
presence in the market was not evident until autumn 1993. For the early part
of last year, the most active buyers were foreign investors, private
companies and quoted property companies.
In fact, institutions sold more property than they bought last year: Pounds
2.63bn in purchases against Pounds 2.98bn in sales. Institutions' net
investment climbed on the back of Pounds 473m spent on development and
Pounds 343m on improving buildings.
Retail property was, by far, the most popular sector for investors,
accounting for 86 per cent of the total net investment in 1993; retail
warehouses alone accounted for 59 per cent of the total net investment.
Institutions were net investors in offices in south-east England (excluding
London), but were net sellers of property in the City and West End.
Although institutional demand rose strongly at the end of last year and is
still high, IPD strikes a warning note about the sustainability of a
recovery that depended so heavily on bond movements.
'This upturn is almost exclusively an investment phenomenon, based upon
falling yields,' said Mr Rupert Nabarro, managing director of IPD. 'The
trend in property returns will be vulnerable to shocks in the gilts market.'
The IPD report adds: 'Questions remain as to the strength of the 1993
recovery . . . A sustained recovery will depend in the medium-term upon low
interest rates and continued investor demand.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940415

