FT944-10986

FT  08 NOV 94 / International Company News: UAC Nigeria begins a new chapter
 -Unilever is severing all ties with the company


   By PAUL ADAMS


Nigeria's private sector and UAC, its flagship company, have reached a
watershed with the decision by Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch consumer products
group, to end its 70-year involvement in the company, a relationship which
came to symbolise stable, long-term investment in Nigeria
The offer to buy Unilever's remaining shares in UAC Nigeria is likely to be
fully subscribed by local investors when it closes later this month, brokers
in Lagos believe.
Nigerians are apparently eager to invest in the company, the country's
largest manufacturing, packaging and distribution conglomerate with the most
prized property portfolio in Lagos, in spite of its chequered history and
the uncertainties of life without Unilever.
UAC Nigeria's origins pre-date the formation of the country. Its forebear,
the Royal Niger Company, was the region's trading pioneer in the late 19th
century. It carved out a near monopoly of trading palm oil and other local
raw materials in exchange for European goods. As the operation grew, Lord
Leverhulme, the founder of the British side of Unilever, was so keen to
acquire it that he paid cash for the company without seeing any accounts.
The business became the largest part of Unilever's United Africa Company,
and after independence in 1960 UAC Nigeria dominated the private sector and
retained powerful influence in government circles. Through one civil war,
more than half a dozen military coups, and the boom-and-bust cycles of the
dominant oil industry, UAC Nigeria has epitomised stability and sound
investment.
This year's disinvestment also closes a long chapter in Unilever's history.
At its peak in 1975, UAC International, the parent of UAC Nigeria and a
mixture of other businesses extending from Africa to the UK, contributed
about one-third of Unilever's group profits. That has shrunk to about 0.5
per cent as Unilever has focused on its core consumer products.
The roots of the disinvestment are two fold - political and corporate - and
stretch back two decades. Under pressure from the Lagos government to keep
UAC Nigeria in Nigerian hands, Unilever had cut its stake to 40 per cent in
the 1970s with the rest held by Nigerian private and institutional
investors.
About three years ago, UAC Nigeria's management suggested to Unilever that
they should go their separate ways. Finally, last December, Unilever agreed
to sever all links by transferring some assets from UAC Nigeria to a new
local Unilever holding company, and to sell its remaining 20 per cent in the
company, valued at around Dollars 46m at the official exchange rate.
Unilever also decided in the 1980s to concentrate worldwide on four
businesses: personal products, food and drink, detergents and specialty
chemicals.
Of UAC Nigeria's 11 divisions, only toiletries fits the current Unilever
profile. Unilever is transfering that and the proceeds from the share sale
to Unilever Nigeria, its new 100 per cent owned holding company. In
addition, UAC Nigeria's Caterpillar distributor will become a joint venture
with Unilever called Tractor and Equipment.
Unilever and Mr Bassey Ndiokho, UAC's chairman, stress that the divestment
decision was mutually agreed and conceived before trading conditions became
more difficult last year.
Mr Ndiokho admits, however, that excessive bureaucracy and the government's
foreign exchange controls have made it difficult for legitimate businesses
to import necessary materials and equipment and to export profitably.
The effects of the military regime's fiscal indiscipline and the political
instability of the past 12 months have been felt throughout the economy. In
1993 at least six working weeks were lost to political disturbances, while
inflation approaching 100 per cent a year and a sharp devaluation of the
naira eroded domestic demand and put pressure on profits.
After-tax profits last year were N432.3m (Dollars 19.65m), an increase in
naira terms of 29 per cent from 1992 but below the rates of inflation and
devaluation.
The situation is worsening. This year's first-half profits were 17 per cent
below forecast, although higher than a year earlier, and the second half
began badly with the political strikes which brought the economy near to a
standstill in July and August. The naira has been devalued on the parallel
market by 40 per cent in the last six weeks.
Nevertheless, demand among Nigerian investors for the UAC offer is high. The
two issuing houses in Lagos, First City Merchant Bank and Investment Banking
Trust Company, have placed all the shares with sub-underwriters who expect
to have sold nearly all the stock when the offer closes.
Mr Ndiokho, who took over as UAC chairman last year when Mr Ernest Shonekan
became head of the interim national government, is confident that the
Nigerian directors can recapitalise, expand and run the business
successfully after Unilever divests.
Initially, most investments will be in property development but in the long
term UAC wants to attract foreign technical expertise in timber, textiles
and packaging. The company is also looking at expansion in seed production,
wood exports and the oil services industry.
The International Finance Corporation, part of the World Bank, is to produce
a strategic study and recommend international partners in new ventures.
Unilever says it will maintain its commitment to Nigeria through its new
holding company and a 40 per cent stake in Lever Brothers Nigeria, which
makes detergents, margarines and personal products.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941108

