FT941-5508

FT  05 MAR 94 / How To Spend It: Storing for the future - Lucia van der Post
looks at exciting plans for House of Fraser


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


To all those who have predicted that the end of the department store is
nigh, Brian McGowan, chairman of House of Fraser, wishes to send a message:
not only are the obituaries premature, he says, but House of Fraser is so
confident of its survival that it is planning to invest Pounds 80m over the
next three years in its future.
In case no-one has noticed, the Fayed brothers, who so offended Tiny Rowland
by paying Pounds 615m for House of Fraser in 1985, have already spent Pounds
120m on refurbishing House of Fraser stores. No-one, least of all the
Fayeds, does that if they do not think there will be a return.
To most city-watchers, Brian McGowan is best known as half of the duo that
built up Williams Holdings. The Fayed brothers managed to lure him away from
his fishing, tennis and skiing-filled retirement to nurture the House of
Fraser group - minus Harrods - to its reflotation next month.
'When I agreed to become non-executive chairman I expected to find a group
that had been milked, neglected and underinvested in, and found it was
simply not true. Cuts had been made. The group had been trimmed, more than
30 stores closed and the number of employees dropped. But all over the
country the big, old names were being polished, revitalised, new life
breathed into them.'
We all know that the department store is not what it was. Many grand old
names have bitten the dust - Marshall & Snelgrove, Debenham & Freebody,
Derry & Toms and Pontings. Once upon a time a visit to one was a high point
in a fashionable lady's week and Lady Jeune, a fashionable woman-about-town
at the turn of the century, wailed about the overwhelming temptations of the
department stores.
Brian McGowan admits that it is probably a long time since most of us have
been overtaken by temptation in a department store and the top priority of
the new team at House of Fraser is to make the shops seductive once again.
Says McGowan: 'For years, department stores had the business to themselves.
Then came the rise of the boutique and the life-style merchandisers, such as
Next, which took business away from them because they hadn't got their act
together.
'To survive, they have to change, like everything else. We've got to make
them attractive places to go to, offer decent loos, somewhere for the kids,
a special feeling of belonging to a club that they like to drop in on.'
McGowan adds: 'We have to concentrate on service. Not just people being
pleasant but staff that know the products and care about them.
'But we have lots of things going for us. To begin with the group has some
wonderful names and buildings. Kendals of Manchester, Rackhams of
Birmingham, Frasers of Glasgow, Howells of Cardiff - these are marvellous
buildings, some a bit faded and in need of a facelift, but they are part of
the history of their cities.
'Then, demographics are on our side. Traditionally our customers come from
the more affluent members of the older age-groups - our 'core' customer
being between 35 and 54 - and as more of the population becomes affluent and
older our customer base is growing.'
Recent retailing history would seem to bear this out. Through the recession
the profits of the top 20 high street names - Next, Laura Ashley, The Body
Shop and the like - have tumbled while the top three store groups, John
Lewis Partnership, Debenhams and Fenwicks have been relatively stable.
In the years when House of Fraser was privately owned, profits were a
well-kept secret. As it prepares for reflotation at the end of the month it
has had to disclose its figures and most store-watchers were surprised to
find that operating profits at House of Fraser had risen in the last year by
24.7 per cent to Pounds 45m.
'It is true,' says Andrew Jennings, House of Fraser's managing director,
'that our return per square foot is relatively low but that gives us a great
opportunity to do better in future.'
For House of Fraser customers who long for more individuality and
personality in their stores the strategy devised by Andrew Jennings looks
promising.
He wants to restore local character to the stores. The days when central
buying decided what customers from Inverness to Plymouth would be offered
are over.
'Our stores range in size from 12,000 sq ft to 340,000 sq ft. They serve
country farmers, old ladies, young men, city dwellers, affluent and
not-so-affluent. Clearly they cannot and should not all be the same.' He is
fond of emphasising that 'House of Fraser is an umbrella not a mould'.
Andrew Jennings sees department stores now as 'a collection of speciality
businesses under one roof'. In other words, what they can offer the customer
is a sense of smallness of scale, of human proportion, of proper focus - all
qualities that attracted the department store customer to the better
boutiques. In addition, of course, the department store can offer diversity.
Between them McGowan and Jennings make a formidable team. Their ambitions
are immense. Quite simply they want House of Fraser to be the leading
upmarket store group in the UK by the end of the century.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940305

