FT942-14833

FT  19 APR 94 / Israel to offer package to Syria: Return of Golan seen as
crux


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


Israel has formulated a comprehensive package for negotiations with Syria on
a withdrawal from the occupied Golan Heights which it wants Mr Warren
Christopher, US secretary of state, to deliver to Damascus later this month.
Israeli officials said the US had told Jerusalem that, if the Christopher
mission succeeds, Syria had promised to upgrade current peace talks to
foreign minister level and enter direct military-to-military talks.
Mr Dennis Ross, US Middle East peace envoy, is expected in Israel on Friday
before flying to Damascus to prepare for Mr Christopher's Middle East
shuttle next week.
The success of the US mission, however, will depend on Israel's commitment
to a full withdrawal from Golan, a key Syrian demand. A Syrian spokesman
said: 'Syria will never accept anything less than full Israeli withdrawal
from the Golan. . . Is Israel ready to return the land, the whole land? This
is the question that needs to be answered.'
One option being considered by Israel is to make an early formal
renunciation of its claims to sovereignty over the Heights as a
confidence-building measure. Mr Yossi Sarid, environment minister, said
yesterday: 'Without giving up sovereignty on the Golan it will not be
possible to push forward the peace process and reach a positive result.'
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, has confirmed newspaper reports of
a new Israeli peace plan. Mr Rabin said Maj Gen Ilan Biran at Central
Command had presented a document detailing Israel's security requirements in
any Golan withdrawal.
The new peace plan deals with what Israel sees as the four fundamental
issues of any agreement - the extent of withdrawal, the nature of peace,
security arrangements and the timetable of phases of withdrawal. Israeli
newspapers said the plan included:
An Israeli declaration of withdrawal.
Full diplomatic relations with open borders and trade.
Israeli withdrawal to be implemented in phases over a period of years.
Normalisation of relations and establishment of diplomatic ties after the
first phase of withdrawal which would leave Israel still controlling most of
the Heights.
Security arrangements including substantial force reductions, early warning
stations, confidence building measures, international observers and
demilitarised areas.
Mr Rabin has promised to take any peace deal with Syria to a referendum.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940419

