FT941-17124

FT  06 JAN 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): The personnel touch
 -How Kenwood staff became image ambassadors in an advertising campaign


   By LUCY KELLAWAY


The picture shows a pretty female athlete sitting on the ground looking
sweaty and disappointed. Another shows a middle-aged Japanese man perched on
a bar stool playing flamenco guitar. A third is of a young Spaniard
scrambling up a rock face.
These images are not designed to sell running shoes, music lessons, or
stamina-building breakfast cereals. Instead they are advertisements for
Kenwood, the Japanese manufacturer of hi-fi, car radio and communications
equipment.
Kenwood is not the first company to attempt to build its brand through
advertisements that have nothing to do with the product it is trying to
sell. Indeed, since Benetton started selling sweaters using pictures of
newborn babies and men dying of Aids, there have been no limits on possible
subject matters for copywriters.
However, the Kenwood campaign presents a departure from the norm: it is
among the first to try to create a brand image based on its staff. And
stranger still, the images do not concern what its staff do when they are at
work, but what they do in their spare time.
The picture of the runner bears the caption: 'Tina Shanur. Order clerk,
parts department, Kenwood USA. 10km runner. Personal best, 57 minutes 26
seconds. Today, 59.15. Damn, damn, damn.'
The message is that these people are committed to whatever they do, they are
individuals in their own right, they are strivers and they work for a
company that encourages them.
Most companies will trot out the cliche about their people being their most
valuable asset. But until now this idea has been used mainly for talking to
employees or to shareholders. Kenwood is taking it one step further by
putting its people at the heart of its sales thrust to the
consumer.
Kenwood recognised that building a brand for electronic products is not
easy. Shared technology means there is little difference between the
products. Successful advertising must convince people that the brand is
suited to their personality. It must create some kind of an emotional link
between the brand and the way people feel.
Kenwood gave the agency, Oxfordshire-based Watts Lord, the task of
developing a character for the brand that would achieve this. 'We did not
want something heavy, or something that would say 'we are wonderful',' says
Bob Griffiths, Kenwood UK's sales and marketing director.
The agency hit upon the idea of finding employees at all levels who could
become 'ambassadors for the brand'.
In order to find these ambassadors the company wrote to its branches all
round the world for suitable candidates. 'These people are not superheroes.
But they all show personal commitment in fields outside the company,' says
Ken Buckfield, managing director of Watts
Lord.
The agency now has a fat file of employees who deliver meals on wheels, ride
horses, restore antique cars, or sail yachts - any of whom could feature in
future advertisements.
'We are trying to develop a personality for our products. We are not just a
consumer electronics company, we are more like a family,' says Griffiths.
This is brand advertising of a pretty risky kind. After all, most people
have hobbies, and in any organisation it should be possible to find
employees who pursue them seriously: indeed, cynics might argue that the
more boring the job and badly treated the employee, the more employees will
throw themselves into their outside interests.
'You get the message these advertisements are about people, but they are too
intangible. I don't really get the connection,'
says Mac Cato, of Desgrippes
Cato Gobe, the image
consultancy.
But even if people get the message that Kenwood employees are a family of
special individuals, will that really make them more likely to buy the
product? 'If people can relate to the brand, then they'll put it on the
shopping list,' says Griffiths.
So far, says the company, the advertisements have gone down well. Consumers
apparently like the look of the pictures so much that they have written in
asking for copies to hang on their walls.
Rio Takegawa, the guitar player, has had invitations to perform a recital.
Tina Shanur has been offered modelling work. And Jordi Puyal, the handsome
rock climber, has received approaches from several European women.
Maybe this proves the advertisements have made their mark. Or maybe it shows
that people are so literal-minded that when they look at the pictures they
think it is the services of the people themselves that are for sale.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940106

