FT942-14941

FT  18 APR 94 / Emerging Markets: News Round-up


   By NICHOLAS DENTON, PATRICK HARVERSON and WILLIAM BARNES


   BUDAPEST, NEW YORK, BANGKOK


HUNGARY
Hungary today starts its mass privatisation programme with the opening of a
public offering of state shares in Soproni Sorgyar, the country's third
largest brewery, writes Nicholas Denton in Budapest.
The State Property Agency, the privatisation authority, is tendering its 37
per cent shareholding in Soproni, worth Ft1.9bn (Dollars 18m) at the issue
price of Ft3,800 a share.
Two fifths of the issue, which is lead managed by brokerage CA Securities,
is open to cash investors, including foreign institutions. But the largest
tranche, three fifths of the entire amount, is reserved for sale to small
investors on strongly preferential terms through Hungary's new 'small
shareholder programme'.
The programme is open to adults paying a token Ft2,000 'entrance fee' and
entitles them to buy shares worth up to Ft100,000 and spread payment over
five years.
MUTUAL FUNDS
The recent poor performance of many emerging markets appears to be dulling
US investors' appetite for mutual funds which invest in developing
countries, writes Patrick Harverson in New York. Last week, for example,
Morgan Stanley postponed a Dollars 60m offering of shares in its new
European Emerging Markets Fund, citing unfavourable market conditions.
This follows recent declines in prices of publicly-quoted emerging market
country funds, including two - an Africa fund and an India fund - launched
in February by Morgan Stanley that now trade at considerable discounts to
net asset value.
THAILAND
Thailand's Association of sub-brokers is to appeal to the stock exchange to
lower the Bt350m (Dollars 14m) entrance fee it proposes to charge for each
of the four new brokerage seats it is adding to the existing 40 seats,
writes William Barnes in Bangkok.
The fee is nearly Bt50m more than previous controversial fees obtained when
seats were distributed by competitive bidding, but stock exchange officials
say the volume of trading has grown sharply.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940418

