FT941-16996

FT  06 JAN 94 / Jobless in West Germany up to 2.5m: Industrial orders fall
as unemployment rate rises


   By ARIANE GENILLARD and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN, FRANKFURT


West Germany's unemployment rate in December rose to its highest level since
reunification four years ago, overshooting government estimates and damping
hopes for economic recovery in 1994.
More than 2.5m were registered without jobs in the western part of the
country in December, bringing the unadjusted unemployment rate to 8.1 per
cent, according to figures released by the Federal Labour Office yesterday.
This compares with 2.4m in November and an unemployment rate of 7.8 per
cent.
The high unemployment rate was announced as industrial orders for November
continued to show weak domestic demand. Orders in Germany fell by 0.5 per
cent against October, while orders from abroad dropped by 1.5 per cent,
according to the economics ministry.
In light of the continuing recession, Mr Hans-Jurgen Koebnik, a member of
the Bundesbank decision-making central council, said yesterday that the
central bank's policymakers believed Germany's short-term interest rates
were too high.
The 5.75 per cent discount rate and the 6.75 per cent Lombard rate,
unchanged since October 22, would fall during the course of the year
provided conditions were right, he said. Mr Koebnik, president of the
central bank of Saarland and Rhineland-Palatinate, said the inflation rate
was an especially important factor.
His remarks match the opinions of most independent economists, but contrast
with the approach traditional among Germany's central bankers.
Mr Bernhard Jagoda, president of the federal labour office, said the
unemployment figures were 'largely attributable to seasonal fluctuations'.
Still, on an adjusted basis the number of unemployed west Germans rose to
2.494m in December from 2.489m in November. In total, 675,000 people lost
jobs in western Germany for the whole year.
In the autumn, a government forecast said the west German unemployment rate
would reach 7.5 per cent by the end of 1993. But unemployment is expected to
climb to 10 per cent next year, according to revised government projections
published late last month.
Economists have been warning that unemployment could continue to rise as
short-time workers are made redundant. Since the beginning of the year, the
number of short-time workers, who have part of their salary covered by the
federal labour office, has nearly halved.
In eastern Germany, unemployment could continue to rise as places on
retraining schemes are reduced. Eastern Germany's unemployment rate rose to
15.4 per cent in December from 15.1 per cent the previous month.
Lex, Page 12

The Financial Times


International Page 1

940106

