FT941-3435

FT  16 MAR 94 / G7 ministers back free trade and labour flexibility


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   DETROIT


Ministers from the Group of Seven leading industrial nations agreed
yesterday that free trade, labour market flexibility and a stable economic
environment were essential to tackle the persistent unemployment that has
afflicted all their economies.
However, the unprecedented two-day conference in Detroit produced 'no single
solution, no one idea or action that will work for every country,' said Mr
Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary and meeting chairman.
The conference yielded a consensus that countries must balance the right
macroeconomic policies with measures to attack longer-term structural
job-lessness.
'Structural reforms can make our labour markets and employment systems far
more adaptable to change. We need, carefully and in our own ways, to pursue
policies to take down barriers and to strengthen our markets,' Mr Bentsen
said.
Ministers agreed on the need to improve the education, training and skills
of their workforces, but Mr Bentsen warned that the G7 countries could
produce all the highly trained workers they wanted, 'but it does no good
unless we've created the climate in which the corporate world has jobs
waiting for them'.
The Detroit conference's conclusions will form the starting point for the
'sherpas' preparing July's summit meeting of G7 leaders in Naples. But
beneath the apparent harmony, divisions emerged, particularly on the
relative importance of government and the private sector.
'I won't say that there were sharp exchanges, but there were some courteous
sharp disagreements,' said Mr Robert Reich, the US labour secretary.
Among the most radical ideas that received support was a suggestion to allow
employees to work a fixed number of hours in the year, rather than each
week, allowing greater flexibility both for employers to deal with seasonal
variations and for workers to plan their own free time.
'At a time when modern technology gives us more and more flexibility, why
should work time still be planned as it was at the beginning of the
industrial revolution?' asked Mr Henning Christophersen, European Commission
vice-president.
Mr Bentsen said ministers had agreed to ask the Paris-based Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development to study the relationship between
productivity, technology and job creation and to expand a study already
under way to improve statistics on joblessness in the industrial world.
Flexible harmony marks G7 jobs talks, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940316

