FT942-15302

FT  15 APR 94 / Government Bonds: Bundesbank move sparks bout of volatile
trading


   By SARA WEBB and FRANK MCGURTY


   LONDON, NEW YORK


The Bundesbank cut its key interest rates by 25 basis points yesterday,
taking the European government bond markets completely by surprise and
sparking a bout of volatile trading in the bund market.
Despite the unexpected good news, some of the European bond markets ended
lower as other factors, such as worries about US inflation and the shooting
down of two US helicopter over Iraq, gave the markets an excuse to trade
lower.
The Bundesbank cut the discount rate to 5.00 per cent and the Lombard rate
to 6.50 per cent. The moves triggered cuts by other European central banks -
in Denmark, Switzerland, Austria, the Netherlands and Belgium - and led to
expectations of easings in Italy and France.
At a press conference yesterday, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank's
president, stressed that money supply M3 remained the main target for the
German central bank. He said he expected west German inflation to fall below
3 per cent in the second half of 1994, adding that the Bundesbank could not
risk triggering inflationary expectations by cutting interest rates too
quickly.
Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, said the interest rate cuts
from the Bundesbank would support government efforts to spur economic
growth.
The bund market had a choppy day despite the good news. The bund contract
opened at 96.80 and traded up to 96.97 ahead of the rate cuts. Having
drifted down, the futures contract bounced on the rate news and then fell
again, touching a low of 96.45. The contract picked up later in the day to
close little changed at 96.83.
Analysts expressed surprise at the bund market's rocky reaction to the good
news. 'The fact the markets fell after the news shows we are still in a bear
market, when 25 basis points off both rates is still not enough to get a
rally,' said Ms Marie Owens Thomsen, international strategist at Midland
Global Markets.
UK gilts drifted lower in the morning, then picked up and closed slightly
higher on the day, taking their cue from the Bundesbank.
The market will be focusing on today's inflation data for March, as well as
on the possibility of a gilt auction announcement.
Disappointing inflation figures triggered a fall in Spanish government bond
prices yesterday morning, but the market later recovered and closed up on
the day helped by the Bundesbank's rate cuts. The Consumer Price Index was
up 0.3 per cent in March from February, leaving the year-to-year rate
unchanged at 5.0 per cent.
US Treasury bond prices receded in thin trading yesterday as the market
cautiously awaited today's release of two important economic reports.
Late in the day, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  3/8 lower at 87
7/16 , with the yield rising to 7.29 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was off  1/16 at 99 13/32 , to yield 5.44 per cent.
Early in the session, bonds across the maturity range dropped sharply on
reports of the shooting down of two US helicopters in Iraq by hostile fire
but recovered on news that they had been downed accidentally by US forces.
The day's only economic news - a weekly gain of 12,000 in claims for
unemployment benefit - was shrugged off, even though analysts were expecting
a slight decline. Attention instead was focused on today's data on
industrial production and capacity utilisation, which economists view as
leading indicators of inflation, the bane of fixed-rate investments.
Anticipation of the figures kept many investors on the sidelines. Traders
said some of the early activity had been triggered by trading in the
mortgage-backed securities market, where a big sale forced the liquidation
of five and 10-year government notes.
Japanese government bond futures rallied in the London trading session as
the yen strengthened against the US dollar. The move prompted the Bundesbank
to intervene, selling yen and buying dollars.
In Tokyo trading, the market had a relatively uneventful day, opening on a
strong note with the June futures contract at 111.79, and drifting lower to
111.44 in the course of the day.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940415

