FT941-3333

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (2): A
whirlwind of innovation - Business assumptions will be repeatedly challenged
in the next few years as technological advances sweep the world of
communications. Multimedia, mobile computing and groupware are among the hot
topics, as Alan Cane explains here


   By ALAN CANE


The key technologies emerging as the catalyst of the next wave of business
and social change have computing power and communications in common.
Multimedia, mobile computing and groupware are the most promising business
opportunities over the next three years. According to a group of computer
companies canvassed last month by Input, a US-based marketing consultancy,
client-server computing, networking in its various forms and document image
processing were all seen as providing continuing business, but there was
less enthusiasm for last year's fashionable topics including artificial
intelligence and graphic information systems.
The computer company's choices are supported by a diversity of evidence.
Deals like Viacom's Dollars 10bn acquisition last month of Paramount
Communications, the US information and entertainment group, exemplify the
excitement multimedia is generating. In January 1993, 150 US newspapers
published a total of 25 articles about multimedia; in December, the same
newspapers published 425 pieces on the topic.
The market for notebook and subnotebook (hand-held) computers is expected to
grow at 20 per cent or more this year compared with only six per cent or so
for the industry as a whole. Prices of subnotebooks seem set to follow their
desktop equivalents downwards especially with the launch of the Compaq
Contura Aero at under Pounds 1000 and the relaunch later this year of IBM's
Thinkpad 500. There is continuing interest in personal digital assistants
(PDAs) combining computing power with communications despite a muted market
response to the launch of Apple's Newton PDA.
The market for groupware - software designed to run on personal computer
networks to support the co-ordination of office activities and exemplified
by Lotus 'Notes' - looks likely to double in the US and Europe over the next
five years. According to Ovum, a London-based information technology
consultancy, the installed base of PC networks has now reached the critical
mass necessary to provide the incentive for the adoption of groupware.
Elimination of barriers
What has changed over the past few months is the speed at which these
esoteric technologies are becoming realities. Last month, for example, 400
senior telecommunications executives from companies including AT&T, BT, MCI
and Mercury, packed a seminar in the US to hear claims that business and
society would be transformed by multimedia through the elimination of
barriers of time, space and form.
Opening the conference, Mr Rudy Puryear, managing partner, strategic change,
at Andersen Consulting, warned that every business assumption would be
repeatedly challenged in the next few years: 'The mean time between
surprises is shortening,' he said.
Most of the corporations present were already investigating the potential of
multimedia; most had only developed a serious interest in the topic in the
past year.
To a large extent, their enthusiasm is being driven by commercial demands,
rather than customer-need. Telecommunications companies like AT&T, MCI, BT
and Mercury need to generate better margins from their networks by moving
from 'pots' to 'pans' ('plain old telephone services' to 'pretty awesome new
stuff'). Computer companies need to find new ways to encourage customers to
buy more computer power as prices fall to commodity levels. Among those
which have already declared an interest in multimedia are Apple Computer,
Intel, Silicon Graphics and Microsoft as well as the games market leaders
Sega and Nintendo.
Mobile computers and groupware are firmly established in the market place.
There are, however, question marks remaining over the potential of
multimedia. It has not been helped by confusion over what the term implies.
The essential definition is the transformation of information of all kinds -
textual, graphical, still and moving video pictures - into computer language
('bits') in which form it can be transmitted down a single communications
channel - which could be a telephone line or a compact disk - to a modified
television set or personal computer in the office or home.
The service is interactive; customers can send back instructions and
requests through the network. What is important is that different bits of
information are co-mingled in the transmission stream; the system is
responsible for sorting out which are text, which are video and so on.
Dr Nicholas Negroponti, director of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology media laboratory, believes that the impact of multimedia on the
business and social world is inevitable. He points to four trends:
First, the 'disappearing desk top' as executives become peripatetic, using
mobile computers on the move or while working from home.
Second, continuing miniaturisation which will make complex and bulky
technologies such as speech recognition for pcs simple and easily
transported.
Third, increased use of the so-called 'Negroponti switch' - the use of fibre
to bring multimedia to the office and home leaving precious broadcast
bandwidth for mobile telephony and computing.
Fourth, the use of intelligent software 'agents' to roam through electronic
libraries gathering information of interest to their owners.
AT&T already has systems which make use of this advanced concept.
Four elements are required for the profitable development of multimedia
systems:
Powerful computers are needed to store, process and keep track of the bits.
High capacity telecommunications channels are needed to transmit them to
office or home.
There has to be a ready supply of information to feed the system.
The customer must be willing to pay for the new services.
All the technological elements for full scale multimedia are pretty well in
place; the computer power, software and networks capable of transporting
millions of bits a second at reasonable cost. Fibre optic technology is now
staggeringly powerful, capable of carrying 150,000 times the volume of
conventional telephone wires. Fibres can be spun from glass so pure that it
is possible to see through a block 70 miles wide.
Chip technology is making possible the computing power to sort through all
those bits. Dr Wei Yen, a senior vice-president at Silicon Graphics, a US
company which specialises in the manipulation of electronic images, said
that the necessary computing power would be available through the
development of microprocessor chips called 'media engines' with the power of
a supercomputer but cost only Dollars 200 (Pounds 136). His media engine
would be available next year.
Given the ability to make one billion calculations a second, he said,
presenting life-like images on the screen did not present technical
difficulties - 'reality is all mathematics,' he smiled.
The chips, which will process bits 64 at a time like a supercomputer, will
be incorporated first in Nintendo's Reality Immersion Technology, claimed to
allow players to step inside real-time, three dimensional worlds.
Nintendo's involvement gives the clue to the principal remaining problem:
the search for attractive and marketable services to feed the multimedia
machine. Entertainment is an obvious option.
New electronic services
Time Warner Cable, the second largest cable operator in the US, intends to
launch this autumn one of the largest tests yet of multimedia services. It
will, in the first instance, allow customers to watch videos delivered via
their telephone lines. The intention, however, is eventually to offer a
'full service network.'
About 4,000 homes around Orlando in Florida are being wired up for the
trial, which could pave the way for a fuller range of electronic services,
such as home banking and shopping.
The Orlando trial uses a combination of fibre optics and coaxial cable for
transmission; in the UK, BT intends to offer a video-on-demand service
offering acceptable picture quality over ordinary telephone lines.
The intention had been to open the service next month; Time Warner announced
it would be delayed earlier this month to allow - 'additional refinements of
the underlying system software and the set-top terminal.'
Coupled with the collapse at about the same time of the proposed merger
between Bell Atlantic and the cable operator Tele-Communications Inc.,
observers were noting that the path to the establishment of successful
multimedia systems will not be that easy.
Many observers, indeed, believe that multimedia will initially be driven by
business applications. An option is telecommuting. France Telecom is
experimenting with a range of technologies including electronic mail and
groupware which could be combined so employees can work from home or
electronic telecommuting centres.
The multimedia race: pages 3 and 4.
Developments and applications for virtual reality technology, page 17

The Financial Times


London Page II

940316

