FT942-16298

FT  11 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Brokers look for calmer conditions - New
York


   By FRANK MCGURTY


After Friday's bumpy ride, the fragile peace that Wall Street enjoyed in the
middle of last week should return this morning, but the beginning of the
corporate results season could bring fresh complications.
At least one market strategist is brimming with confidence. Late last week,
Ms Gail Dudack at SG Warburg went out on a limb by predicting that Tuesday's
82-point rally would go down as the end of the correction phase for
equities.
'The panic selling which characterised markets (around the Easter holiday).
. . reversed on Tuesday in a classic bottoming pattern,' says Ms Dudack. She
points out that 89 per cent of that session's volume was in advancing
issues, after a long sequence in which declines represented 85 per cent of
the activity.
Her counterparts are generally more circumspect, however. Most analysts
believe the underlying tensions of recent weeks are still lurking just below
the surface. Their presence was felt painfully on Friday, when a lazy
session was jolted to life by sell programs activated in the early afternoon
by a gradual erosion in bonds.
While generally confident that the worst of the volatility is over, analysts
warn of the possibility of a reprise in coming sessions. 'I see the market
struggling upward in the short term,' says Mr Alfred Goldman, technical
analyst at AG Edwards in St Louis. Although stocks have moved past their
'peak downside intensity', he believes there is still a chance of a milder
re-run of the Easter action.
Mr Hugh Johnson, chief investment strategist at First Albany, says there are
two reasons to expect smooth conditions this week. First, investors are
exhausted from the events of the past fortnight. Second, it is unlikely that
this week's producer and consumer price indices will produce any surprises.
Even if they do, the Federal Reserve is looking more closely at leading
indicators, such as commodity and industrial material prices, rather than
readings of current inflation such as the PPI and CPI.
The flood of results which will begin to trickle in to Wall Street this week
is likely to produce a few surprises, but with expectations running high,
the net impact on stocks could be negative.
'Unless earnings come in unexpected either way, they may not have any
effect,' says Mr Paul Stanton, head of over-the-counter trading at Johnson
Lemon. He says strong earnings projections are already priced into the
market and that disappointments could present a genuine threat to share
valuations.
However, speculation over the timing of the Federal Reserve's third
tightening of monetary policy will continue to dominate.
Action by the Fed seems almost inevitable to many observers, such as Mr Bill
Dodge at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York. In the run-up, he sees stocks
taking more knocks, although he draws some encouragement from last week's
rally. 'It at least showed that the downside can be contained,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940411

