FT944-5931

FT  01 DEC 94 / Arts: Sugar and schmaltz - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET (U) Les Mayfield
CORINNA, CORINNA (PG) Jessie Nelson
CRONOS (18) Guillermo Del Toro
TO DIE FOR (15) Peter Mackenzie Litten
Can we sue Hollywood for abducting one of our leading philanthropists? We
refer to the disturbing case of Lord Richard Attenborough.
For years Lord R has been the white-whiskered Father Christmas of British
cinema. Find a selfless, hardworking movie committee anywhere in the land
and he will be on it. Watch a movie awards ceremony and he will be holding
out his ermine-fringed hat, soliciting help for that frail, lovable,
disadvantaged thing called the British film industry.
So what is he doing playing Santa Claus for the other side in Miracle On
34th Street? Short answer: making the movie bearable. Or more so than this
seasonal Hollywood tear-jerker would be without him. Attenborough is the
only class act in this remake of the 1947 schmaltzfest about a New York
department store Santa who gives everyone a Christmas to remember.
Kris Kringle, as our hero is called, materialises outside the store just
when the personnel manager needs him. The previous Santa has been falling
off his sleigh under the influence of too much Kentucky bourbon. Might Kris,
we are encouraged to ask as the plot unfolds, be the real Mr Claus? By final
reel he has spread cheer, patted children's heads, answered testing
questions on the geography of the North Pole and made everyone believe in
peace, goodwill and reindeers.
Attenborough has bonhomie written all through him. The make-up people have
been at his whiskers, curling the white moustache and giving a vertical
frisk to the white eyebrows. He looks like God after a bath and brush-up. He
cracks a lordly whip at the reindeer; shows a beaming patience with the
icky-eyed little girl he befriends who takes up so much screen time. (She is
the daughter of the store's publicity director Elizabeth Perkins.) And he
looks nobly harrowed in the climactic trial scene, when the judge must
determine if he is Santa or a fraud.
If only the film around matched its star. Written with more winsomeness than
wit by John 'Home Alone' Hughes, it is directed by Les Mayfield, who used to
make tie-in plugumentaries about other people's films (Back To The Future,
Who Framed Roger Rabbit). Miracle On 34th Street is a tie-in puffumentary
for Christmas: an on-location hype spree in snowiest Manhattan, filled with
a glutinous glow that Yuletide addicts may find appealing but no one else
will.
If Attenborough makes Miracle On 34th Street almost watchable, Whoopi
Goldberg does the same for Corinna, Corinna. Another resistible child is at
screen centre. Little Molly (Tina Majorino) has just lost her mother, and
her father (Ray Liotta) cannot cope with solo parenting as well as with a
high-pressure job writing advertising jingles.
It is hard enough finding a rhyme for 'pudding' without having to make the
things as well. So Goldberg enters: everyone's ideal cook/nanny. Soon she is
making puddings and finding a rhyme for them ('puddin''/'should'n''), and
inserting lovestruck stars in Liotta's eyes. But - political subtext time -
we are in the 1950s, so can the couple overcome racial prejudice? And will
little Molly, amid her dark-complexioned in-laws-to-be, grow up to be a good
Sixties liberal?
Writer-producer-director Jessie Nelson clearly grew up by having eight
spoonfuls of sugar every day on her cornflakes. As music swirls and hearts
climactically melt, a sweet tooth is not enough for this film: you need a
full set. But do marvel at Miss Goldberg - at that whimsy-free presence with
its brown, croaky, street-smart voice, its slow-burn reactions, its
ironising eyes that torpedo sentimentality or pretension even as they come
towards her.
More perversely scheduled for Christmas - but welcome in the circumstances -
is the Mexican horror film Cronos. At its centre is a present from Hell: a
golden bauble invented by a 16th century alchemist and now coming into the
hands (literally, with retractable steel pincers piercing his palms when he
holds it) of a modern-day antiquarian (Federico Luppi).
But he puts up with the pain. For the gruesome thing has an insect inside
which filters and rejuvenates the victim's blood, thereby conferring
immortality. Cue the film's chase subplot, with our hero pursued through
midnight streets by the plug-ugly henchman of a dying millionaire (ex-Bunuel
veteran Claudio Brook) who also covets eternal life.
Guillermo Del Toro directs as if Borges had visited him in a dream and
Hieronymus Bosch had arrived at the same time in a nightmare. Gothic
congestion is the style. The first half, in which eerie leitmotifs pile up
and plausibility waits on mystery, is spellbinding. Cameraman Guillermo
Navarro's silken chiaroscuro puts the romance into necromancy, while the
philosophy-prone dialogue - Toro himself wrote the original script - has a
mad ingenuity. Insects are God's chosen species, says the millionaire:
'Christ walked on water. So does the mosquito.'
Only near the close do we fall into the dull accounting process of
'explanation' and the routine modern-dress horror movie's search for novelty
locations. (Final showdown is around a giant neon sign atop a skyscraper
roof.) But Cronos is still, by a tall mile, the best film of the week.
To Die For is a gay comedy-weepie gauchely styled after Ghost and Truly,
Madly, Deeply. Mark (Ian Williams), after dying of Aids while looking
strangely healthy, returns to haunt his lover (Thomas Arklie). Like the
frequently returning hero of Cronos, he is dead but has no talent for lying
down. But unlike him he is dull, winsome company.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941201

