FT944-2988

FT  15 DEC 94 / Arts: Tall tales of manor'd wealth - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


PRINCESS CARABOO (PG) Michael Austin
NEVER ENDING STORY III (U) Peter MacDonald
THE PAGEMASTER (PG) Joe Johnstone and Maurice Hunt
THE NUTCRACKER (U) Emile Ardolino
CHASING THE DEER (PG) Graham Holloway
ONLY THE STRONG (15) Sheldon Lettich
Princess Caraboo, the tale of a beautiful vagrant girl (Phoebe Cates) who is
adopted by early 19th century English high society in the belief that she is
a foreign princess, shows that people will believe anything if it comes in a
charismatic wrapping.
They may even believe that this medium-jolly if maddeningly erratic movie is
based on a real story. So contends co-screenwriter John Wells. But I have
been to that well before, or tumbled down it. As a humble theatre reviewer I
once fell for Wells's claim that his play The Projector (Stratford East,
1970s) was an authentic 'lost' 18th century comedy. Result: egg on my face
and the near-termination of a promising critical career.
Let us just say that even if Caraboo is true it cannot have been true like
this. English society never consisted, we hazard, of Jim Broadbent and Wendy
Hughes living, however entertainingly, in manor'd wealth with a set of
strange furniture (seashell-upholstered settees a speciality) and a Greek
butler portrayed with tortured vowel sounds and expressive moustache by
Kevin Kline (very funny).
No ill-nourished vagrant ever looked like Phoebe Cates (aka Mrs Kline), who
resembles a well-fed graduate of Hollywood High School seeking further
doughnuts. And no surviving picture of the Prince Regent suggests that he
resembled John Sessions wearing Mikado cast-offs. Sessions's look of camp,
gobstopper-cheeked naughtiness also comes closer than ever before to
suggesting he may be the illegitimate son of Freddie Jones.
The movie trips along with its strange, rambling comic gait, never quite
adding up to the sum of its parts, fruitily though these are played. Add
Stephen Rea (lovestruck journo), the Reverend John Wells (more gobstopper
cheeks) and Professor John Lithgow, English-accented again after A Good Man
In Africa, and you have a surging roster of multi-style talent seeking a
central meeting place. But director/co-writer Michael Austin stands around
like a dazed traffic policeman. Moods collide (satire, farce, mystery,
romance); characters honk and criss-cross; and if there was ever a true
story behind Caraboo, its bones are slowly broken under the weight of
incidental traffic.
We expect what Mark Twain would call 'stretchers' at Christmas time. This is
the season when we gather round the fire to listen to tall tales and to be
struck about the head by flying chestnuts.
The Pagemaster and Never Ending Story III are variations on the same
chestnut. A little boy is hurled into make-believe land, where a dose of
educative fantasy strengthens him for the real-life battles back home. Alas,
the fantasy scenarios in both films are dull enough to put the hero into a
coma before he even contemplates the return journey.
In The Pagemaster Macaulay Culkin falls and knocks his head on a library's
marble floor, thereby precipitating dreams about animated books. The voices
of Whoopi Goldberg, Patrick Stewart, Leonard Nimoy and others prattle behind
the dancing vellum-bound shapes as Culkin lives through cartoon digests of
Moby Dick, Treasure Island, Dr Jekyll And Mr Hyde and Gulliver's Travels.
These are witlessly slogged through in a 66-minute film that seems like 66
hours.
Culkin himself is showing grave signs of wear. Since Home Alone the boy has
acted like a dazed demi-angel who has lost radio contact with Planet Earth.
The instant-access mugging that had such charm in HA - 'Macaulay, smile',
'Macaulay, scream,' 'Macaulay, hit the burglars]' - has lost its verve. We
know that Master C could never actually 'act'. But now he seems to have lost
that peerless in-born talent, so post-modern in one so pre-pubescent, for
parodying acting.
Another boy thespian adrift in imaginative hyper-space is Jason James
Richter in The Never Ending Story III. What to say about a movie with tedium
sewn into its very title? Young Bastien, our hero, is now a Los Angeles
schoolboy apparently living on the same doughnut diet as Phoebe Cates.
Persecuted by bullies, the plump-cheeked lad takes refuge in a library,
where on opening the eponymous folklore tome he is magicked back into the
land of 'Fantasia'. Luck-dragons; princesses; Tony Robinson as a gnome; and
mile on mile of Christmas grotto decor.
We would like to say that all plot resemblances between this film and The
Pagemaster are coincidental. Perhaps so. But the shared library settings
hint at a Western cinema suddenly becoming alarmingly pedagogic about
reading. Note the posters of famous film stars urging 'Read' on the walls of
the Never-Ending library and the parade of nudging book titles on the
shelves of The Pagemaster.
But Hollywood never quite manages to heave itself up into high culture.
Among the books flaunting their spines at Master Culkin are Ten Little
Indians and The Haunting: giveaway-lowbrow titles, which also happen to be
the titles by which the movies not the novels were known. Popular cinema may
be making one of its periodic bids to turn from poacher to gamekeeper, but
apparently it can still only recognise stolen game.
In a week of bizarre cross-referencing, all we need now is another film
starring Master Culkin, hinting at Hollywood's affair with high culture and
containing a plot poised between fantasy and reality.
Abracadabra: The Nutcracker. George Balanchine's version of the Tchaikovsky
ballet has been filmed, with Macaulay as Drosselmeyer's nephew. This riot of
sound and colour, directed by Emile Ardolino (Dirty Dancing), was created
some time ago. This explains why Culkin is in angelic prime, capering
through his role with all the hammy wonder he brought to Home Alone. (He
actually was a ballet student before being captured by Tinseltown).
Lovely sets; luscious music; worth a Christmas outing. We wish we could
speak thus of Chasing The Deer. The good news is that this British film was
heroically financed by small investors: a literal army of them, who having
handed over their wallets then kitted themselves out in 1740s battle dress
to play extras in Graham Holloway's mini-epic about the Jacobite wars.
Now the bad news. The combat scenes play like one of those Monty Python
battle sketches in which obscure women's guilds, having selected a patch of
mud, used to hit each other over the head with handbags. Between battles,
the screen is cleared for the actors to stand in uncertain lighting mouthing
self-destruct dialogue. (Sample conversation-stopper: 'Then there is the
episcopalian dimension . . . ') Ten points for financial initiative; one and
a half for creative result.
Only The Strong will appeal to only the barmy. Ninety minutes of the
Brazilian martial art called capoeira, which to the untrained eye looks like
breakdancing with violence. Sheldon Lettich directs. Someone called Mark
Dacascos stars. Avoid.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941215

