FT942-14854

FT  19 APR 94 / Health options for Clinton: Mitchell outlines less costly
alternatives


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton left Washington for Milwaukee yesterday on yet
another drive to promote healthcare reform amid signs that he is willing to
back more modest alternatives advanced by Senator George Mitchell, the
Democratic majority leader.
Mr Mitchell, who last week turned down a chance to serve on the Supreme
Court in order to lead the fight for healthcare reform, laid out his ideas
at a weekend party policy retreat in Virginia. Mr Clinton attended the
session, as did Mr Ira Magaziner, the White House adviser who is one of the
principal architects of the administration's bill.
According to the New York Times, Mr Mitchell's suggestions preserve the
essentials of the president's goals - universal uncancellable coverage, with
employers bearing a share of costs for workers.
But each of his variations would be less costly to both the government and
companies. For example, Mr Mitchell raised the idea that employers should be
asked to bear only 50 per cent of the insurance bill, rather than the 80 per
cent in the administration proposals, with companies with more than 1,000
staff retaining the option to provide their own healthcare programme. The
Clinton plan confines this option to those with more than 5,000 employees.
He also suggested a more limited package of insurance benefits and different
ways of subsidising small businesses by basing such payments not on total
payrolls but on the age of each worker. This, he argued, would spread
subsidies more evenly to make easier coverage for the lower paid.
Mr Mitchell calculated that his approach could reduce the average employer
premium for each family by about 16 per cent and cut the government bill by
about Dollars 150bn-Dollars 165bn (Pounds 103bn-Pounds 113bn) by the end of
the century. Earlier this year the Congressional Budget Office, the
independent watchdog, reported that the Clinton plan would increase federal
spending, not cut it, by Dollars 74bn by the year 2000.
The senator did not portray his ideas as a concrete plan but he recognises
the importance of making legislative progress in the weeks ahead, given the
assumption that the Clinton plan, as drafted, cannot pass.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940419

