FT944-5997

FT  01 DEC 94 / Wessex Water fights metering


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


Wessex Water yesterday launched a campaign against universal metering for
water charges and announced plans to appoint two customer directors to the
board of its utility business.
Mr Colin Skellett, managing director, said customers in the Wessex region
had 'made it very clear they do not want metering'.
Wessex will be lobbying the government to allow water companies access to
information on council tax bands. Mr Skellett said this could be used in
conjunction with a metering option to provide a fairer system of charges.
However, such a move would require government legislation.
At the moment, water charges are based on the old system of rateable
property values. However, water com-panies must come up with alternative
methods of charging customers by the year 2000.
Mr Ian Byatt, the industry regulator, is known to favour metering. But some
water companies feel this method is expensive to install - Wessex estimates
the cost at about Pounds 140 per household - and that it would hit the
poorest sections of society hardest.
Mr Skellett said combining the council tax bands with metering would allow
Wessex to tailor its charges to lessen the impact of abandoning the rateable
system on the poorest customers.
The campaign was launched as part of Partnership 2000, a series of
initiatives aimed at improving customer service. Wessex has appointed Mrs
Lesley Bennett and Mr John Lofts, respective heads of the company's two
customer-liaison panels, as non-executive directors to the utility board, as
opposed to the main company board.
The move appears to be unique in the sector. It follows the controversial
bid by former regulator Mrs Diana Scott to join the Yorkshire Water main
board. The issue divided Yorkshire's small shareholders from institutions,
which overwhelmingly rejected Mrs Scott's nomination.
Wessex has pledged to devote savings on its capital investment programme to
funding issues such as sewerage flooding, which were not allowed for in the
summer price review.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941201

