FT944-5996

FT  01 DEC 94 / Pension fund in tax test case


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


Barclays Bank Pension Fund, one of the country's biggest, faces a special
assessment by the Inland Revenue. The move will be a test case on whether
pension-scheme profits earned by underwriting new share deals ought to be
taxed.
Barclays is the first pension scheme to face a formal assessment. Yet it is
understood that as many as 10 other big schemes have been issued so-called
'protective assessments' in respect of their underwriting profits in recent
years.
The Revenue issued those assessments saying it believes underwriting new
share issues is a trading activity not covered by the tax exemption which
applies to profits earned on pension schemes' ordinary investment
activities.
Barclays' pension scheme, which has close to Pounds 7bn in assets, was
assessed last summer by the Revenue in respect of the 1989-90 fiscal year.
Barclays is contesting the assessment and a hearing is expected before the
general commissioners for such tax cases early next year.
If Barclays loses, it may appeal to a panel of special commissioners. If
such an appeal were lost, many pension schemes are likely to face requests
for back taxes on underwriting, forcing schemes to reconsider whether they
wish to continue the exercise.
The move to review underwriting income comes as the fixed commissions earned
by pension funds are under attack from other quarters. In November the
Office of Fair Trading released a study which concluded that fund managers
generally - including pension schemes - earned profits on underwriting which
were far in excess of the risks taken.
The OFT inquiry focused on whether there was enough competition in the
underwriting of new share issues.
UK insurance companies, which are also significant underwriters of new share
issues, are taxed on their underwriting profits and have shown no signs of
withdrawing from the business. Mr Geoff Lindey, chairman of the National
Association of Pension Funds' investment committee, said that while it was
not clear that schemes would no longer underwrite, 'there would be some
quite large funds which would decide it wasn't worth the trouble'.
The association has long argued that there is no difference between
under-writing a new share offer for a four to six-week period - at the end
of which it could own the shares - and making a long-term investment
decision and that it should con-sequently be free of tax. The Revenue has
argued that it is short-term trading.
Meanwhile, Bacon and Woodrow, consulting actuaries, say that a client, a
mid-size UK industrial pension scheme, has been asked to provide the Revenue
with details on any profits earned by short-selling - the sale of shares it
does not already own.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941201

