FT941-3314

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (16): A
radical change in culture - Case study, two companies break new ground


Facilities management agreement between BP Exploration Europe (BPXEU) in
Aberdeen, and Andersen Consulting, broke new ground for both companies. In
effect, BPXEU outsourced not only the IT department and the accounting
software it had used, but the actual accounting function and staff as well.
The decision, taken in the early 1990s, affected the entire accounting
services of the UK and the Continental Shelf operations - a Pounds 12bn
business worldwide, employing some 7,000 people. Another unusual aspect was
the extreme secrecy of the arrangements: the 300 accounting staff affected
were not told until after months of negotiations and hammering out details
of the facilities management (FM) contract.
The driving force for BP Exploration towards facilities management was the
need to cut down all expenses by 30 per cent. Tom Wright, control and
planning manager at BPXEU , explains the pressures brought about by the
collapse of oil prices since the early 1980s - 'we realised we would have to
radically alter the way we did business to remain competitive. We had to
reduce costs 30 per cent across the board,' he says. 'It was a requirement
for every manager to achieve that within three years without compromising
health and safety.'
The core skill for BPXEU was its business of oil exploration, and a hard
look at the accounting services revealed that a line could be drawn between
what accounting information was truly necessary in-house, and what was not.
'It is vital that we have that information, for making policy and
interpreting business information, but not that we provide it ourselves,'
says Mr Wright.
'Similar styles' is the reason he gives for the choice of Andersen
Consulting, which already had a track record at BPXEU. When news of the
announcement broke in June, it was a brand new idea for both companies.
Andersen was to take over accounting staff as well as IT staff and computer
assets.
'Initially there was shock, even anger. However we had prepared pre-planned,
individual, intensive counselling sessions, and by the end of the day,
people understood the effect it was going to have. We though that was better
than months of uncertainty,' says Wright.
The business was transferred under transfer of undertaking legislation,
which protects the employees and their rights. Effectively they had no
choice, although for some, the centralisation of operations in Aberdeen,
from the six sites previously involved, pre-determined the decision.
'Everyone outside Aberdeen had a choice of relocation to new location or
accepting severance terms,' says Tom Wright. 'They were transferred - full
stop. There was no choice.'
Andersen took over the staff, the Vax computer and McCormack and Dodge (now
Dun & Bradstreet) Millennium software used for the accounts. Wright himself
has no doubts that the deal arranged for BPXEU accounting staff actually
secured better career prospects and long-term employment.
'Andersen Consulting provides greater focus and incentive for the staff who
feel far closer to the business. If an accountant works for an accountancy
company, it is the focus of using the core skills in the core business that
drives the difference. No one believes that on 'day one,' of course, but
after six or seven months that is exactly what has happened.'
The pension rights were the only thing that had to be addressed - in some
cases 'topped up' to match the BP scheme for those transferring to the
Andersen pension scheme.
'The key benefits are the enthusiasm and the focus of the staff. It has
reduced costs by creating a single interface, instead of a myriad of
interfaces,' says Mr Wright. 'The real effect is that we have turned a fixed
cost to a variable, or at least semi-variable cost. As the service expands -
say, drilling increases or new fields come online, or we dispose of other
assets - so the cost varies. Now we can concentrate on the core business,
and it allows us to focus on the business of exploration and production. It
has simplified things. We don't have to worry about training, developing and
motivating 300 accounting and support staff.'
However, there has been no abdication of decision-making. 'We take all the
business decisions. They provide the financial analysis and variants
analysis, but they don't decide what should be done: the decision-making is
the core skill.' says Mr Wright. He believes the physical distance of the
Andersen operation, five miles away, was essential to bring about a change
of culture.
The initial contract is for four years: both parties reckon on three years
to get the costs down, although a longer partnership is envisaged.
'It's an opportunity to share benefits: if Andersen can grow the business,
they can bring the cost down. They have the focus to do it faster and more
efficiently. The other thing I'd emphasise is that we really did want the
best for our staff. We honestly believed they would have a better future
than in a business where the cost pressures of the North Sea were a constant
threat,' he adds.
The FM contract has had one more important psychological effect, he says.
'More than anything else, the move convinced everybody else inside BP that
we are serious about changing the way we do business.'
For Andersen, the business has grown as expected. It took 317 staff from
BPXEU, only 30 of them computer-based. 'That's what makes this deal so
unusual: it's a business function management, not just systems management,'
says Norman Cook, Andersen's associate partner, the head of the unit at
Aberdeen.
It now has extra customers, including Sun Oil in Aberdeen. Cook's view is
that Andersen's expertise has already brought savings. He is confident that
the current costs of Pounds 15m per year can be brought down by Pounds 5m by
1995 - 'we've saved a lot because we manage the bank balance tightly: Pounds
500,000 a year in funding charges alone.'
Bill Lattimer, partner in charge of market development for the outsourcing
practice at Andersen Consulting, believes this is the way FM is going - 'the
IT component is of less interest to the customer: it's not the important
element in Aberdeen. The way we have developed the people is important. We
have taken an organisation, a process, and completely redefined the way the
service operates and the way it interacts with its customers. The
value-added service we're providing is our skills in service definition and
management.'

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940316

