FT941-13053

FT  27 JAN 94 / Leading Article: European defence


Yesterday's meeting of the British, French and German defence ministers was
apparently an unprecedented event. It would be quite normal for any two of
them to meet bilaterally, or for all three to meet with their colleagues in
the Western European Union. But a trilateral meeting is a novelty.
That it has been held barely a fortnight after the recent Nato summit is not
a coincidence. One important and perhaps insufficiently noticed effect of
that summit has been to give a significant boost to what is known, in
current politico-military jargon, as the 'European security and defence
identity' (ESDI). Previous attempts to develop this have been checked by the
conflicting priorities of Britain and France. France believes that ESDI
should be an aspect of the EU, distinct from and independent of Nato, while
the UK opposes anything which might appear to compete with, undermine or
otherwise weaken Nato.
At the summit President Bill Clinton not only reaffirmed the US's long-term
commitment to European security, but also made it crystal clear that this
commitment would be strengthened, not weakened, by the development of the
ESDI, to which the new 'combined joint taskforces' are intended to give
tangible form. More important, he did so in a way that apparently carried
conviction with European leaders, including notably President Francois
Mitterrand.
France, no longer under pressure to return formally to the integrated Nato
command which it left in 1966, and no longer suspecting the 'Anglo-Saxons'
of seeking to block the development of ESDI, has shed virtually all its
inhibitions about working with Nato on a day-to-day basis. The UK for its
part now feels much more relaxed and positive about ESDI. Current thinking
in Whitehall is that it should be possible, when the Maastricht treaty is
revised in 1996, to endow the EU with a common defence policy explicitly
linked to the Atlantic alliance. This would, among other things, make it
easier to rebut Russian objections to central and east European countries
joining Nato, since membership of the alliance would become a logical part
of their preparation for membership of the EU.
The faltering of the Russian reform process, and the chauvinistic noises
heard from Russia in the last few months, have obliged west European
governments to begin thinking seriously about defence; while the US attitude
to the former Yugoslavia has strengthened the feeling, in London as well as
Paris, that Europe should be better equipped to take military action on its
own when necessary. At present Europe is clearly incapable of doing anything
serious in the defence field without US leadership and direct involvement.
That will not be changed by occasional meetings of defence ministers, or for
that matter by an amendment to the Maastricht treaty. If they seriously
intend to develop a capacity to act, European governments will have to check
and perhaps even reverse the reduction of their defence budgets, which
everywhere except in France are virtually in free fall. They will need to
look much harder at ways of getting a 'bigger bang for the buck' (or for the
Ecu), by co-ordinating their procurement policies and extending the single
market to defence contracts. Above all they will need to develop a genuine
unity of purpose, which means a capacity to reach common decisions and a
willingness to act on them.
Of that there can be little hope until Germany overcomes the inhibitions it
currently feels about joining in military operations, even when firmly
convinced of their political necessity.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940127

