FT944-10945

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (2): The gamble paid off - The economy is
responding to treatment


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


For the moment, Mr Manmohan Singh, the finance minister, seems to have
gambled successfully. When he delivered this year's budget in February, he
said he was taking a calculated risk in slightly relaxing controls on public
spending in order to promote growth.
All the indications are that his calculation were right - with India
enjoying the biggest surge in industrial output since Mr Singh and Mr PV
Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, launched their economic reforms three
years ago.
But this success could prove short-lived unless the government presses ahead
with more measures to free the Indian economy from the dead weight of 40
years of socialist-inspired central planning. Partial reforms have already
created a widespread sense of excitement, in India and abroad, about the
opportunities for business. The government's reform-minded critics say
further reforms are needed if this excitement is to generate sufficient
growth for India to achieve industrial take-off - a sustained increase in
its long-term economic growth rate.
Mr Narasimha Rao argues that it is important not to rush reform. In a large
democracy like India, broad-based consensus must precede significant change.
He also says that India must balance the pursuit of liberalisation with a
proper respect for its past achievements, including the tradition of
state-owned industrial enterprise.
His critics say the prime minister lacks a sense of urgency. They claim that
India, already behind important international rivals such as China and
Indonesia in economic development, is wasting valuable time. The
International Monetary Fund, in its annual report published on the eve of
this month's IMF-World Bank meeting in Madrid, urged India to accelerate
reforms.
In the light of India's recent economic performance it is easy to understand
why the government is relaxed. Seven good monsoons in a row have provided a
solid underpinning to living standards of most Indians, especially the 70
per cent who still live on the land.
Thanks to liberalisation, which has included the abolition of most controls
on domestic investment combined with the easing of curbs on trade and
foreign investment, foreign trade and investment are expanding. Exports,
which the government sees as an engine of growth, rose 20 per cent in the
year to March 1994 and have risen 10.6 per cent in the first five months of
the 1994-95 year. Imports, after three years of stagnation, are also growing
due mainly to imports of machinery and equipment - a sign of increasing
confidence in industry.
Industrial output, which was also slack in the early years of reform due to
cuts in government spending, is now picking up - buoyed by private demand,
just as reformers hoped. In June, the latest month for which figures are
available, it rose 8.6 per cent, the biggest increase since 1991. Inflation,
running at about 9 per cent a year for wholesale prices, is higher than the
government would like but has fallen from over 11 per cent in recent months.
As Mr Shankar Acharya, the government's chief economic adviser, says: 'The
economy is performing well.'
Foreign companies have been sufficiently impressed with the way India has
dragged itself out of the 1991 balance-of-payments crisis to take advantage
of the relaxation of investment curbs and invest in India. The inflow of
direct investment has soared from Dollars 150m in 1991-92 to Dollars 620m
last year and should climb further this year because several large private
projects to build power stations with the help of foreign partners are close
to starting construction work.
Even more dramatic has been the increase in foreign portfolio investment
from Dollars 158m in 1991-92 to Dollars 4.1bn last year, including
investment in Indian markets and in the overseas issues of Indian companies.
The inflow has helped take foreign exchange reserves to over Dollars 19bn,
compared to just Dollars 1.6bn in 1991.
Taking account of the optimism of domestic and foreign companies, the
Reserve Bank of India, the central bank, in its annual report made its most
positive forecast in recent years. It predicts national output will rise by
about 5 per cent in 1994-95, up from 3.8 per cent last year. Agricultural
production is set to expand 3 per cent and industrial output by 7 per cent,
fuelled by a 10 per cent rise in private investment. Domestic demand,
especially in cars, motorcycles, scooters, refrigerators and consumer
electronics, is so strong that exporters have been diverting supplies from
the overseas markets to the domestic - to the annoyance of the commerce
ministry which is trying to promote exports.
Mr Manmohan Singh believes the economy is on track to grow at 6-7 per cent
in the late 1990s. This may be so, but it will almost certainly require
further significant reforms to achieve the target. Mr Tarun Das, director
general of the Confederation of Indian Industry, says: 'We need to go
further and faster with reform if we are to achieve industrial take-off.'
While the economy has picked up impressively in the past year, the growth
rate is still less than the average of 5.5 per cent a year achieved in the
pre-reform 1980s and well short of India's international rivals.
It is not as if the government did nothing in the past year to advance
reform. Important recent moves have been an overhaul of the tax system,
including the rationalisation of indirect taxes; reductions in import duties
from a maximum of 85 per cent to 65 per cent; the partial liberalisation of
the heavily-controlled pharmaceuticals industry and the opening of the
telecommunications industry to private enterprise, including foreign groups.
There have also been significant changes in financial markets, notably the
licensing of 10 new privately-owned banks, the first time in more than 20
years, and of new foreign banks. Some foreign exchange controls have been
lifted, allowing India to accede to Article 8 of the IMF, an important
bench-mark of the financial globalisation. Only last month, the central bank
deregulated bank lending rates. Mr Shankar Acharya says: 'It is a fact that
some people feel reform has slowed .. But these achievements are still
important.'
Next on the public agenda is reform of the insurance industry, in which the
government is considering a report which recommends ending the state
monopoly. Mr Manmohan Singh is also committed to further cuts in import
duties in next year's budget and is considering lifting the virtual ban on
imports of consumer goods.
However, advocates of faster reform argue that this agenda fails to address
crucial issues, some of which are discussed in detail elsewhere in this
survey. First, public spending remains high. After cuts in the first years
of reform, public borrowing soared last year, taking the fiscal deficit to
7.3 per cent of GDP. It is falling in 1994-95, thanks to strong tax
revenues. However, the burden of interest payments is rising - from 39 per
cent of revenues in 1990-91 to 53 per cent in 1993-94, according to the
reserve bank. This squeezes the funds available for development, health and
education. Without better health and education, the great majority of
Indians cannot hope to participate in a modern economy.
Next, while many bureaucratic controls on the economy have been scrapped,
the officials' desire to retain influence has not. Also, India needs to
improve the efficiency of state-controlled industries. The government has
sold minority stakes in public enterprises but shies away from full-scale
privatisation.
The government has also postponed possible reforms of labour laws that limit
employers' rights to dismiss workers. While private employers often find
ways around these, through voluntary retirement schemes, public enterprises
have little incentive to shed labour.
More needs to be done to encourage private investment in infrastructure,
including power, telecommunications and transport, all virtually state
monopolies which have suffered from years of under-investment.
Finally, while ministers have liberalised the capital markets, they are
reluctant to relax control of the banking industry. The state-owned banks,
which dominate the market, are being allowed to raise private equity, but
the government will retain a majority stake and stifle genuine competition.

The Financial Times


London Page II

941108

