FT942-14764

FT  19 APR 94 / Arts: Contrasting fortunes at the opera


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, has made an operating surplus for the
second consecutive year.
Figures for the last financial year, announced at a press conference
yesterday, show a surplus of Pounds 400,000, bringing its accumulated
deficit down by half to Pounds 1.4m. By the end of the next financial year,
Covent Garden should be out of the red. But this successful turnaround of
the Opera House's fortunes has been at a cost. Chief executive Jeremy Isaacs
acknowledged yesterday that with seats in the stalls now costing Pounds 102,
ticket prices were too high.
Although an average of 86 per cent of seats were filled last year, the
company would like to make productions more accessible by reducing prices by
up to one-fifth. Nobody was proud of having to increase prices to their
present levels, 'but we have to, to earn the income to keep the house in the
black,' said Isaacs.
This year's Arts Council grant to the Royal Opera House stands at Pounds
7.76m, representing 28 per cent of the company's projected income. Although
a significant sector of the public was willing to pay the existing high
prices for seats at Covent Garden, this tended to be for popular operas like
Carmen and Rigoletto. Tickets of modern productions, such as Harrison
Birtwistle's award-winning Gawain, had to be discounted to fill the house.
'It is going to be very difficult to put on new work and British work,'
warned opera house chairman Sir Angus Stirling.
Meanwhile, down the road at the Coliseum, English National Opera is cutting
seat prices further in an attempt to reverse the decline in its audience.
New director Dennis Marks has filled 62 per cent of the seats this season,
as against a doleful 56 per cent in the last year of Peter Jonas's reign.
But with a frozen grant from the Arts Council of Pounds 11.65m for 1994-95,
and an accumulated deficit of Pounds 2.4m, this is not good enough. To build
up audiences for the new season in September, ENO will be offering discounts
to regular supporters, appealing to young audiences, and changing its
overall pricing policy to ensure that 60 per cent, as against 50 per cent at
present, of the seats available (except on Saturdays) will cost less than
Pounds 25.
The front stalls, 102 seats in all, at Pounds 45, will cost Pounds 5.50 more
on weekdays, but the remainder of the stalls, some 447 seats, will be
reduced to Pounds 35. The Friday premium also disappears, although you will
still pay more on Saturday. The changes will create more flexibility and
reduce the average price of a weekday ticket at the ENO to Pounds 25.80.
Anyone who buys tickets for three ENO performances at full price will be
offered a 10 per cent discount on any future purchases during the season.
United Airlines is helping to promote and underwrite the scheme. It is an
alternative to an ENO subscription, which has been hit by the recession: few
opera lovers these days are prepared to pay substantial sums and commit
themselves to performances months in advance.
To encourage new opera goers, ENO is offering Pounds 5 tickets for 100
school children aged between 13-18 at each of 12 performances next season.
An ENO fan, Irving Laidlaw, who paid for Ken Russell's ill begotten
production of Princess Ida, is subsidising the seats.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940419

