FT942-12451

FT  29 APR 94 / On a wing and a prayer: Peter Norman examines the deputy
governor's plans for Bank of England management restructuring


   By PETER NORMAN


Mr Eddie George, the governor of the Bank of England, could have something
concrete to celebrate to mark his first year in office on July 1.
If all goes according to plan, the Bank will have put into operation a new
management structure designed to help it respond better to rapid change in
global financial markets and pursue its two main objectives of monetary and
financial stability.
The restructuring project has been the responsibility of Mr Rupert
Pennant-Rea, the former editor of the Economist appointed deputy governor
last July. Early in December, the Bank had a weekend brain-storming session
about its future at Ashridge management college near London. After five
months of planning in three working groups, and extensive consultation
inside the Bank, Mr Pennant-Rea yesterday outlined his proposals to the
Financial Times as the first details were being disclosed to Bank staff in
The Bank Fortnight, a staff newspaper.
The planned management changes still have some hurdles to clear, including
approval by the Bank's Court which advises the management on policy. Some
details are still unclear, notably the proposals for a revised staffing
structure. But the shake-up proposals, which insiders say will be more
radical than anything seen in Threadneedle Street since 1980, are moving
into a high gear. Directors will be giving presentations to the staff this
week. It is hoped that the new 'organogram' will be agreed by mid-May so
that the Bank's operations can be grouped into two broad 'wings' by July 1.
If agreed, the internal restructuring will come after a hectic two years in
which the Bank has bounced back from the humiliation of Britain's forced
exit from the European exchange rate mechanism in September 1992 and has
been able to carve out significantly greater influence over monetary and
economic policy.
The Bank now produces a quarterly inflation report, which it publishes
without censorship by the Treasury. It has been given discretion over the
precise timing of interest rate cuts. Since earlier this month, the views of
the governor and chancellor in their regular monthly meetings have been
published after a short delay, giving the Bank extra clout in the debate
over interest rate decisions.
The restructuring will also take effect only weeks after the Old Lady has
celebrated her tercentenary. But if the changes symbolise anything, it is
the emergence of a leaner, fitter and more professional Bank, reflecting Mr
George's 32 years of service, his no-nonsense personality and his determined
pursuit of the twin goals of lasting low inflation and a solid financial
system in Britain.
The reforms will group the Bank's activities under two equally important
wings: one to secure monetary stability and one to make secure the financial
system. These will replace the Bank's present tangled allocation of
responsibilities in which the markets area, economics, international
activities, banking supervision and the banking department have all been
self-contained departments or divisions.
The Bank will continue to have four executive directors below the governor
and his deputy. But whereas each has run his own department until now, in
future two will be responsible for the running of each wing.
At first sight, the functional responsibilities of the executive directors
do not seem to change greatly. Mr Ian Plenderleith will contine to head
monetary operations and Mr Mervyn King, the Bank's chief economist, will be
responsible for analysis in the monetary stability wing.
In the financial stability wing, Mr Brian Quinn will be in overall charge of
regulation, supervision and surveillance, with the aim of achieving what Mr
Pennant-Rea calls 'stability and soundness' in the financial system. There
would be some tidying up of anomalies, with Mr Quinn taking control of the
supervisors of wholesale money markets and gilt-edged market makers, which
at present report to Mr Plenderleith.
Mr Pen Kent will be put in charge of 'financial infrastructure', meaning
that he would remain in charge of finance for industry, the financial
markets and institutions division, and Crest, the Bank's programme for a
stock exchange settlement system. The official purpose of Mr Kent's part of
the wing will be to boost the efficiency and competitiveness of the UK
financial sector.
The proposed restructuring is intended to bring the Bank's operational and
analytical work closer together. An important motive is the wish to make the
Bank more adept at spotting dangerous trends in the world economy and
financial markets. As the markets become more integrated, it makes little
sense for the Bank to maintain a segmented structure. The planned
reorganisation also recognises that the international aspects of monetary
policy and financial supervision should not be handled separately.
The Bank's international division will no longer exist as a separate entity.
Such a move has been on the cards since the start of this year when there
was no immediate replacement for Mr Andrew Crockett, who resigned as an
executive director to take over as general manager at the Basle-based Bank
for International Settlements.
However, getting rid of the international division is bound to be
controversial. No other comparable central bank has shown an urge to take
such a step. But Mr Pennant-Rea argued yesterday that this was necessary to
ensure that the Bank's international work was 'absolutely plugged into' its
dual monetary and financial objectives.
In the past, international staff have tended to become detached from the
main work of the Bank. With huge financial flows passing through London and
more than 500 foreign banks in the City, this is something the Bank cannot
afford.
In future, senior Bank people from the governor down will be directly
involved in international representation, according to their subject matter
or expertise. Mr King, for example, will be the Bank's key man on issues
relating to economic policy co-ordination in the Group of Seven leading
industrial countries and on matters relating to the European Monetary
System. Mr Quinn will take the lead on international co-ordination of
supervisory issues. Significantly, given past traumas for the Bank, such as
the BCCI affair, the bulk of the international staff will be transferred to
Mr Quinn's department.
Each of the two wings will have what Mr Pennant-Rea calls a 'wing liaison
function' which will 'act as a lynchpin between the operations and analysis
segments of the wings'. The wing liaison staff, already dubbed 'Wincos' by
some wags after the handle-bar moustached RAF wing commanders of the second
world war, would be crucial to cutting out duplication of effort and making
the system work.
A new management layer - that of deputy director - will be created for the
top five people below the executive. These, according to Mr Pennant-Rea,
will be key senior appointments of people who would be expected to take on a
lot of the responsibilities of the executive directors. One hope of the
deputy governor is that the reorganisation will gradually alter the culture
of the bank 'to create a stronger sense of involvement and common purpose
among the staff'. That means more accountability for their actions and
greater flexibility to ensure that the Bank has the right resources in the
right place.
Greater flexibility is often a euphemism for downsizing. But that is not a
reason for the present restructuring. The bank has been cutting staff
steadily for some years, dropping to just under 4,000 from 7,500 in 1979.
Mr Pennant-Rea says: 'We will be better at formulating monetary advice;
better at executing the monetary policy decisions of the chancellor; better
at carrying out our banking responsibilities and much better at anticipating
some of the big glacial-like changes that happen in the financial world.
Those are huge prizes.'
But huge prizes generally involve large risks. The Bank has a blueprint for
the start of its fourth century, but this will only work if it carries all
its staff with it.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940429

