FT941-3559

FT  16 MAR 94 / Brussels to keep close eye on telecom ventures


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


The European Commission yesterday served notice that it intends take a more
active role in policing joint ventures in the fast growing
telecommunications market.
Mr Philip Lowe, head of the Commission's merger task force, said the
Brussels authorities would be looking closely at industry proposals for
co-operation which might restrict competition. He told the Brussels
Telecommunications Forum that technology was moving so fast that it was
outstripping decision-makers and posing a challenge to regulators. 'Frankly,
we have to watch it.'
Mr Lowe predicted the European Union would have to accelerate its agreed
timetable for liberalising national markets for voice telephony from
January, 1998 - a view shared widely inside the Commission.
Mr Lowe's speech provided the first clues on future regulatory policy in
telecoms, a booming market which could see most of Europe's state companies
privatised before the end of the century.
Mr Lowe suggested two areas where the competition directorate would either
extend its powers or 'clarify' existing jurisdiction:
Lowering the thresholds above which Brussels automatically vet deals, from
Ecu250m (Pounds 189m) annual turnover in the EU market to Ecu100m. This is a
long-standing Commission goal; but Mr Lowe said telecom ventures usually
started with a low turnover but could grow very quickly into big players.
Examining the definition of industrial 'co-operation'. Joint ventures may
not amount to market concentration but they could still restrict
competition, Mr Lowe suggested.
In the past year, the directorate's merger task force has vetted 10 cases
involving telecoms operators, including a British Telecom proposal to
provide valued added services with MCI, the US telecoms company. Overall, it
looked at 200 cases in all industrial sectors.
In one case, Philips, the Dutch electronics giant, withdrew a proposal for a
joint venture with Siemens for an optical fibre cable project.
Mr Lowe reminded industry of the advantages of dealing with Brussels
competition authorities. Takeovers of a certain size are automatically
investigated within a month.
Where serious doubts exist about their effect on competition, they are
subject to a four-month inquiry. Separately, companies considering joint
ventures or mergers can seek informal guidance.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940316

