FT941-3595

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (8): Into equities, while rivals
stayed with bonds - Richard Lapper traces the growth of an innovative
insurer that was born in humble circumstances, but more than held its own in
an industry dominated by a cartel of powerful companies / Company history: 2


   By RICHARD LAPPER


The Provincial Insurance Company 1903-38: Family, Markets and
Competitive Growth
by Oliver Westall
Manchester University Press, Pounds 40
465 pages
On one level, this book is an intriguing tale of entrepreneurial success,
featuring, among others, John Maynard Keynes and his largely successful
record as a fund manager in the 1920s and 1930s.
On another, it provides evidence to challenge orthodox assumptions about the
'competitiveness' and other perceived strengths of the British insurance
industry.
Westall, a business historian at Lancaster University, was commissioned to
write the early history of the Provincial Insurance Company, a small
family-owned concern which ranks among the UK's top 20 insurance companies.
The company still sticks doggedly to its independence, an attitude which
becomes less surprising when the measure of its early achievements is
understood.
The origins of the Provincial were not auspicious. The company's founder,
James Scott, a Bolton cotton magnate, chose an insurance company in
preference to investing in a local bleach factory.
The decision was motivated, in part at least, because it allowed Scott's two
sons and heirs to live in the Lake District, and was greeted with some
scepticism by the insurance establishment. Moreover, as Westall tellingly
describes, the Provincial emerged in a market dominated by a cartel of
powerful insurance companies.
By the beginning of this century, the biggest companies had built up an
elaborate and effective cartel, based on the tariff - an agreed minimum
price for insurance premiums.
The formation of the fire offices committee in 1868 had allowed systematic
rate regulation in fire insurance to become 'formal and explicit', and over
the next 30 years 'a formidable system of market control was consolidated,'
writes Westall.
'By 1903 an array of committees, served by a professional staff, controlled
73 tariffs covering virtually every class of fire insurance, specifying in
detail the form policies should take and the minimum premium rates to be
charged for every aspect of risk.
'The development was of the greatest importance,' he continues. 'If the fire
offices committee could prevent rate competition, it would remove the most
effective solvent of the bonds of goodwill which protected established
companies from competitors trying to build up new market share.'
The achievement of James Scott and his sons Samuel and Francis was to break
into this market. One important tactic was the ability to set premiums at
rates lower than those demanded by the tariff companies. However, the
success of this tactic seems to have depended on three separate elements.
The Provincial took an innovative approach to distribution, which allowed it
to reduce its expense base; while the tariff companies sold insurance
through an extensive network of agents, serviced by a wide and ultimately
costly network of branch offices, by contrast. Provincial built up its
connections with independent insurance brokers (the forerunners of today's
commercial brokers) - such as the Bains (in Leeds) - who were prepared to
deal with a number of separate companies.
The company was relatively quick to take advantage of opportunities to
launch new products, which emerged with some frequency amid rapid
technological and social change. Initially specialising in fire insurance
for Lancashire mill-owners, Provincial broke into the accident market which
emerged after the introduction of compulsory workers' compensation insurance
in 1906, for example. This was 'a buoyant business, free of traditional
links. This allowed less well-established companies to use rate competition
to grow with the market.'
After the first world war, Provincial focused much of its attention on the
motor insurance market, which was an important new source of income for
other non-tariff insurers such as Eagle Star, Cornhill, General Accident and
Lloyd's of London. Provincial built up its share of the motor market by a
selective underwriting strategy. Its offer of a 'country discount' to
motorists driving bigger cars and living in rural areas was not copied by
more established competitors, allowing the Provincial both to increase its
market share by a rate disproportionate to its size and to make profits.
Finally, Samuel and Francis Scott took an adventurous approach to investment
strategy. One of two insurance companies advised by Keynes, the Provincial
invested more than 30 per cent of its funds in the equity markets at a time
when most of its competitors favoured safer government bonds and loans and
mortgages. As a result, Provincial earned above-average investment income,
and stole a significant march on its competitors, who, on the whole, did not
adopt this approach until the 1950s and 1960s.
'Despite the extraordinary changes in the investment environment during the
inter-war years, most insurance investment continued to reflect late
nineteenth century conventions,' says Westall.
By 1938 the Provincial had become a significant 'competitive element' in the
UK market, and was making significant profits. The family's original
investment of Pounds 75,000 was worth Pounds 2.5m by 1938, an increase in
value of about 20 times in real terms. There the story ends, although a
second volume bringing the history up to date is apparently on the cards.
Meanwhile, Westall's analysis of the industry cartel, its disintegration in
the 1960s and 1970s, tariff system and the inefficiencies it may have
shielded, demands further and wider development. All the more so, bearing in
mind the complex challenges that the industry now faces.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940315

