FT943-12654

FT  23 JUL 94 / World Stock Markets: Scenarios for the final leg of the bull
market - Strategic investment options


   By ADRIAN FITZGERALD


UK-based pension fund managers had good reason to crow at the end of last
year. Their international asset allocation resulted in a performance which
was well ahead of the benchmark.
WM Company figures show that the average return earned in overseas equities
was 39.4 per cent, compared with the return of 25.3 per cent from the FT-A
World ex-UK. Underexposure to the US and overweight positions in continental
Europe were mainly responsible. More-than-double weightings in the smaller
Pacific Basin markets provided the icing on the cake.
Claims at the mid-year stage this year will be more muted. It is likely that
overseas equity portfolios are already trailing the FT-A benchmark by 5 or 6
percentage points. The big swing factor has been Japan.
The sterling return for the world ex-UK over the first six months of the
year was 1.7 per cent. However, this conceals the fact that nearly all
equity markets performed badly. Take Japan out of the index and the return
falls to -7.9 per cent.
The problem for most UK-based pension fund managers is that they were very
under-exposed to Japan at the start of the year. Worse still, their
relatively heavy weightings in the rest of the Pacific Basin will have
back-fired on them. Hong Kong and Malaysia, for example, returned -29.2 per
cent and -24.1 per cent respectively.
It is a time for a serious strategic re-think. Most equity markets have been
driven down this year as a result of the collapse in bond markets triggered
by the turn in US interest rates and mounting inflation concerns. It is
understandable that the US bond market should be the first to suffer
significantly given that the economy is more advanced than most in terms of
the current cycle.
It is also inevitable that a collapse in confidence in that market should
have a knock-on effect around the world. But quite why the knock-on effect
in the UK has been so severe is puzzling many economists and strategists.
Long gilt yields have risen by more than 2 percentage points at a time when,
if anything, consensus inflation forecasts are still edging down. And what
UK managers have to consider is whether this presents them with a good
opportunity partially to rebuild some domestic bond exposure or whether the
financial markets are signalling that bad news is just around the corner.
Certainly, the significance of this year's collapse in UK bonds should not
be under-estimated. The real, total return from long bonds up to the end of
last year averaged a remarkable 7.5 per cent a year. And despite a return of
 15.9 per cent in the first six months of 1994, long bonds have outperformed
equities so far in the 1990s.
These are powerful statistics to consider at a time when anomalous
opportunities in the UK bond market may be on offer. However, this is not to
advocate a wholesale switch from equities to bonds, merely to suggest that
it is an ideal time to reflect on portfolio efficiency. Indeed, our own
analysis suggests that a significant recovery in bond markets world-wide
would spark off a geared recovery in equity markets. And as far as equity
investment is concerned, the secret will be to identify which markets will
benefit from a combination of firm bond markets and good news on the
economic growth front.
That potential certainly exists in the UK. News on both the inflation and
growth front continues to better expectations. Solid growth in corporate
earnings and dividends will be achieved this year and next. Moreover,
institutional liquidity is very healthy. A recovery in the bond market is
undoubtedly needed if US equities are to make renewed headway. The
pre-requisites for that to occur are a stabilisation of the dollar and
further re-assurance that the strong economy does not present a significant
threat to inflation.
If, and when, that scenario unfolds, equity investors will be able to sit
back and enjoy what may be the final leg of the cyclical bull market. Our
projections for markets elsewhere suggest that UK pension fund managers are
highly unlikely to make up lost ground against the international benchmark
in the second half of the year.
Despite the good run in the first half, it is too early to be taking profits
in Japan.
Equally, we would argue that the pension funds' overweight exposure to
continental Europe could prove to be a drag on performance in the medium
term. Ratings in many markets are already discounting a sharp rebound in
earnings and there is a risk that investors will grow increasingly
impatient.
Of course, we could have it completely wrong. Perhaps bond markets are
correctly anticipating an inflation resurgence. And perhaps there is a
danger that corrective procedures will choke off the recovery. In which
case, all equity markets would still be vulnerable.
We think it unlikely. The fundamentals all point to further economic
recovery world-wide against a background of continued, low inflation. There
is every reason to remain fully invested.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
FT-A WORLD INDEX TOTAL RETURNS
 ------------------------------------------------------------
                     Dollar investor    Sterling investor
                       1993    1994       1993    1994
                       Year      H1       Year      H1
 ------------------------------------------------------------
UK                     23.8    -8.6       26.7   -12.4
US                      9.6    -3.2       12.6    -7.2
Japan                  25.0    30.8       27.9    25.3
Europe ex UK           32.5     0.7       35.5    -3.5
Pacific ex Japan       89.9   -15.7       94.4   -19.2
World ex Japan         21.7    -4.4       24.6    -8.4
World                  22.6     4.6       25.4     0.3
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Adrian Fitzgerald is director of equity research at NatWest Securities,
Edinburgh

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940723

