FT944-2443

FT  16 DEC 94 / November retail figures confirm sluggish demand


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Economics Correspondent


Official figures on November retail sales confirmed the impression left by
the Confederation of British Industry survey this week - that consumer
demand was sluggish in the run-up to the vital Christmas period.
Retailers are finding it difficult to attract shoppers without cutting
prices. For example, according to the British Retail Consortium, department
stores reported that fragrance sales were well ahead, but only with the help
of price promotion that had damaged margins.
Mr Hugh Clark, the consortium's trading policy director, said: 'Whilst
spending slightly more overall, consumers have adopted a more cautious and
demanding approach, researching carefully and seeking out the best value,
keeping retail inflation at a very low level and margins under pressure.'
November's 2.5 per cent annual rise in retail sales volumes, seasonally
adjusted, is the lowest increase since April last year. In October the
annual rise was a revised 3 per cent.
Seasonal adjustment is an important part of the statistical process at this
time of year; November is normally the second busiest shopping month. While
the seasonally adjusted figures show no change in sales between October and
November, in unadjusted terms sales actually rose by 7.5 per cent.
The Central Statistical Office's preferred measure is to use a three-monthly
average. On that basis, sales volumes in the three months to November were 3
per cent higher than in the same period of 1993. However, the rise compared
with the previous three months (to August) was just 0.5 per cent.
In value terms, unadjusted retail sales in November were 3.4 per cent higher
than in November last year.
Comparing the three months to November with the previous quarter, the
strongest sector was household goods, which recorded a rise of 1.9 per cent;
the weakest was other non-food, which includes stores such as off-licences,
florists and tobacconists, which reported a fall of 0.9 per cent.
Clothing and footwear sales also fell, both between October and November,
and on a three month on three month basis. The mild weather affected sales
of coats, hats and gloves.
However, food retailers reported sales volumes in the three months to
November which were 0.6 per cent higher than in the previous quarter, and
4.8 per cent higher than in the same period a year ago. The British Retail
Consortium said fresh produce and poultry sold well, and Christmas foods
were in demand.
Significant falls in sales of camcorders, video games and home computers
were reported. Yet sales of white goods, televisions and hi-fis were up on a
year ago.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941216

