FT943-919

FT  27 SEP 94 / Helping Providence along


   By JOE ROGALY


The changes to the Labour party are not quite complete. There is more work
to do. For a start there is that dreadful colour, red. Blue is so much more
sympathetic. Then there is that awful song, the Red Flag. Surely something
better could be sung at the conclusion of next week's party conference? Land
of Hope and Glory, possibly? The delegates might be given little Union Jacks
to wave as the leader takes his bows. Not least is the need to look again at
the party's name. We must be frank here. On its track record of the past 15
years, 'Labour' is not exactly bankable as a harvester of hearts, minds and
little crosses on ballot papers. The word 'Conservative' springs to mind.
That has proven potential.
Yeah yeah. Say it. The old cracks are truly the best ones. The line about
Land of Hope and Glory is to be found in this morning's 'open letter to Tony
Blair' from Demos, an eclectic think-tank. The Labour leader is doing well,
but he cannot avoid such observations. During the past few years he has
given some of us the impression that he seeks to make truly revolutionary
changes to the Labour party. I suspect that, if he could, he would rename it
 -not 'Conservative', of course, but, say, 'Democratic'.
Short of the absurd, Mr Blair will do what he believes is necessary to win.
Perhaps he is mindful of the sermons of Hugh Blair, an 18th century divine
whose works were known to Jane Austen. I like to imagine that the
long-forgotten clergyman to whom she refers in Mansfield Park is one of the
Labour leader's ancestors. 'Let us then neglect no means which may be of
avail for procuring the grace and favour of that divine Providence on which
so much depends,' this ancient Blair preached. 'Because Providence is
superior to us, it does not follow that therefore man has no part to act; or
because our industry is sometimes disappointed, that therefore it is always
in vain.'
To date, little of Mr Blair's industry has been without fruit. Not content
with snatching the label of purveyor of law and order from the Tories, he is
engaged this week on an exercise designed to portray the government as a
bunch of profligates and the people's party as the ark of fiscal prudence.
Yesterday Ms Harriet Harman was put up to deliver an ingenious recalculation
of the public expenditure tables, allocating so much to 'rescue' spending
and so much to 'renewal'. It appears that the former has risen and the
latter fallen. Fancy.
We need not spend time debating whether the shadow chief secretary's sums
are accurate. That is beside the point. What is going on is the manipulation
of our perceptions. The Tories are branded tax liars, which is only right
considering their ruthless disregard of veracity during the April 1992
election campaign. They have failed to manage the economy properly, says
Labour, with less chance of being believed now that the prospect of a long
period of non-inflationary growth lies before us. Never mind. We are to take
it that 'rescue' spending, on social security, is the consequence of
Conservative economic failure. Today Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor,
will follow through with the argument that the old dispute about which party
is likely to tax us more belongs to a bygone era. The terms of the debate
are to be changed. There are no quick fixes on offer. Labour, he will
intimate, will invest for the long term.
Decoded, this had better mean 'no new taxes', or it will not help Providence
to do its work of granting the opposition a spell in government. Mr Brown
need not say as much in so many words. Like Mr Blair the shadow chancellor
is blessed by his opponents, both inside his party and beyond. Think about
it. The Labour left, depleted in numbers, is still quoted on the airwaves.
There will be trouble at next week's party conference, the broadcasts warn
us. It does not sound like much of a threat to me.
The traditional left is a damp squib. It should be called the Pipsqueak
tendency. Yet Mr Peter Hain and Dr Roger Berry, both MPs who cast doubt on
the Brown-Blair-Harman strategy, serve a useful purpose. As critics who are
easily squashed, they give verisimilitude to the centrist proposition that
Labour modernisers want us to digest. The Conservative chief secretary to
the treasury is equally helpful. 'I can hardly believe my ears,' said Mr
Jonathan Aitken yesterday, after hearing Ms Harman's remarks. 'Here we have
the shadow chief secretary attacking the Tories over money they are spending
on the poor and the unemployed.'
Precisely. Labour's pitch is that it will manage a dynamic market economy
better than the Conservatives. When it succeeds, it can help the worse-off.
Wealth creation first, redistribution, maybe, to follow. It is not
socialism, but Providence has little patience with that outmoded creed. The
new doctrine is impertinent, but no more so than Mr Blair's campaign on
cutting down crime, or his statement that he thinks it better for children
to be raised by two parents than one. He is running for office in a
conservative country, and must campaign accordingly.
There is plenty of evidence in favour of such an accommodation. A new Fabian
pamphlet, Any Southern Comfort, by Giles Radice and Stephen Pollard, draws
on focus group research to establish that while Labour is better regarded
than it was, it is still on probation. White collar and skilled manual
employees, floating voters to a man and woman, are worried about crime,
jobs, health care, their children's futures. These anxieties have arisen
under a succession of Conservative ministries. Labour is correct to
concentrate on them, but it has not yet convinced sufficient potential
converts that it will make the streets safe and enlarge the employment
market without raising taxes or restarting inflation.
Labour's theft of chunks of the Tories' image is a direct response to this
kind of research. It may not please Demos, whose wish-list demands that Mr
Blair produce a vision of Britain as a 'teleworkshop of the world'. He is
asked to end middle class tax reliefs to finance a basic income tax rate of
15 per cent, as suggested by Mr Frank Field some years ago, and adopt other
policies regarded by Demos authors as radical. And why not? We all project
our fantasies on to Labour's changing screen. Mr Blair's job is to select
those that assist Providence to assist him.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940927

