FT942-15461

FT  15 APR 94 / South African Elections (April 26-28): South African
mediation effort fails


   By PATTI WALDMEIR and MARK SUZMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


An attempt to resolve South Africa's political crisis through foreign
mediation collapsed yesterday. Mediators packed their bags and left the
country's political parties to their disputes.
'The fact that it has failed fills me with sadness,' Lord Carrington, former
British foreign secretary, told reporters as he, Mr Henry Kissinger, former
US secretary of state, and five fellow mediators cut short their mission
after the parties failed to provide them with agreed terms of reference.
The failure of mediation, less than two weeks before planned all-race
elections on April 26-28, will seriously undermine hopes for a peaceful poll
and for stability of the new government. Constitutional negotiations appear
to have reached a dead end, though African National Congress president
Nelson Mandela said last night he was prepared to continue talking to the
mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom party. In reality, negotiations are likely to
resume after the poll. In the meantime, the ANC will continue trying to do a
separate deal with Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini, to guarantee his
constitutional status and persuade him to endorse the poll.
The ANC will also push for a further security crackdown in KwaZulu/Natal,
power base of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Inkatha leader. Mr Cyril
Ramaphosa, ANC secretary general, said more troops would be sent to the area
to deal with a predicted surge in violence.
Mr Ramaphosa made an unprecedented visit to the Johannesburg Stock Exchange
to warn brokers of the imminent collapse of mediation. Markets reacted
negatively. The JSE's overall equity index weakened 68 to 4,955 and the
commercial rand, the trading currency, dipped 0.62 cents against the dollar
to close in London at R3.6008 in spite of central bank intervention.
Mr Mandela and President F W de Klerk were last night at pains to stress
their desire for reconciliation when they took part in South Africa's first
ever televised election debate. 'I am proud to hold your hand. Let us work
together to end division and suspicion,' Mr Mandela told local television
viewers and millions more watching the live debate on CNN Worldwide, as he
grasped the hand of Mr de Klerk.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940415

