FT942-16231

FT  12 APR 94 / Crime laws head hectic US Congress schedule


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The US Congress faces a hectic legislative schedule after returning to
Washington yesterday from a two-week recess, with healthcare, crime, welfare
reform and campaign finances likely to dominate debate in the coming weeks.
Crime legislation, of which one version has already passed the Senate, will
be the immediate priority, with debate scheduled in the House of
Representatives later this week.
But House leaders have not yet reached agreement on the exact contents of
their version of the bill, which will roll together measures including
proposals for mandatory life sentences for a third violent offence. Gun
control and death penalty components of the bill are likely to be
controversial.
Congressional leaders say the healthcare reform bill will be more difficult
to craft, but claim legislation can be passed by both the House and the
Senate before July, opening the way for a climactic conference between the
two chambers to reconcile their two versions, at which the real shape of the
reform will finally be determined.
Senator George Mitchell, the Democratic leader, yesterday met Senator Robert
Dole, his Republican opposite number, to try to agree on how to arrange a
busy programme for the Senate, with a possible clash looming over Mr Dole's
insistence on congressional hearings into President Bill Clinton's financial
involvement in the Whitewater affair.
Mr Dole has threatened to delay action on other legislation if he does not
get his way on Whitewater hearings, but Mr Mitchell, who had to handle
another threatened Republican filibuster yesterday over legislation to
designate 3.75m acres of Californian desert as wilderness, warned the
Republicans against such delaying tactics.
'Senator Dole is a good friend and a very smart man, but I would not want to
be him going to the American people and saying: 'We think Whitewater is more
important than passing a crime bill. We think Whitewater is more important
than passing a healthcare bill',' Mr Mitchell said in a television interview
on Sunday.
Mr Mitchell's own future could influence the Senate's work this summer. The
Democratic leader has already said he will not run for re-election in
November, but if Mr Clinton were to select him to fill the vacant seat on
the Supreme Court he might leave the leadership even sooner.
So far only Senator Thomas Daschle of South Dakota has declared himself a
candidate for the leadership, while Senator John Breaux of Louisiana, who
had been considered a leading contender, yesterday said he would not seek
the job.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940412

