FT943-12636

FT  23 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: The week ahead


Imperial Chemical Industries, the UK's biggest chemicals group, reports
second-quarter results on Thursday. Estimates range from Pounds 110m to
Pounds 130m against Pounds 96m. Most observers are bullish about prospects.
ICI is benefiting from its exposure to the buoyant US and Asian markets, and
the UK recovery. The only fly in the ointment is the European continent, but
US groups have even noted some upturn in demand there.
Reuters Holdings, the UK financial information and news group, will
emphasise its international and high-tech credentials on Wednesday by
presenting interim results in New York. The meeting will be transmitted live
by satellite to London, where analysts expect pre-tax profits of about
Pounds 245m for the six months to June 30, compared with Pounds 215m last
time.
BAT Industries, the UK-based tobacco and financial services group, is
expected on Wednesday to announce an increase in underlying interim profits
to about Pounds 900m before tax, although the range stretches from about
Pounds 880m to Pounds 920m. Last year's figure was Pounds 902m, but that
included a Pounds 123m exceptional profit from a brand swap deal with a US
company. Growth is thought to have been stronger in the second quarter,
driven mainly by insurance rather than tobacco. Lloyds is the first of the
British clearing banks to report its interim results (on Friday) although
the outlook is affected by uncertainty over its proposed Pounds 1.8bn
acquisition of Cheltenham & Gloucester building society. Pre-tax profits of
about Pounds 850m are expected although the figure is uncertain because it
will be affected heavily by how much the bank gains from releasing bad debt
provisions.
Interim results from Lloyds Abbey Life, the life insurance group, on
Wednesday are expected to show pre-tax profits of Pounds 164m to Pounds 176m
for the six months to June 30 (Pounds 152.5m). Interim dividend is expected
to be between 6.5p and 6.7p (6.3p). Acquisition of new life and pensions
business will have been difficult, especially given the emphasis put on
training the sales force. Growing vehicle sales and an exceptional gain on
the disposal of the Appleyard motor dealer group should lift interim pre-tax
profits at Lex Service, the UK's largest car distribution and leasing group,
to around Pounds 31m (Pounds 21.2m) under FRS3. Analysts expect underlying
profits of about Pounds 24m when the group reports on Tuesday.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940723

