FT941-12809

FT  28 JAN 94 / Still drilling the N Sea wishing wells: The harsh climate of
tax and pricing that challenges oil exploration


   By ROBERT CORZINE


The drillers on oil rigs exploring in the North Sea are an optimistic breed.
A positive attitude helps when only a third of exploration wells drilled
find significant traces of hydrocarbons and only a few of those prove
economically viable.
The drillers' optimism will be tested this year as the effects of low oil
prices and tax changes made last year threaten a lean 12 months.
A recent study from consultants Arthur Andersen suggests that companies have
firm plans to drill only 100 exploration or assessment wells this year
compared with 121 last year and more than 200 in 1990, when tax policies
encouraged exploration. About seven onshore wells are likely to be drilled
this year.
The decline in exploration comes as UK North Sea production reaches levels
last seen in 1988 - before the Piper Alpha disaster led to large-scale
shutdowns for modifications to platforms and the installation of new safety
equipment. Oil production last year was an average of 1.98m barrels a day, a
five-year high as 14 new oilfields came on-stream, compared with nine in
1992. Gas production was 20 per cent higher.
Average daily oil and gas revenues rose by nearly 13 per cent to Pounds
33.5m, helped by buoyant gas prices and foreign exchange rates which offset
somewhat the steep fall in oil prices, down from about Dollars 20 a barrel
for the benchmark Brent crude in January last year to a current level of
about Dollars 14.
The production surge gave a strong boost to the UK economy last year,
contributing 0.2 per cent of the seasonally adjusted 0.7 per cent increase
in total GDP for the fourth quarter, according to government figures. The
development of new reserves continued to account for about a fifth of UK
industrial investment in the first half of last year, official statistics
show.
Oil output is likely to rise again this year as additional fields come
on-stream as a result of investment decisions taken a few years ago. Ms Kate
Jackson, an analyst at Wood Mackenzie consultants in Edinburgh, says five
new oil fields should begin producing in 1994. That, say provisional
estimates from Wood Mackenzie, will increase UK offshore oil production for
1994 to an average of 2.5m barrels a day.
Revenues, however, will come under pressure unless oil prices recover, a
prospect that divides analysts. City forecasts for the average price of
Brent crude this year range from Dollars 14-Dollars 18 a barrel compared
with Dollars 17 a barrel last year.
The short-term effect of low prices on North Sea output is surprisingly
small. A recent Wood Mackenzie study concluded that a barrel of North Sea
oil costs on average Dollars 5 (Pounds 3.30) to produce. In spite of the
North Sea's reputation as a high-cost production area, most existing fields
should remain profitable even if the oil price struggles to rise above the
present depressed Dollars 14 a barrel. Even a collapse to Dollars 10 a
barrel would lead to only a marginal decline in production to the year 2000,
the study said.
Analysts say this is because cost-cutting and technological innovation is
helping companies find and recover greater amounts of oil at lower costs.
The extensive infrastructure of North Sea pipelines and land terminals means
new discoveries near existing fields can be easily and cheaply connected to
pipeline net-works.
The ownership structure of most North Sea fields is another factor likely to
keep even marginal fields producing, according to Ms Jo Armstrong, economist
with Royal Bank of Scotland.
It is common for a dozen companies, ranging from very small exploration and
productions companies to the integrated majors such as Shell and British
Petroleum, to have stakes in individual fields. 'The different financial and
tax positions of the partners militates against early shut-ins,' she says.
The high cost of maintaining an idle North Sea platform is another deterrent
to early closedowns.
It is therefore no surprise that companies seeking short-term financial
relief find it easier to postpone or cancel exploration projects.
But those that can afford to continue drilling should find that costs have
fallen sharply. Current day rates for drilling rigs are at the bottom of the
usual Pounds 17,000-Pounds 22,000 range, according to Robert Steven of the
FT's North Sea Letter. High lay-up costs mean that many drillers may simply
grin and bear it by accepting contracts below their operating costs while
waiting for oil prices to rise.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940128

