FT944-10894

FT  09 NOV 94 / EU ministers refuse to abandon steel quotas


   By EMMA TUCKER


   BRUSSELS


European Union industry ministers yesterday refused to back proposals from
the European Commission to abandon quotas on steel imports from Slovakia and
the Czech Republic.
The ministers were meeting in Brussels to discuss the commission's decision
to tear up its two-year rescue plan for the EU's steel industry after steel
companies failed to deliver capacity cuts essential for the successful
restructuring of the troubled sector.
Full abolition of the plan implies an end to quotas on steel imports from
the two east European countries from the beginning of next year. But
ministers from some member states were concerned about the impact of
increased east European imports and argued that the quotas should be
extended.
Yesterday the commission was backed by the UK, the Netherlands and Denmark
but opposition from other member states meant no decision was reached about
the quotas. This has been delayed until the new year when four new member
states - Austria, Finland, Sweden and Norway - have joined the Union.
Mr Tim Eggar, UK industry minister, said he very much regretted the failure
to agree to end the quotas.
'It seems to me that one of the things which is giving the commission and
the whole of the EU a credibility problem is that when they reach agreements
they don't stick to them,' he said. 'I was disturbed by the attitude of a
number of my colleagues who were prepared to see the end of the plan but
wanted to keep the quotas in place.'
The lack of a decision on quotas raises questions as to whether the rescue
plan has been abandoned.
Ministers agreed to drop quarterly production guidelines and framework
agreements between the commission and the industry. But they also agreed to
maintain the social measures of the steel plan - designed to ease the
problems incurred with installation closures - for another year, even if
there were no proposals to increase the Ecu240m (Pounds 188.88m) originally
earmarked.
Furthermore, a number of delegations in Brussels yesterday said they
regretted that the commission had abandoned the plan, and the council of
ministers as a whole reaffirmed that it was 'very concerned at the
persistence of structural overcapacity, the main cause of the difficult
situation in which the European steel industry found itself'.
It added that notwithstanding the 'favourable' trends in the steel market,
'a lasting solution to the problem of overcapacity must be found'.
Ministers also discussed the future of Eko Stahl, former east Germany's
biggest steel mill. The commission has recommended that Eko Stahl should be
granted aid from the German government to permit the takeover by
Cockerill-Sambre of Belgium. However, the move has to be agreed unanimously
and yesterday the British asked for more details on the level and type of
German subsidy.
In addition, the French said they were not ready to reach a decision and a
vote was delayed. The French are understood to be using delaying tactics
over Eko Stahl in order to win concessions on French shipyards, threatened
with extinction if subsidies are withdrawn under an international agreement.
In spite of this, Mr Karel Van Miert, commissioner responsible for
competition, yesterday said he was confident an agreement on Eko Stahl would
soon be reached.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941109

