FT944-6051

FT  01 DEC 94 / Russian forces mass for push against breakaway regime


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


Russia was on the threshold of military action last night against the
breakaway republic of Chechnya as the deadline loomed for President Boris
Yeltsin's ultimatum that the rebel leadership lay down its arms.
The crisis, building since Chechnya's declaration of independence late in
1991, has been intensified by Mr Yeltsin's deadline of 6am today for
compliance by the Chechens.
Detachments of interior ministry troops were massed at the base of Mozdok,
across the border from Chechnya in the neighbouring republic of North
Ingushetia. Women, children, and the elderly were told yesterday to leave
the Chechen capital Grozny, 1,500km south-east of Moscow.
A report in the Moscow daily Sevodnya said that a further detachment of
officers based in Khabarovsk, in the Russian far east, had been awaiting
orders for several days to fly to Grozny to police a state of emergency.
General Dzhokar Dudayev, the Chechen president who declared the north
Caucasian republic independent, has said that any attack by Russia will be
met with armed resistance. Chechnya has a population of 1.2m.
Grozny airport was bombed for the second day in succession yesterday, with
reports suggesting that at least 10 aircraft had been set ablaze on the
runway. Russian bases surrounding the republic denied ordering a bombing
mission.
Fighting has ceased between the Chechen forces loyal to Gen Dudayev and the
Russian-backed opposition provisional council - which brought opposition
troops to the gates of the presidential palace at the weekend. The council
declared a ceasefire following Mr Yeltsin's ultimatum on Tuesday.
The Chechens are seen, especially in Moscow, as violent and
disproportionately involved in organised crime. They carried on resistance
to Russian imperial rule in the 19th century more bitterly than any other
Caucasian people and were repressed by Stalin during the war for alleged
collaboration with the Germans.
Because of that reputation, strong fears have been voiced of a campaign of
retaliation in Russia if the intervention goes ahead. The guard on Mr
Yeltsin has been strengthened, as has security at nuclear power stations.
While preparing for war, Russia is also making overtures for a peaceful
settlement. Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, was reported last
night as telling a group of journalists that 'we are ready for talks with
anyone - but I hope the people of Chechnya understand that they cannot play
games and that this cannot go on'.
Mr Sergei Yushenkov, chairman of the Russian parliament's defence committee,
is to fly to Grozny today to attempt to negotiate the freedom of as many as
70 Russians captured in the weekend fighting. An aide to Mr Yushenkov said
last night that Gen Dudayev had agreed his safe passage and to hold talks on
the prisoners' fate, although an earlier statement from the Chechen press
service denied that they would be freed.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941201

