FT943-12646

FT  23 JUL 94 / Watchdog boosted as Halifax and Allied Dunbar join


   By ALISON SMITH


Halifax Building Society and Allied Dunbar - the last significant
organisations whose support for the Personal Investment Authority had been
in doubt - yesterday announced they would sign up for the new regulator.
The news is a boost for the PIA, which has been the subject of intense
controversy in the financial services industry. It began operations this
week, replacing the existing regulators in a move intended to improve
investor protection.
Despite the list of financial services companies which have expressed
opposition to aspects of the regulatory change over the past few months, the
move leaves Prudential Corporation, the UK's largest life insurer, as the
only large organisation to have insisted on its right to be regulated
directly by the Securities and Investments Board, the chief City watchdog.
Statements from Halifax and Allied Dunbar show they still have serious
doubts about the PIA's likely effectiveness, despite their applications to
join.
Mr Mike Blackburn, Halifax chief executive, said the debate about whether
the current system could deliver high standards of investor protection would
continue. 'For so long as it remains', however, the society believed that
the PIA would stand a better chance of reaching the necessary standards with
the support of Halifax.
Mr George Greener, chief executive of BAT's UK financial services
operations, which include Allied Dunbar and the other subsidiary Eagle Star,
said the companies were joining because there was more chance of influencing
it from within. While he still had grave concerns about the PIA, 'we are
where we are', he said.
While the PIA was careful yesterday to say only that it was treating the
applications like any others, it will have been relieved to receive them.
Had Halifax or Allied Dunbar followed Prudential's announcement of its
refusal to join the PIA in March, then the balance of the debate within the
industry could have turned against the new regulator.
C&G leads on profit per customer, Page 4
Frisky watchdog, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940723

