FT942-15419

FT  15 APR 94 / Utility watchdogs backed: Carsberg warns government against
overhaul of regulators


   By ANDREW ADONIS


Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, has come out strongly
against overhauling the system of utility regulation, warning of the
'private agendas' of those calling for change.
Speaking at a dinner, Sir Bryan advised the government to be 'cautious'
about change. 'Although not perfect, the achievements of the current system
have been substantial,' he said, and warned of the danger that reform would
politicise the regulatory process.
'The great strength of the present system is the removal of politicians from
the regime, (whose involvement) had pretty disastrous consequences in past,'
he said, referring to the detailed involvement of ministers in the
management of the utilities when they were nationalised industries.
As director-general of Oftel, the telecommunications regulator, from 1984
until 1992, Sir Bryan set parameters for the succession of regulatory
offices since established for the other privatised utilities, each a
statutory body largely independent of Whitehall.
Calls for reform have come most recently from Mr John Baker, chief executive
of National Power, the privatised electricity generator, and from City
institutions concerned at the coming regulatory reviews of the water and
electricity distribution industries.
Earlier this month Mr Baker publicly supported the idea that utility
regulators be brought together in a common organisation.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd Investment Management and Prudential, the UK's
largest institutional investor, have been urging water companies to appeal
to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission rather than accept any tough price
limits set by Ofwat, the water industry regulator.
Although not naming the critics, Sir Bryan dismissed those calling for
looser regulation. He noted that privatisation legislation made no mention
of 'light-rein' regulation, but imposed specific duties on regulators to
ensure fair competition and reasonable terms for consumers.
Sir Bryan also intervened in the dispute between British Telecommunications
and the government over the ban on BT carrying entertainment services. He
supported the ban as essential to promoting local competition in
telecommunications by the cable TV companies, but warned it would have to be
reviewed in due course 'otherwise we shall end up with new local monopolies
 -and we also don't want to lose the power of BT to innovate.'
Editorial comment, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940415

