FT942-12642

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: CRA puts Pasminco stake up for
sale


   By NIKKI TAIT


   MELBOURNE


Pasminco, the only primary producer of refined zinc and lead in Australia
and a leading force in the zinc industry, has in effect been put up for sale
by CRA, the Melbourne-based diversified mining and resources company in
which RTZ of the UK has a 49 per cent interest.
CRA said yesterday it was prepared to sell its 29.9 per cent interest in
Pasminco 'subject to receiving an offer which is satisfactory as to price
and conditions'.
In addition to its current shareholding, CRA has an option over a further
19.2 per cent of Pasminco - shares which are held by North Broken Hill Peko
(North), another Australian mining and resources group. This expires on June
6.
If CRA were to exercise the option and sell on the shares, it could provide
interested buyers with a 49 per cent holding in Pasminco. Analysts estimated
that a stake of that size could fetch about ADollars 500m to ADollars 600m
(USDollars 357m-USDollars 429m).
Speculation over possible bidders for ranged widely. Names mentioned
included international companies such as South Africa's Gencor and Minorco,
and Canada's Teck, as well as local mining groups, such as Normandy Poseidon
and BHP. Pasminco shares closed 5 cents lower at ADollars 1.77.
CRA said the sale of the Pasminco shares would release cash which would be
used to fund the development of the Century zinc-lead-silver deposit in
Queensland. A year-long study is under way there, and Mr John Ralph, CRA's
chief executive, said any development would probably involve an open-pit
operation.
He added that the company had yet to decide on its initial size and capacity
of development, but regardless of the mine's size, expected a development
cost of about ADollars 600m to ADollars 800m. This would make Century one of
the largest projects in the zinc and lead industry as an initial
development, said CRA.
Results warning, Page 34

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940428

