FT941-4062

FT  12 MAR 94 / Books: In search of adventure


   By JDF JONES


SOMETHING LOST BEHIND THE RANGES by John Blashford-Snell HarperCollins
Pounds 18, 374 pages
John Blashford-Snell is one of the last surviving 'explorers' in the
Victorians' understanding of the word. Supported in that tradition by the
Army, he was appointed 'Adventure Training Officer' in Sandhurst in 1963,
which seems to have allowed him to travel to the more obscure corners of the
world at the expense of the taxpayer; he also, it must be granted, did his
duty as a Sapper in various less interesting places like Belfast and
Whitehall.
This autobiography, Something Lost Behind The Ranges, is by no means
Blashford-Snell's first book and it is a surprisingly good read so long as
you are not looking for philosophical insights or deep political analysis
(Haile Selassie is 'one of the most supreme Christian warrior kings the
world had ever known'). What he gives us instead of profundity is a brisk
record of a crowded, dangerous and adventurous life.
After childhood in a Hereford rectory, school in Jersey, and a subaltern's
blooding in Cyprus, Blashford-Snell went off to Ethiopia on 'the expedition
that changed my life' - to attempt to navigate the Blue Nile by raft. He and
his multi-disciplinary team had not reckoned with the bandits and rapids
that awaited them, but they made it, and it made his name.
There followed the founding of the Scientific Exploration Society and 20
years of fun: South America (the Alaska-Cape Horn venture, with the horrors
of the Darien Gap), Oman, Zaire (a scientific route to commemorate the
centenary of Stanley's trans-Africa expedition), Papua New Guinea, East
Africa, Loch Ness, Tibet, Mongolia - and so much and so many miles more.
Blashford-Snell's own role, he explains in a rather endearingly inarticulate
way: 'I am not a scientist but simply, as a Royal Engineer, an
'obstacle-breaker' whose job it was to launch and sustain the experts in
their selected areas to the best of my ability'.
The job got more serious when the adventure-training of young soldiers was
diverted to a larger role by a British government alarmed by the arrival of
a new generation of unemployed. Prince Charles told the Lords that the young
were seeking 'some of the challenges of war in a peacetime situation': HRH
thereafter became one of Blashford-Snell's most important patrons.
The immediate result was Operation Drake in 1978, which sent a a sailing
ship round the world on a variety of good deeds, crewed by 'Young Explorers'
who had been selected by old-fashioned criteria ('We had to get candidates
wet, cold, hungry, miserable, frightened and furious as fast as possible,' -
Blashford-Snell was surprised to find that girls qualified faster than men).
That led to Operation Raleigh, on a larger scale, and eventually in the
late-1980s to a number of 'Executive Expeditions' in which older FT-types
went out to places like Botswana and Nepal to endure the sort of experiences
they were endorsing for the younger generation.
He can be surprisingly funny, particularly about his childhood: he writes of
his pet monkey who seized control of the household Maxim gun; the St Bernard
who devoured the pekingese which cocked a leg over the war memorial; the
ringing of his father's church bell by peppering it with a .300 rifle. The
tone of voice is, shall we say, Sandhurst ('my chums'; 'my jolly, supportive
wife'). There is next to no description of a personal life, and no detail
about the eventual troubles of Operation Raleigh, or, for that matter, the
organising of these formidable expeditions.
This is the very opposite of the life of an actuary or an academic and
Blashford-Snell tells it with gusto.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940312

