FT942-14344

FT  21 APR 94 / Nato allies threaten wider use of air strikes in Bosnia


   By LAURA SILBER, GEORGE GRAHAM and GILLIAN TETT


   BELGRADE, WASHINGTON, BRUSSELS


The US and its European allies yesterday threatened to step up air attacks
on the Bosnian Serbs as suffering in Gorazde reached new extremes with the
reported death of 10 patients in a rocket attack on the town hospital.
Support for escalating air strikes was stronger in Washington than in
Europe, where officials were wary of alienating Russia and putting UN ground
troops at greater risk. Moscow has rebuked the Bosnian Serbs over their
continued attacks on Gorazde, but still opposes the use of force against
them.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, said broader use of air power
was necessary to avoid a repetition of the Gorazde tragedy in the five other
places designated by the UN as safe areas for Moslems.
He also called for tighter sanctions against the Serbs and fresh efforts to
bring the parties round the negotiating table. Other US administration
officials said they would press their allies to endorse the use of air power
outside the safe havens.
In Brussels, Nato ambassadors gave a cautiously positive response to a
request from Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, for more air
support. A Nato spokesman said Mr Boutros Ghali's request had been
'considered in a favourable light', and Nato military planners would
'urgently' start drawing up plans for possible air strikes in co-ordination
with the UN protection force.
But Nato leaders warned that these preparations could take several days, and
said a firm decision would not be taken until another Nato meeting, expected
to take place in the next day or two. Nato diplomatic sources indicated that
they hoped to use the delay to consult Russia over any possible action.
Bosnian radio said the town was gripped by panic as 60,000 people, most of
whom are refugees, were under fire despite the promise on Tuesday night by
Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, of a unilateral ceasefire.
The agreement also allows for the deployment of some 150 peacekeepers in the
Moslem-controlled part of Gorazde, which would lay the groundwork for the
Serb partition of the town in the strategic Drina River valley.
Ten people were killed and 15 wounded when three rockets hit the hospital,
aid workers said. However, the Bosnian Serb army accused the Moslem
defenders of sniping and firing mortars and anti-aircraft guns from the town
centre, said Tanjug, the Yugoslav news agency.
Editorial comment, Page 29

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940421

