FT941-17074

FT  06 JAN 94 / Personal View: UK's wrong turning on training


   By DAVID SOSKICE


The UK government has recently given two important clues to future policy
directions on the links between education and training. First, it is
launching a new apprenticeship scheme. Second, it is cutting the number of
entrants to higher education this year by 3.5 per cent. There are good
reasons for believing this is the wrong direction for the UK to be taking.
During the last decade, a series of studies comparing vocational training in
the UK and other economies has made clear how limited a role UK companies
played in the provision of effective initial vocational training for
school-leavers.
The central problem has been a failure to understand the institutional
preconditions required for the private sector to be heavily involved in the
initial training of young people. In all the advanced economies in which the
private sector plays a central role in such training (the Scandinavian
economies, Austria, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Japan), there
are strong and binding traditions of co-operation between companies and in
long-term links between companies and banks. These 'deep structures' of
capitalism allow four things to happen which are necessary to persuade
companies to commit serious resources to initial training:
1. Wage competition between companies is 'managed', so companies do not fear
that the employees they have trained will be poached. 2. Companies deal
directly with highly resourced employer organisations (in which they have
confidence) over the setting up, updating, monitoring and administration of
training programmes. They do not have to deal directly with public training
agencies (which they are likely in principle to distrust).
3. They have access to long-term finance.
4. With powerful employer organisations behind them, companies are prepared
to allow unions an important role in both training policy-making and in
day-to-day involvement.
British companies have none of these advantages. They can rely neither on
non-market co-ordination with other companies, nor on long-term links with
banks. Any attempt to develop an effective system of vocational training in
the UK is thus unlikely to be successful.
Different 'systems' of capitalism, however, have different institutional
comparative advantages. In a quite different area from vocational training,
big changes have been occurring in the link between education and the UK
economy. These changes are similar to, but lag behind, what has been
happening in the US where, in the last decade or so, there appears to have
been a radical change in the nature of skills required. This is especially
so in the service sectors, where the skills that are increasingly in demand
are not the type taught in vocational training, but are social,
organisational and computing skills.
The route to social skills is the education system, but with academic
quality of education mattering less than prolonged immersion in an
environment in which communication with peers and self-organisation is
important. The US, with more than 55 per cent of young people going into
some form of higher education, has the educational pool which has been able
to meet the demand for this type of labour force. Productivity in the US is
still significantly greater than in Germany and Japan, and greater again
than in the UK. Since this largely now reflects the performance of the US
service sector, the mass higher education road is a potentially attractive
one for Britain to go down.
The big changes in the UK appear to reflect the early stages of just such a
direction. Preliminary results of the recent large-scale Employment in
Britain Survey attach particular importance to social skills, suggesting a
widespread increase in the demand for 'higher social skills, for instance
with respect to communication and handling people', and to computing skills.
Equally significant is the near doubling of the proportion of young people
going on from school to higher education. This can be partially explained by
the pressure of government education policies. But it is hard to resist the
conclusion that the driving force is the changing nature of skill
requirements. So it is difficult to understand why the government is braking
the expansion of higher education, and re-emphasising apprenticeships.
The author is director of the Economic Change and Employment Institute of
the German government's Social Science Centre, Berlin. He is an emeritus
fellow of University College, Oxford

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940106

