FT941-5514

FT  05 MAR 94 / Cookery: England's favourite pasta


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


Manufacturing tagliatelle in the privacy of your very own Smallbone kitchen
might be a late-20th century phenomenon. So, too, might be nipping out to a
supermarket for the latest line in multi-layered seafood lasagne. But it
struck me the other day that there is nothing new about the English passion
for pasta.
Macaroni, in particular, has been popular for centuries: indeed, macaroni
cheese is a national dish. It has been a nursery comforter for generations
of children and a traditional choice for Friday lunch in households where
meat was forbidden on Fridays. Until the 1980s, it was the only alternative
to an omelette that vegetarians were offered outside their own homes.
Macaroni is said to have come to Britain from medieval Italy, where it was
dressed commonly with soft cheese, sugar and cinnamon and served as a first
course. Gradually, the sweet elements gave way to more elaborate savoury
additions. By the 18th century, macaroni was the height of fashion in
Britain. Indeed, so smart was it that dandies were nicknamed 'macaroni'.
At that time, a favoured dish for balls and theatre suppers was Roman pie
(the word Roman in the title indicated the inclusion of macaroni, just as
Florentine implied spinach).
This pie was a mixture of sliced chicken, game birds, ham, tongue and
intensely-flavoured gravy, layered in a dish with macaroni bathed in a
creamy bechamel sauce, and sealed under a lid of puff paste to keep
everything moist and succulent.
It is a recipe to remember for Christmas - one of the best ways I know to
use up turkey and other festive meats.
Here are two of my macaroni favourites - recipes in which the pasta plays an
equal role with the other ingredients. Take your pick from chicken livers or
mussels, both luxurious but inexpensive.
MUSSELS WITH MACARONI, SCORCHED PEPPERS & FENNEL (serves 4) Ingredients: 6oz
macaroni; 1 1/2 lb mussels; 3-4 tablespoons dry white wine (or water); 1
large red pepper, seeded and chopped; 1 1/2 plump heads of fennel, trimmed
and cut into chunks;  1/2 teaspoon fennel seed and a few strands of saffron,
pounded together with pestle and mortar, then soaked in 3-4 tablespoons
boiling water; 1-1 1/2 teaspoons cornflour mixed to a paste with 2
tablespoons cold water; 1 tablespoon or so of olive oil; 2-3 tablespoons
each snipped chives and flat leaf parsley.
Method: Clean the mussels and prepare the other ingredients as described.
Cook the macaroni in boiling, salted water. Meanwhile, heat a little oil in
a large, heavy-based pan and scorch the pepper and fennel. Lower the flame
and cook gently for a few minutes more until the vegetables are nearly
tender. Add the saffron and fennel liquid and the chopped herbs, and set
aside.
Towards the end of this time, bring the wine to the boil in a separate large
pan. Add the mussels, cover, and cook for around three minutes until they
have opened. Strain the liquor and measure. There should be 1/4 pt or so -
top up with water if necessary. Discard any mussels that have not opened and
shell the rest.
Pour the mussel liquor and the cornflour mixture into the vegetable pan and
bring to the boil, stirring. Boil for a minute or so until the sauce is
stickily thick. Away from the heat, add the cooked and drained pasta and the
mussels. Toss to mix, season to taste, and serve straight away.
CHICKEN LIVERS WITH MACARONI, HONEY & LIME (serves 3-4) Ingredients: 6oz
macaroni;  1/2 lb chicken livers, cleaned, trimmed and cut into chunks;  1/2
lb main crop carrots, peeled and cut into small batons; 1 small onion,
chopped finely; 1 teaspoon or so finely-chopped ginger root; 1 generous
teaspoon runny honey; 1 teaspoon cornflour mixed to a paste with 1 generous
tablespoon freshly-squeezed lime juice; a dribble of olive oil; the
finely-grated zest of a lime; 2 or more tablespoons freshly-chopped
coriander leaves.
Method: When all the ingredients have been prepared as described, start
cooking the macaroni in plenty of well-salted boiling water. Warm the oil
with the ginger; add the carrots, honey and 6-7fl oz water; and cook until
the carrots are tender. Drain, reserving the liquor. Meanwhile, saute the
chicken livers in a little oil. Put the carrots and livers into a low oven
to rest.
Add a little more oil to the saute pan and fry the onion. Pour on  1/4 pt or
so of the carrot liquor and the lime and cornflour mixture. Cook, while
stirring, for one minute or so letting the sauce bubble and thicken. Add a
tablespoon or more of coriander and the drained and cooked macaroni. Then
tip the contents of the pan on to the chicken livers and carrots. Toss to
mix, check seasoning and scatter extra coriander over the top.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940305

