FT943-13147

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (3): Youth takes the helm - Banking and
finance


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


After the collapse of the old regime the new democratically elected
government urgently needed to find young Albanians capable of understanding
and working with foreign governments and the international institutions
willing to help to rebuild the state apparatus, banks and other bodies.
A prime example of this new technocratic elite is Mr Kris Luniku, the 32
year old deputy governor of the National Bank of Albania with overall
responsibility for monetary policy. (The bank itself enjoys formal
independence modelled on that of the German Bundesbank.)
After graduating in economy and finance from Tirana University in 1986, Mr
Luniku joined the state bank three years later, starting with a stint in the
mountainous north east. There followed several months secondment to German
banks where he received training in government securities and stock exchange
practice before going to the IMF in 1991 for a crash course in financial
programming and medium term adjustment processes.
The courteous and slightly shy young banker recalls the first awesome days
in 1992 when he and two colleagues took responsibility for introducing
monetary policy to the bank. 'Nobody really knew what the relationship was
between interest rates and inflation, what the instruments of monetary
policy were, or how a central bank functioned,' he confesses.
'We had to be cautious, define our goals and then monitor our progress. We
knew we just could not afford to make mistakes.' After its modest start,
however, the new team quickly expanded with the recruitment of young,
multilingual people with an academic grasp of macro-economics who were eager
to learn more.
Under the overall supervision of the governor, Mr Dylber Vrioni, a former
engineer and erstwhile chairman of the ruling Democratic Party, the young
technocrats spread out to apply their skills in six new divisions of the
bank dealing with the budget, monetary policy, balance of payments,
macro-economic analysis, statistics and financial operations and
instruments.
In July, the bank took responsibility for controlling liquidity through open
market operations connected with the first issue of treasury bills. 'We are
trying to become more efficient by switching to indirect instruments with
credit ceilings for the private and government sectors and reserve and
liquidity requirements for the banking system,' Mr Luniku says.
Until now the central bank has financed the government deficit. But the
treasury bill auctions in July will be open to individuals and private
companies. The aim is to spread the load and control the excess reserves of
the banking system. Interest rates on deposits are now positive after the
recent slide in inflation.
Reform of the financial system really began with liberalisation of the
foreign exchange market, at a time when reserves were practically
non-existent. It proved a great success and the Lek appreciated against a
basket of foreign currencies by around 25 per cent last year thanks to
emigre remittances and foreign aid.
Proof of the free exchange market can be seen in the hordes of licensed
money changers with wads of notes in hand who congregate perfectly legally
in front of the central bank building offering a slight discount on
officially announced rates.
Development of an inter-bank money market is now the main element in the
drive to make the banking system an efficient conduit for investment.
The task of reform began two years ago when a two tier banking system was
created by the new Central Bank Law, which established a Bundesbank-type
independent central bank, and the Commercial Banking Law of April 1992 which
hived off three commercial banks from the formerly monolithic state bank.
The balance sheets of the three state owned commercial banks, the National
Commercial Bank of Albania (NCBA), the Savings Bank and the Rural Commercial
Bank, have been partially cleared of their nearly Lek5bn bad debt after the
government issued Lek2.7bn in interest bearing bonds, which are negotiable
and tradeable.
But the banking system remains weak and slow. The key to future development
lies in creating new bankers. The World Bank and the EBRD are funding a 25
week course at Tirana university to train bankers in risk analysis and the
like. Two joint venture banks with full banking licences have been set up in
the capital.
These are the Italian-Albanian bank, a joint venture of the NCBA and Banca
di Roma, and the Arab Albanian Islamic bank whose shareholders are the NCBA
and the Arab Islamic Bank of Bahrain. One fully foreign-owned bank, the
Dardania bank, has been formed with capital from Kosovo and Albanians
abroad.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940721

