FT944-2385

FT  16 DEC 94 / Arts: The Little Match Girl - Theatre


   By DIANA SOUTHWELL


After his radical adaptation of Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray,
the thought of gay provocateur Neil Bartlett interfering with Hans Christian
Andersen's The Little Match Girl at the Lyric Hammersmith might send shivers
down most censorious spines. It is like Fagin leading one of our seasonal
institutions down a dark alley for some forbidden pleasure.
But in Leah Hausman's frothy production, fears of something untoward are
completely unfounded. This is undiluted child's play, aided and abetted by
the show's main attraction: the Britton brothers, Tim and Chris,
collectively known as Forkbeard Fantasy, doubling up as assorted snowmen,
nuns, cops and angels when they descend from heaven in their underwear on a
snow cloud. Their mission? To protect the Little Match Girl from the
yuletide afflictions of poverty and homelessness.
So far so kosher. All Bartlett can really be accused of is shoehorning
Andersen's slight, melancholic and sentimental story of the street urchin
who dies from exposure on New Year's Eve into a contemporary Christmas
musical. Unfortunately his ambition never quite catches fire. What we get is
an evening of sugary anachronisms cheerfully presided over by Terry Neason's
dear, dead old Grandma: an ample-bosomed Scottish matron who has been yanked
from the steps of Mary Poppins' St Paul's, airbrushed and relocated to West
London.
Against the backdrop of Penny Saunders' lurid cartoonscapes, Hammersmith is
turned into a Dickensian theme park. The council house penury of Sian
Reeves' Little Match Girl failing to contend with her grumpy, Sun-reading,
sofa-bound Dad (Steve Fortune) rapidly gives way to joyous cod-Victorian
street bustle when Grandma persuades Miss Match to go out and sell some Swan
Vestas.
Suspiciously mature and vocally shrill, Reeves' raven-haired, emaciated
heroine is a striking street ingenue. But there is too much of the artful
about her to take her plight seriously. 'First The Big Issue, now matches .
. . whatever will they think of next?' snarls Tim Britton's bemused Harrods'
grotesque, Griselda, exiting stage left pursued by a tottering skyscraper of
Christmas presents. Quite. It seems much more likely that Reeves has time
shares in her pocket rather than a handful of lucifers.
The uncomfortable parable, that not everybody is happy at Christmas, is
conveniently lost in the warm flush of Nicolas Bloomfield's tripping
Sondheim and Lionel Bart-sounding arrangements. Each song, like a struck
match, becomes a cue for one of the Match Girl's customised visions. This is
where sentiment and the Britton brothers' diverting pantomime are most
successfully spliced.
The first startling vision is an enormous, cuddly Pooh Bear; but the third
vision is the showstealer: an inspired piece of Alice in Wonderland with the
Brittons as two pieces of giant cutlery - (a sort of Basil Fawlty
knife-and-fork duet).
In this they champion the hurt feelings of an all-singing, all-dancing
Christmas dinner dominated by Steve Fortune's lugubrious giant Turkey,
supported by a three-part harmony of Mashed Potatoes (Liza Sadovy, Lindsey
Dawson and Simon Penman), and finally swamped by a children's chorus of
Brussels Sprouts (pupils from Brackenbury School).
The short second half fails to match this shameless ebullience. The final
fantasy scene, where the Little Match Girl is finally taken into heaven, is
a resistible piece of Bartlett campery with the entire cast conjugating in
Restoration wigs around a haystack posing as a Christmas tree. An 18 carat
piece of cutesiness; but a 22 carat piece of kitsch.
The Little Match Girl is at the Lyric, Hammersmith until January 21.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941216

