FT942-14380

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (2): The force of gravity begins to be
felt - Fares are feeling the pinch as traffic between Europe and Asia
reaches a peak


   By DANIEL GREEN


Air links between Europe and Asia are coming of age. For years, they have
been the fiefdoms of a handful of carriers whose fares seemed to defy
gravity. Now the business of flying east is beginning to succumb to
competitive pressures that promise to bring fares down and are already
raising service quality.
Traditionally, flying between London and Hong Kong or Frankfurt and Tokyo
has meant choosing between the two national carriers involved. Such
competition as there was arose from the Asian standards of service  -
subservient and ever-attentive - which the European carriers felt necessary
to counter.
Today, tight limits on competition still apply to some large destinations
such as Seoul, South Korea, and Beijing in China. But progressively the
others have seen third competitors muscling in. To Singapore it is Qantas,
to Hong Kong and Tokyo it is Virgin Atlantic, and to Bangkok there are a
whole host of carriers, including Austria's Lauda Air and Taiwan's Eva Air.
There is evidence that the changes are bringing with them a taste of the
competition that has so far been mostly confined to north Atlantic routes.
On the London to Tokyo route, where four airlines compete - British Airways,
Japan Air Lines, Virgin Atlantic and All Nippon - BA finds itself now the
only carrier that offers a standard business-class sized seat. In February,
ANA announced that it was refitting its business class cabins with seat rows
50 inches apart instead of 40 and a month later JAL followed suit. Virgin
has had its big-seat Upper Class product since 1989.
Virgin has had a more rapid impact on the London-Hong Kong route. Both
British Airways and Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific have responded to the
arrival of Virgin Atlantic on the London service by adding 'sleeper
services' of their own. The idea is one pioneered by BA on its transatlantic
routes and involves feeding passengers on the ground so that they can get
more sleep in the air. Passengers also get items such as sheets to sleep in
and seats in a specially designated part of the aircraft. These products are
not as good as Virgin's, where business class passengers get first class
sized seats, but could help prevent some defections to the new competitor.
Such competition has a powerful effect on fares, too. A typical business
class return fare between London and Tokyo is about Pounds 3,400. Between
Zurich and Tokyo, where Japan Air Lines and Swissair are the competitors,
the fare is almost 20 per cent higher at about SFr8,400 (Pounds 4,000).
It is similar on routes to Singapore from London, where there are three
competitors. The business class return fare is about Pounds 2,400 while from
Paris, where only Singapore Airlines and Air France operate non-stop
services, the business class return fare runs to around Pounds 3,500.
Competition on routes between Europe and Japan especially is continuing to
grow, says Mr David Scowsill, British Airways' regional general manager for
Asia-Pacific. 'In the last year or two airlines have loaded more capacity on
routes to Japan despite the fact that Narita (Tokyo's main international
airport) is constrained.'
He says that competition will be given another boost this year with the
opening of Osaka's Kansai airport in September. This investment in capacity
is happening in spite of the economic difficulties in Japan, he says.
'Airlines are taking a long-term view.'
Even bigger than Japan, both in terms of growth and potential market size is
the Chinese market.
'European carriers took about 200,000 passengers into Beijing last year, a
rise of about 15 per cent on 1992,' says Mr Scowsill. About one in six are
on business and that figure will grow this year.
The airlines are keen to put on more services to China but are largely
limited to traffic that originates in Europe in spite of the fact there is a
growing class of high income Chinese. This is mainly because the Chinese
government has a strict visa issuing regime for Chinese nationals wishing to
travel and there is no infrastructure of travel agencies in China, making
the simple act of buying a ticket difficult.
Add to this the need for long negotiation between European government
officials and their Chinese counterparts and this has made it difficult for
carriers all over Europe to add services to China. Even today, no airline
runs a daily non-stop service between Beijing and London, Paris or
Frankfurt.
Of Europe's airlines, it is Germany's Lufthansa that has a valuable head
start over other European carriers in services to China because it has the
only direct flight (with one stop) to Shanghai.
Other carriers usually go through Hong Kong with a change of aircraft and
often airline. So Hong Kong remains the first choice of business traveller
working in Europe, although there is plenty of room for growth, according to
Cathay Pacific, especially from continental Europe.
Cathay is planning to increase its presence in central Europe where it is
practically an unknown name. Mr Jobst Rottman, Cathay's manager of sales and
distribution in Germany, says that the airline is still suffering both from
its low profile in Germany and from economising by recession-hit German
business travellers.
'We think that 20-25 per cent of economy class passengers are travelling on
business, twice the level of two or three years ago,' says Mr Rottman.
Cathay's response has been to try to feed more passengers into Frankfurt for
the journey to Hong Kong. It offers free short-haul flights to business
class passengers and last year signed a co-operation agreement with Malev,
the Hungarian carrier.
Such an arrangement mirrors what has been happening on the North Atlantic
where passengers feed into an ever smaller number of European cities from
which the long-haul flights leave.
'There will be more pressure on key points in Europe. Far eastern carriers
are beginning to find that secondary points do not warrant non-stop
services, they cannot make them pay,' says Mr Scowsill.
The solution, according to both BA and many of the Asian carriers, is for
aircraft manufacturers to design and build bigger aircraft.
Until this comes about, the fight for customers will be conducted on a
relatively mundane level. This is, nevertheless, one that the business class
traveller is likely to feel keenly. According to Mr Paul Griffiths,
commercial director at Virgin, business travellers in Asia are accustomed to
higher levels of service than their counterparts in the US. That does not
mean the battle between carriers will be limited to fringe benefits. There
will be fare competition too, he says. The gauntlet has been thrown down.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940420

