FT941-5515

FT  05 MAR 94 / Minding Your Own Business: A little rival for the giants -
Computing / Robin Brooker looks at a no-frills office package


   By ROBIN BROOKER


Connect Software, a UK software developer, has taken a careful look at the
needs of the small office and produced a package, Office Manager, aimed
squarely at the 'Soho' (small office / home office) market.
Connect is pleased with its product, but it has to compete with giants such
as Microsoft, which markets Microsoft Office, a suite of packages with many
more features, many of which are of little use in a very small office and
cost nearly 10 times as much.
Office Manager combines contact management, letter writing, invoicing,
elementary stock control and document storage. You can use Office Manager on
its own or link it to Money Manager, with data moving between the two in
both directions.
The core of Office Manager is its database. Each database file holds only
500 records but this should prove no restriction for its potential users.
Two possible problem areas are in compiling customer lists and parts lists.
Organising the customer list into separate files for geographic areas
overcomes the restriction. Similarly, the parts list, taking motor spares as
an example, could differentiate between engine and electrical items.
Moving from one database to another is easy: Office Manager automatically
saves a file before loading a new one, thus eradicating the main danger when
dashing between files.
When creating invoices you can have your stock list on screen. As you add
the quantities to the invoice the stock list is updated automatically. You
can post the invoice directly to your Money Manager data file with just two
or three keystrokes.
Designing templates for invoices is simple. You can prepare them with plain
paper or for your own pre-printed letterheads.
Producing letters can be very quick using the text editor and all standard
letters can be individual templates. It then becomes a matter of choosing
the person you wish to send it to and telling the program which letter you
want to send - almost no typing required. As there is no typing, it leaves
little room for typographical errors. The mail merge facility is also much
easier to use than in the more sophisticated programs such as Microsoft Word
for Windows. The word processing facilities seem a little basic compared to
the larger programs and there is no spell checker, no thesaurus nor grammar
checker.
My one apprehension about the program is that it works under MS-Dos. This
has its benefits: the program will run on a basic PC with a hard disk. It
ran happily on an old Amstrad 1512, which is considered something from the
age of the dinosaur by many computer freaks.
Recent computer purchasers have been sold the idea that Windows is the
standard computer interface and that programs running under Ms-Dos are
difficult to use. The menu system of Office Manager is very easy to use. Any
user of Windows would have no problem using the program and the manual
describes how to install and operate the software from Windows' Program
Manager.
Office Manager's unique combination of facilities makes it suitable for a
wide variety of uses where larger programs can be both expensive and
cumbersome.
Office Manager costs Pounds 49.95 and is available from Connect Software, 3,
Flanchford Road, London W12 9ND. Tel: 081 743 9792 Fax: 081 743 8073

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940305

