FT943-13068

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: Victims spared media gauntlet


   By DAVID OWEN


It will go down as the compassionate reshuffle.
The cameras clustered outside Mr Major's front door early yesterday morning
were interested of course in quick confirmation of who the rising stars
were.
But mainly they wanted to see blood. They were destined to be disappointed.
In a break with convention, the knife had already been wielded some 12 hours
earlier.
Those who were to be dropped from the cabinet had been told discreetly by
the prime minister at Number 10 on Tuesday evening - after a well-publicised
cocktail party.
This thoughtful touch spared Messrs Patten, Brooke, MacGregor and Wakeham
the unpleasant task of running the raucous media gauntlet within minutes of
being informed of their fate.
The first clue that there were to be no public executions came when word
began circulating in the scrum outside Downing Street that a government car
had collected Mr Patten's ministerial red boxes without picking up the
education secretary.
By this time the ritual reshuffle-day comings and goings at Number Ten had
already started, with Mrs Gillian Shephard appearing first at 9am to the
press gang's initial confusion. 'In past years it was common for the victims
of reshuffles to arrive early, but Mrs Shephard is tipped for promotion,'
reported the Press Association.
There was more confusion some minutes later when Mr Douglas Hurd, the
foreign secretary, came into view.
This was the instant when some experienced commentators momentarily
abandoned their back-of-envelope reshuffle predictions and thought about
early retirement: it had been universally forecast that none of the 'Big
Three' positions at the Treasury, the Foreign Office and the Home Office
would change hands.
But Mr Hurd was only teasing. Within seconds he had strolled past the
waiting crowd and disappeared safely into the Foreign Office, a gleam in his
eye.
From then on it was plain sailing as Mr Major's chosen few arrived at
irregular intervals, doing their best to look composed. The prize for the
longest stay went to Mr Jeremy Hanley, the new party chairman, followed by
Mrs Shephard, who had stayed for a cup of coffee with Mr Christopher Meyer,
the prime minister's press secretary.
When Dr Brian Mawhinney, another cabinet newcomer, departed at 11.33
precisely, the show was over.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940721

