FT941-12832

FT  28 JAN 94 / Major soothes Tory critics of council reform


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Mr John Major has acted to reassure backbench Tories concerned at the
government's reforms of local government.
Meanwhile social services directors attacked the policy of replacing the
two-tier system of counties and districts with all-purpose unitary
authorities, saying it would make the job of protecting children at risk
more difficult.
The prime minister assured MPs that the status quo for county councils
remained an option in the proposed local government reorganisation - in
spite of statements from environment ministers that this should happen only
in 'exceptional' circumstances.
In a letter, the prime minister told Sir John Stanley, Tory MP for Tonbridge
and Malling in Kent: 'The maintenance of the status quo is an option that
the local government commission can consider in carrying out its review of
local government structure in the shire counties.'
Sir John said he was delighted with the response. 'For a considerable time I
have been very doubtful whether unitary authorities are the right answer for
such a large, complex and diverse county as Kent,' he said. 'The cost of the
local government reorganisation is bound to result in a sizeable one-off
bill falling on Kent council tax payers.'
He said the local government commission for England, which has not yet made
formal recommendations for Kent, did not appear to be considering the status
quo. Instead, it 'was saying that the choice for Kent was effectively
between four and eight unitary authorities'.
Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary, has so far not accepted any of
the proposals to retain the status quo put to him by the commission.
The Association of Directors of Social Services said abolition of the
counties could result in 'a series of mini-Orkneys' - a reference to the
1991 row over the small, unitary Orkney Islands Council's reaction to child
abuse allegations.
It said the commission had not looked seriously at the problems for
protecting children at risk under a series of smaller authorities.
Ms Denise Platt, president of the association and social services director
for Hammersmith and Fulham, said: 'To steal a phrase - every small authority
is a mini-Orkney. Child protection services can only be developed if there
is a reasonable sized department.'
She said that problems in Orkney, when social services wrongly took children
into care after allegations of 'ritual sex abuse', had been caused because
there had only been a small group of social workers, who could not develop
breadth of knowledge or experience.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940128

