FT941-4206

FT  12 MAR 94 / Kravchuk may govern alone if polls fail


   By JILL BARSHAY


   MOSCOW


President Leonid Kravchuk of the Ukraine has told the US that he may try to
rule his economically stricken country alone, by presidential decree, should
parliamentary elections later this month fail to produce a legally
acceptable result.
Such a move, which could place Mr Kravchuk into a similar confrontation with
his parliament as President Boris Yeltsin faced in Russia last year, is now
being openly discussed by his close political advisers.
One senior adviser to the Ukrainian president said 'we are very sure the
parliamentary election (scheduled for March 27) will not produce a result.
It will be a good opportunity for Kravchuk' to 'press ahead with reforms and
stay in power until the end of his term until 1996'.
The adviser said that Mr Kravchuk had discussed the possibility of ruling
Ukraine by decree when he met President Bill Clinton in Washington on March
4.
While neither Mr Kravchuk nor the parliament has a record in radical
economic reform, the president blames parliament for blocking the few reform
measures he has tried to push through. Last year the parliament foiled an
attempt by Mr Kravchuk to loosen government control of land.
The opening Mr Kravchuk would need to run the Ukraine unhindered by
parliament arises out of a convoluted election law passed last November by
the existing parliament - elected while Ukraine was still part of the Soviet
Union.
Some 6,000 candidates have registered for the March 27 poll, an average of
13 per voting district. Under the law, to win in the first round of voting a
candidate must secure more than half the votes cast and more than half the
electorate must cast their votes.
To win in a second round of voting planned for April, the top two candidates
in any district will square off under the same rules. Mr Kravchuck's
advisers believe that this is where the new voting law is flawed and that it
will be difficult to draw more than half the electorate out to vote once and
nearly impossible for a second time.
If the president and his men are right in predicting a low voter turn-out,
parliament's electoral commission will be required by law to declare the
elections invalid, and thus potentially pave the way for presidential rule.
According to a presidential adviser, Mr Kravchuk would finally have his
opportunity to reform Ukraine's disastrous economy by decree without a
parliament to get in his way. He would also cancel June presidential
elections and convene a constituent assembly to redesign a political model -
presidential or parliamentary - for the country.
Last month Mr Kravchuk announced that he would not stand for early
presidential elections this June but this now appears to have been a tactic
to prepare the ground for cancelling presidential elections, disbanding
parliament and taking control of the country. Mr Kravchuck remains the only
Ukrainian politician put in power by popular vote since the republic became
independent.
The west is particularly concerned that Mr Kravchuk should remain in power
until an agreement to scrap its nuclear missile arsenal, signed in January
in Moscow, is completed. Ukraine's parliament has yet to approve the 1968
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, making Mr Kravchuck the sole guarantor of
the deal.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940312

