FT943-12962

FT  22 JUL 94 / Manager gets 9 years in Dollars 448m Indonesian fraud


   By AP


   JAKARTA


An Indonesian court sentenced a former bank manager to nine years in prison
yesterday in a loan fraud case that has cost a state bank more than Dollars
448m (Pounds 290m), AP reports from Jakarta.
Meanwhile, the prosecution demanded life imprisonment for the Chinese
businessman whose company took out the loan from the state-owned Bank
Pembangunan Indonesia.
Questions have also been raised about the roles of senior officials
including President Suharto's chief adviser, but they are not on trial.
Mr Maman Suparman, 48, former manager of the bank's South Jakarta branch,
was found guilty of receiving a 256m rupiah (Pounds 75,800) bribe from
businessman Mr Eddy Tanzil and illegally converting documents to help him
obtain the loan and use it improperly.
The South Jakarta District Court also fined Mr Suparman 15m rupiahs and
ordered that his house and land be confiscated.
His lawyers said they would appeal.
'There was no evidence found during the trial that Suparman has received
bribery in connection with the loan,' said Mr Danny Kaliamang, who led a
six-member defence team.
The prosecution had demanded a 13-year sentence for Suparman, the first
person to be tried in the case.
At the Central Jakarta District Court, Mr Hamid Bachmid, the prosecutor,
demanded life imprisonment for Tanzil, who obtained a Dollars 430m loan in
1991 for his Golden Key Group for a petrochemical plant.
Mr Bachmid said the loan was not used as intended, causing a loss to the
state of Dollars 448.8m, including unpaid interest.
Also on trial is Mr Towil Haryoto, a former president director of the bank.
Two other directors are still awaiting trial.
Thousands of students demonstrated in several large cities last month,
demanding that two senior officials resign over the loan fraud case. Some
protesters also called for interrogation of President Suharto's youngest
son, Mr Hutomo Mandalaputra.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940722

