FT944-11105

FT  08 NOV 94 / Manufacturers warned against complacency


   By RODERICK ORAM


Manufacturers must guard against complacency brought on by rising output and
orders and remain committed to achieving international competitiveness, the
National Manufacturing Council, an arm of the CBI, said yesterday.
Mr Tony Hales, the council's chairman and chief executive of Allied Domecq,
the drinks group, said: 'It is now crucially important that companies do not
become complacent in the short term and relax the drive for both fundamental
change and continuous improvement.'
He urged the government to take further action on competitiveness, tax
structures and other measures to help create the best business environment.
But he also reminded business that the onus lay on it to make the most of
the opportunities created.
The scale of the task was underlined by Mr Alf Gooding, chairman of Gooding
Group, a Welsh consumer electronics maker. He said: 'In terms of
manufacturing capacity, we are not much better off than we were a quarter of
a century ago. What the hell went wrong with UK manufacturing? The answer is
a failure to invest on the necessary scale.'
He called for a tripartite effort from industry, the City and government to
raise investment levels. Public spending, for example, should be increased
on roads, railways and other infrastructure projects.
The issue of inadequate transport facilities was taken up by several
speakers in the conference debate on manufacturing.
Mr Neil Ashley, chairman of Amey Holdings, the contractor said one reason
business lacked the networks it needed was a combination of 'Treasury
parsimony and green hype'.
The sharpest exchange in the debate came over the British Standards
Institution's BS 5750 quality certification programme. Mr Jeremy Woolridge,
chairman of BW Wedge Holdings, a West Midlands galvanising company, said:
'Its handbook allows an inferior product to be made to consistently bad
standards.'
Mr Vivian Thomas, chairman of the BSI, said it was a shame to 'take
something successful like BS 5750 and use it as a whipping boy'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941108

