FT942-14357

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (24): Airports of the world - It's easy
to get to Tokyo / Narita


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Narita, the international airport that serves Tokyo, now has two terminals.
While this should not worry the well-organised traveller, it is testimony to
the large scale and complexity of the place which anyone who finds himself
having to use Narita should be warned about.
Narita does try, however, to be user-friendly. Transport between the airport
and central Tokyo is relatively easy and the airport buildings boast
facilities ranging from shower rooms (for Y600 an hour) and audio-video
rooms (at Y400 for two hours) to a business centre and free children's play
room.
For those caught hungry at the airport, restaurants serve a variety of
Japanese, Chinese and western cuisine at somewhat higher prices than average
in downtown Tokyo.
There are hotels and conference facilities catering to a variety of needs
around the airport and two conference rooms in the airport itself, the
largest of which can handle up to 50 people.
Getting away from Narita is also relatively hassle-free. Perhaps the most
convenient way for travellers staying at hotels downtown is to use the
airport limousine, which runs at regular intervals to the major hotels and
stations in Tokyo, Yokohama and some parts of Chiba, including Tokyo
Disneyland. Some limousines go directly to hotels.
The cost is steep at Y2,700 (about Pounds 17.75) to central Tokyo and Y3,500
to Yokohama, but the ride is generally comfortable with reclining seats and
air conditioning. The drawback is that traffic can be horrendous depending
on the time of day and an average 70-minute drive to central Tokyo can
stretch out substantially.
The Narita Express trains which run from the airport to stations in similar
areas are much more reliable and offer smooth, comfortable travel to major
destinations for much the same cost. Access is relatively easy to the trains
which run at half-hour to one-hour intervals.
On the other hand, independent travel by car is somewhat more complicated as
parking facilities are relatively expensive and not within easy reach. Taxis
and car rentals are readily available but costs are steep.
While aeroplanes should not arrive at Narita too late, travellers should be
warned that Tokyo itself goes to sleep fairly early so that finding a place
to eat after about 10pm is difficult.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940420

