FT941-3440

FT  16 MAR 94 / More flexible, and less arrogant friend: The outlook for a
UK-based computer company in a cut-throat marketplace


   By ALAN CANE


International Computers, the UK-based computer company, used to epitomise
arrogance and insularity. Even 'International' in the company's name begged
an invidious comparison with International Business Machines, the world's
largest computer company.
Stories of its conceit abounded. The chief salesman for a region, it was
said, would put up in the best hotel and announce he would be available that
evening in the parlour to take customers' orders for computers.
Since its acquisition, first by the UK telecommunications company STC in
1984 and then by Fujitsu, Japan's leading computer maker, in 1990, that
arrogance has evaporated. 'Today we are humbler and nimbler,' says Mr Peter
Bonfield, ICL chairman and chief executive.
Mr Koshiro 'Kit' Kitazato, Fujitsu's man in ICL's headquarters in Putney,
west London, is charged with co-ordination between the Japanese computer
giant and its UK-based subsidiary. He says ICL has learnt reliability from
Fujitsu, while Fujitsu has learnt flexibility from ICL.
Fujitsu set several strategic objectives at the time of the takeover. ICL
would be autonomous, operating at arm's length from its parent. It would
retain its European base, seek maximum commercial co-operation with Fujitsu
and, eventually, float on the London Stock Exchange.
The first few conditions have been fulfilled; the recession has delayed the
flotation. Both companies agree they should work more closely together to
share research and development, and marketing costs.
There have been some positive developments: ICL's new mid-range computers
are the first to be sold under the two companies' names; a pioneering
trainee exchange scheme is under way; the two groups are collaborating on
check-out systems for supermarkets; ICL's office software has been rewritten
to be marketed in Japan.
Despite these achievements, ICL's 1993 results, scheduled for release today,
will not be exciting. Turnover will be higher than last year's Pounds 2.5bn,
but pre-tax profits are expected to be well below the Pounds 38.6m recorded
for 1992. Profitability has been on the slide since 1989, when ICL made
Pounds 148.6m before tax. The 1993 figure represents little more than
break-even, though it is respectable in an industry undergoing global
restructuring.
ICL's top management is taking steps to safeguard the group's profitability.
Earlier this year, the company raised Pounds 100m through a rights issue
wholly taken up by Fujitsu - the first time the UK company had turned to its
parent for funds.
The issue reflects the group's pessimism over short-term prospects in the
computer marketplace, as the industry moves towards low-cost, low-margin
operating systems based on common standards.
Cash is one bulwark against a highly competitive market; an increasingly
efficient and lean operation is another. Mr Bonfield points to the steady
decline in the group's overheads. In 1987 operating expenses as a percentage
of turnover were 26.8 per cent; in 1992 the figure was 22.8 per cent and it
is expected to have fallen further in 1993. The company employs about 25,000
and is cutting jobs at about 5 per cent a year.
The reason for ICL's drive for economies is the relentless decline in gross
profit margin. Standing at 47 per cent in 1987, it is now less than 35 per
cent as the shift to lower-cost systems continues.
Nevertheless, ICL remains the only consistently profitable broad-based
computer manufacturer headquartered in Europe; worldwide, it is one of the
few traditional computer companies not floundering in red ink. By
comparison, Siemens Nixdorf of Germany and Olivetti of Italy are losing
money; and Groupe Bull of France is dependent on repeated restructuring
grants from the French government.
Mr Bonfield's reputation is high, both with Fujitsu and the industry at
large. He was recently asked by Mr Martin Bangemann, European Union
commissioner for industry and telecommunications, to join the High Level
Group on Information Technology, set up to consider the impact of
information technology on Europe. This is an indication that ICL has
restored its Euro credentials after being bundled out of high-level European
policy meetings following the Fujitsu takeover.
But restoring adequate profitability has proved more difficult. Though it
still manufactures mainframe computers, more than 50 per cent of ICL's
revenues come from the services sector. Competitors now include services
companies, such as Electronic Data Systems (EDS), and personal computer
makers, such as Compaq, as well as its traditional rivals, IBM, Unisys and
Digital Equipment.
According to Input, a US consultancy which tracks the computing services
business, ICL's improvement in market share in services ranks it fourth in
Europe behind the US companies Microsoft, Andersen Consulting and EDS.
The company has been split into 26 semi-autonomous businesses, each with
profit and loss responsibilities. There are three groups: industry systems,
including countries such as France and Portugal, under Mr Richard
Livesey-Haworth;
services, including Workplace Technologies and Sorbus Europe, the
maintenance company ICL owns with Bell Atlantic, under Mr Paul Whitwam;
and technology businesses, exemplified by Design to Distribution, ICL's
manufacturing consultancy, under Mr Ninian Eadie.
These changes, made over the past year, are evidence that the company is
going through a second significant restructuring. The first took place more
than a decade ago when, under Mr Robb Wilmot, ICL forged a technological
alliance with Fujitsu and pioneered the shift to standard systems. That was
when ICL abandoned cherished notions of setting the technological agenda and
accepted that it would have to buy its technology from the best sources.
Despite what many saw as the dead hand of STC, ICL prospered during the
buoyant economy of the late 1980s.
But both ICL and STC were aware the company needed an owner with deeper
pockets and greater commitment to the information technology business than
STC. The solution proved to be Fujitsu. It bought the company just before
the US and western Europe entered recession. At the same time, the cost of
computer hardware fell sharply, helped by a fierce price war between
personal computer manufacturers.
ICL's survival is a consequence of a flexibility uncommon in large
companies: 'In storms we are quite quick up the rigging, even if the planks
are leaking,' Mr Livesey-Haworth says wryly.
Much of this flexibility comes from a trio of acquisitions: Datachecker, a
US retail automation company which is the cornerstone of ICL's ambitions as
a global retail systems company; Nokia Data, the Finnish personal computer
company, which ICL bought in 1992; and Technology, the UK's largest personal
computer distributor.
Datachecker, as ICL's senior managers recall, was a case study in how not to
manage an acquisition. The company sent in its own manager and accountants
who ran rough-shod over local management. Sensitivities were bruised, so the
assimilation took longer and cost more than envisaged.
When ICL acquired Nokia Data, it was determined not to make the same
mistake. PC operations were consolidated in Scandinavia. The chief impact,
however, was cultural, a pattern repeated with the acquisition of
Technology. 'We needed a shot of the faster-moving PC culture,' Mr Eadie
says.
So what is ICL's future? It is likely to remain medium sized; it is unlikely
to make more money this year than in 1993, as Mr Bonfield sees no
improvement in the market. He believes, however, that ICL's reorganisation
will be complete this year. Largely freed from debt through the rights issue
and from restructuring charges, the company should return to significant
profitability in 1995, he predicts. This could mean profits eventually
reaching 5 to 6 per cent of revenues.
The worry now is not complacency, but battle fatigue: 'We drive this company
hard, but it's the only way to do it,' Mr Bonfield says. Mr Keith Todd,
finance director and chief strategist, agrees: 'We have gone through world
war three, but we cannot relax. The fight goes on.'

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940316

