FT942-16224

FT  12 APR 94 / World Trade News: 'Everyone wins' in Uruguay Round


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS and GUY DE JONQUIERES


   MARRAKESH


All countries will emerge winners from the Uruguay Round trade liberalising
accords, Mr Peter Sutherland, director-general of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, declared yesterday. Mr Sutherland said assertions that
some of the world's poorest countries would lose from the accords were based
on 'a mis-statement of the facts'. He was speaking on the eve of a four-day
meeting of ministers from more than 120 countries which will end with a
formal Uruguay Round signing on Friday.
'The least developed countries are not losers but winners,' he said. Above
all, they would gain from strong multilateral rules and disputes settlement.
For small and economically weaker countries, these rules were the only
protection from the 'law of the jungle' where 'might is right'.
Mr Sutherland said ratification of the Uruguay Round was still the subject
of debate in some countries and legislative approval by the leading trading
powers must be completed in time for the round to take effect by next
January. However, the round would not mean an end to international trade
policy disputes.
Japan is expected to call at this week's meeting for unilateral trade
weapons to be placed on the agenda of the World Trade Organisation, planned
to replace Gatt. Tokyo fears that the new international trade rules will not
curb the growing use of anti-dumping actions and US threats of unilateral
trade sanctions.
The Gatt secretariat, in an analysis published this morning, estimates that
market-opening for agricultural and industrial goods negotiated in the
Uruguay Round could add Dollars 235bn (Pounds 160.9bn) a year to world
income by 2002. This compares with estimates from the World Bank, the OECD
and others of Dollars 212bn-Dollars 274bn.
These estimates do not include expected gains from liberalisation of
services trade or the boost to business confidence and investment from
improved trade rules.
According to Gatt, industrial tariffs in developed countries will fall from
an average 6.3 per cent to 3.9 per cent. Some 43 per cent of their imports
by value will enter duty free, against 20 per cent before the round began.
Virtually all their industrial tariffs will be 'bound', giving exporters
security that they will not be raised again. Developing countries have
agreed to bind tariff lines covering 59 per cent of the value of their
imports, compared with 14 per cent before the round began.
The Gatt analysis notes that the least developed countries will receive
significantly lower tariff cuts on their exports than others - 25 per cent,
compared with 37-38 per cent.
However, if textiles and clothing, and fish and fish products, are removed
from the calculation tariff concessions to the poorest countries average 59
per cent compared with 44 per cent for industrialised nations.
In addition, abolition of quota restrictions under the Multi-Fibre
Arrangement after 10 years could in effect more than double the 22 per cent
average tariff reduction in the textiles and clothing sector, Gatt points
out.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940412

