FT942-16310

FT  11 APR 94 / Emerging Investor: Politics and trade influence yen -
Currency Markets


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The yen will be in the spotlight this week as investors seek to assess the
impact of the resignation last Friday of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the Japanese
prime minister.
Although the initial focus will be on the appointment of Mr Hosokawa's
successor, few analysts believe the change has serious policy implications.
The weakness and confusion within the ruling coalition makes it difficult to
predict when a successor will be appointed.
For the markets, two key issues arise from his departure: What will it mean
for the passage of the Japanese budget and what impact will it have on
Japan's trade dispute with the US.
The opposition LDP has recently blocked passage of the budget, delaying
implementation of a Y15.25 trillion fiscal stimulus. Failure to pass this
package will harm economic prospects, depress the stock market and probably
spill over into a weaker yen.
In recent months the dominant factor affecting the value of the yen has been
the trade dispute between Japan and the US.
Any indication of a deterioration in relations has tended to strengthen the
yen.
This week is likely to see a new development on the trade front, with the
GATT conference in Morocco expected to provide the forum for a resumption of
bilateral trade talks.
Elsewhere, a raft of US economic data, and the first Bundesbank council
meeting for four weeks, will shed further light on the prospect of a
decoupling of US and European financial markets.
US producer and consumer price figures will be carefully watched for hints
of inflation. Retail sales figures will also offer an indication of the
economy's strength.
Short of some very unexpected figure, most observers are not expecting any
change of policy before the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on May 17.
Talk of a cut in the German discount rate has also receded as the recent
strength of the dollar has put the D-Mark under pressure.
The repo rate will continue to be trimmed, but analysts now favour the April
28 meeting of the Bundesbank to produce a cut in the discount rate.
Two European currencies that will be closely watched are the lira and the
escudo. Continued progress towards forming a new government in Italy will
bolster the lira further, pushing it below L950 against the D-Mark.
In Portugal, meanwhile, markets will be watching to see if the central bank
has successfully warded off the speculators who drove the currency lower
over the past two weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940411

