FT943-12783

FT  22 JUL 94 / Government Bonds: US Treasuries fluctuate within narrow
range


   By FRANK MCGURTY and CONNER MIDDELMANN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US Treasury bonds fluctuated within a narrow range yesterday, influenced by
sharp movements in the dollar and conflicting interpretations of a regional
economic survey.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  1/32 better
at 84 13/16 , with the yield inching up to 7.54 per cent. At the short end,
the two-year note was off  3/32 at 99 27/32 , to yield 6.067 per cent.
Bond traders were keeping a closer eye on the foreign exchange markets than
in recent sessions. The fresh attention was prompted by repeated warnings
from Mr Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, that a depressed US
dollar was a threat to the economy. On Wednesday morning, the central banker
told a Senate committee that the greenback's weakness could lead to higher
inflation by increasing the cost of imported goods and, in turn, domestic
products which compete with them.
With the link between the currency and bond markets reinforced, the dollar's
slide in the wake of the Bundesbank's decision to forgo a cut in interest
rates did not sit well with Treasury traders. Bonds slumped, but later
recovered as the dollar rallied on supportive comments by Mr Lawrence
Summers, a US Treasury undersecretary.
With the dollar's vagaries back at centre stage, the July survey of business
conditions by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia provided a fleeting
diversion. Immediately after its release at 10am, bonds lurched downward as
traders focused on a big jump in the prices-paid component.
However, closer examination of the survey revealed a pattern of moderating
growth in the region, mitigating the inflationary implications of the prices
data. That perception allowed bonds to move back to near their opening
levels by early afternoon.
Germany largely led yesterday's European bond market action, supporting
prices in most markets after the Bundesbank announced it was leaving key
interest rates unchanged.
Investor activity remained low, however, and is expected to become even
thinner in coming weeks as policy-makers and investors go on holiday. 'It's
been pretty dead in the futures and deadly dead in cash,' said a Frankfurt
dealer.
At its last meeting before its month-long week recess, the Bundesbank's
central bank council left official interest rates unchanged and set
fixed-rate securities repurchase agreements at 4.85 per cent for the next
four weeks.
After slipping immediately after the announcement, bunds soon recovered and
firmed significantly. The September bund future fell to a low of 93.48 but
closed at 94.08, up 0.40 point on the day.
The short end of the curve remained relatively soft on widespread
disappointment that the Bundesbank had only shaved three basis points off
the repo rate, most traders having hoped for a fixed-rate repo at 4.80 per
cent or less.
However, the long end was boosted by a sense that the Bundesbank was
remaining true to its anti-inflation stance in leaving rates unchanged, and
that it would lower them again on further weakening in M3 money supply
growth.
'Not cutting rates before the break leaves easing hopes intact, which will
support the market during the summer,' said a trader.
UK gilts closed little changed but up from earlier lows, pulled higher by
strength in the German market and by retail buying, traders said. The
September long gilt futures contract on Liffe ended at 103 3/8 , up  5/16 on
the day.
Today's attention will be on the release of second-quarter UK gross domestic
product data and the continuing Senate testimony of Federal Reserve chairman
Alan Greenspan.
French government bonds followed German bonds higher but underperformed them
slightly, allowing the 10-year yield spread to widen to 51 basis points from
46. The September notional bond future on Matif rose 0.12 points to 117.20.
Italian bonds ended a volatile and largely futures-driven session sightly
higher, boosted mainly by the strength in the bund market.
However, they also underperformed German bonds amid uncertainty ahead of the
Italian cabinet's presentation of its long-term budget plans after the
market closed. The Italian 10-year yield spread over Germany widened some 15
basis points to 399 basis points.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940722

