FT941-13149

FT  27 JAN 94 / 'Big Bang' for Chile capital markets: Reforms in Latin
America's leading financial system


   By DAVID PILLING


Chile boasts the most sophisticated domestic financial market in Latin
America - a development that has helped the country achieve the highest
savings rate in the region. A new law passed by Congress this week, lifting
many of the remaining market restrictions, is expected to help keep it that
way.
'We believe this to be one of the most important financial reforms in many
years,' said Mr Julio Bustamante, chief regulator of Chile's fast-growing
pension funds. 'This is a project that took us more than two years to draw
up and one that spent more than a year in parliament undergoing a process of
refinement.'
The new law broadens investment choices, introduces new financial
instruments and seeks to apply international standards of regulation.
Impulse for reforms came from a desire to manage better the savings
administered by Chile's private pension funds (AFPs) and to tap their
resources for social needs such as infrastructure and housing.
AFPs, privatised in 1981, control Dollars 15bn in savings, more than 35 per
cent of Chile's gross domestic product - and expected to reach 80 per cent
by the turn of the century. Under legislation introduced in the early 1980s,
employees are required to save at least 10 per cent of their wages in one of
these funds.
AFPs have complained for years that over-cautious regulations have starved
them of investment opportunities and dented their ability to increase
profits. Pension funds and associated life insurance companies are
restricted to investing 30 per cent of their capital in blue chip stock. In
practice, they have concentrated on only a handful of shares in the
electricity and telecommunications sectors.
New regulations will allow AFPs gradually to extend their investments to
most of Santiago's nearly 300 listed companies, provided these satisfy
certain criteria. It is hoped that this will provide a financial fillip to
small and medium-sized companies, and coax some of Chile's conservative -
often large - family-run concerns to float on the stock market.
'I think the more companies that are eligible for AFP investment the more
interest there will be among medium-sized private companies to open up to
the market,' said Mr Juan Andres Camus, managing director of Celfin, a local
investment bank.
New instruments are also to be introduced, such as mortgage-backed
securities, convertible bonds, and revenue bonds. It is hoped that the
latter will encourage private capital to play a much larger role in
financing badly needed infrastructure such as ports and roads. Mr Bustamante
estimates that, of Dollars 500m worth of infrastructural projects planned
for the next two years, institutional investors could provide up to 40 per
cent.
Scope for AFP provision of venture capital and for coverage of risk through
options, futures and swaps will also be expanded.
Furthermore, AFPs and other institutional investors, such as mutual funds,
will be able to expand investments abroad, currently limited to 3 per cent
of their portfolio in AAA-rated bank debt and gilt-edged securities. This
ceiling will be raised over four years to 12 per cent, permitting AFPs to
invest more than Dollars 1.3bn abroad.
'When a country is on the road to development, it doesn't only export goods
 -but also services and capital,' said Mr Bustamante.
The range of foreign investment options will be widened to cover equity and
bonds in investment-grade companies. AFPs will also be permitted to cover
risk through currency and interest rate swaps, but will not be allowed to
use such instruments for speculation.
Along with greater flexibility comes a tougher regulatory framework aimed at
clamping down on abuses of new freedoms by Santiago's tight-knit business
community. Reforms devote much space to defining insider dealing - still a
novel concept in much of Latin America - and set minimum prison sentences
for specified offences.
There is also an attempt to erect walls between pension funds, brokerages
and listed companies on whose boards the same faces tend to crop up again
and again. Under the new legislation, for instance, brokerage houses whose
executives are board members of specific companies will be obliged to resign
their directorship or cease trading in shares of that company.
Although rules pertaining to conflict of interest were softened by Senate
amendments - after lobbying from interested parties - Mr Bustamante feels
that the final result is satisfactory. 'It will force a lot of changes,' he
said.
The legislation does not address foreign investment restrictions, such as a
one-year repatriation period and high levels of withholding tax on stock
market gains. But there are signs that the new administration, due to take
over in March, may be willing to do so.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940127

