FT942-15453

FT  15 APR 94 / World Trade News: Bananas jeopardise procurement deal


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


   MARRAKESH


As more than 120 governments prepared to sign the most important world trade
deal in history, European Union ministers were struggling in Marrakesh to
surmount deep divisions over a bitter dispute about the import of bananas.
Though the row does not directly threaten the planned signature of the
Uruguay Round trade accord today, it could cast a pall over the ceremony and
jeopardise a parallel accord to open to international competition public
procurement contracts worth more than Dollars 300bn a year.
EU ministers were summoned to an emergency meeting last night to try to
resolve the issue. However, the meeting was abandoned after efforts by the
European Commission and the Greek presidency failed to find enough common
ground for agreement.
The ministers plan to meet again today, barely six hours before governments
belonging to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade are due to start
signing the Uruguay Round.
The dispute stems from Germany's concern that a court case it has brought
challenging the EU's proposed regime for banana imports could be prejudiced
by obligations imposed by the Uruguay Round. Germany is supported by Belgium
and the Netherlands.
The Commission has offered Germany assurances that its legal rights will be
fully protected. However, France has said that unless Germany withdraws its
court case entirely, it will refuse to sign the new Gatt agreement on
government procurement.
That would prevent the EU subscribing to the agreement and could undermine
an important bilateral deal on procurement it reached with the US on
Wednesday. That in turn could discourage other Gatt members from going ahead
with plans to liberalise their procurement rules.
Last night's meeting was delayed until Mr Gerard Longuet, French industry
minister, arrived from Paris. However, other delegations said he had a
dinner engagement and did not participate in discussions.
Germany wants to be able to import more 'dollar' bananas grown in Latin
American countries. France fears that this could reduce banana imports from
its colonies and territories in the Caribbean. However, its decision to link
the issue to the procurement agreement is surprising because it stands to
gain most from freer competition for public contracts.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940415

