FT942-14314

FT  21 APR 94 / Chinese banker pledges tight money policy


   By TONY WALKER and REUTER


   BEIJING, CALCUTTA


China is committed to a tight money policy and will not ease credit
restrictions in response to signs of a marked slowdown in the state
industrial sector, one of the country's top bankers said yesterday.
Mr Dai Xianglong, a deputy governor of the People's Bank, the central bank,
delivered a blunt message to a national banking conference in Shanghai that
faltering state enterprises could not expect to live on easy credit.
Mr Dai also pledged that money supply growth would be kept within this
year's targets which envisages year-on-year growth of about 15 per cent
compared with annual growth of 30 per cent since 1990.
The bank official, whose remarks appeared aimed at heading off demands from
the state enterprise lobby for a loosening of credit restrictions, said that
the country's economic managers must 'remain cool headed'. Inflation, he
said, 'was showing no sign of improvement'.
Figures released earlier this month by the State Statistical Bureau revealed
that industrial output of state enterprises, which account for between 40-50
per cent of the total, had slowed to 2 per cent.
This compared with 50 per cent for township enterprises and 90 per cent for
foreign funded ones.
China's overall rate of economic growth began slowing in the first quarter
to 12.6 per cent compared with more than 13 per cent in 1993. The
government's target for this year is 9 per cent.
Cost-of-living increases are running at more than 25 per cent in the cities
compared with last year. Retail inflation exceeded 20 per cent in the first
quarter against the same period in 1993. The authorities introduced a
16-point stabilisation programme last July in an effort to cool an
overheating economy.
Mr Dai warned that state enterprise demands for additional credit would be
examined on a 'case-by-case' basis. Priority, he said, would be given to
those with good economic performance, followed by those in a position to
'turn red into black in a short time'.
Enterprises up to their neck in debt and with no hope of recovery will be
declared bankrupt, he added.
China, which wants closer ties with India, is considering a big land
concession to New Delhi as a step to settle a border dispute, China's
ambassador in India said yesterday, Reuter reports from Calcutta.
Mr Cheng Ruisheng told a news conference at Calcutta that his country,
claiming huge parts of several Indian border states, was prepared to concede
the Himalayan Sikkim region to India. He did not say when China was planning
to officially recognise Sikkim as an Indian state.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940421

