FT944-10914

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (34): Bedroom farce or tragedy - Married
life is not what it used to be


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


The wealthy middle class, at the heart of India's emergence as one of Asia's
most promising markets, are finding it hard to reconcile the flashy images
on their television screens with the traditions and values they have
inherited.
As this group of an estimated 250m urban Indians is remorselessly targeted
by business houses for its purchasing power, it is undergoing dramatic
social changes, and marriage and the family are coming under increasing
scrutiny.
'Urban Indians are going through a phase like that the West experienced in
the 1970s,' says Ms Sheela Batra, a sociologist at Delhi University. 'Family
values are fast eroding and marriages are not longer sacrosanct as they used
to be, even 10 years ago.'
But look through the matrimonial classified ads in Delhi's two leading
newspapers on Sunday, and you would think that the more things change the
more they stay the same.
The Times of India and the Hindustan Times, those venerable papers locked in
price wars and circulation-boosting gimmicks, have changed the format of
their most-read pages, ostensibly because readers have limited time and
would prefer the paper to offer them brides and grooms made to order under
the desired heading.
Caste considerations may have receded in 'modern' urban India, but
traditional systems of segregation have given way to others in the new
market economy. Business women, bank officers, bureaucrats and non-resident
Indians all come neatly packaged under different headings.
Read the fine print, and you see a constant demand for husbands who are
engineers, chartered accountants, doctors, civil servants, employees of
foreign banks and multinationals, masters of business administration, those
with five-figure salaries.
They must also, of course, be handsome and, better still, non-smoking
tee-totallers from cultured families.
Those hunting the ideal woman frequently specify that beside being fair,
slim, beautiful, tall, sweet-tempered, well-mannered, sober and homely, she
should also be a convent-educated virgin]
Money is always a great leveller. A father who wants his
less-than-immaculate daughter to tie the knot merely has to say that he is
willing increase the dowry and the imperfection will be overlooked.
With increased consumerism come higher demands for dowry, and there are
'fixed rates' for grooms of different professions. Working women are now
more acceptable as potential brides than in the past.
'A working woman is like a goose who continues to lay golden eggs, and is
now a more attractive proposition than a woman who brings a one-time dowry,'
says Ms Madhu Jain, a senior editor with India Today, who writes on changes
in Indian society.
'As more women enter the workplace, marriages are undergoing strains not
experienced even 10 years ago,' says Sheela Dutta, a marriage counsellor.
'It's not as if the stress is confined to a new generation - some of my
clients have been married for over 20 years.' As age-old social structures
such as the joint family collapse, roles within the home are no longer
well-demarcated.
'Many couples have a problem resolving the power issue,' explains Dr Bindu
Prasad, clinical psychologist and family therapist. 'There are invariably
problems when the families of the husband and the wife don't match, or have
strong cultural differences. While building up a new unit comprising husband
and wife they have to work out a system separate from their families.'
Dr Prasad finds that a lot of problems stem from the fact that Indians are
over-attached to their parents. 'Women are asserting their individuality and
demanding more rights, while men are finding it hard to accept that their
wives are increasingly less like their mothers,' adds Dr Prasad.
Mr Anand Grover, a Bombay lawyer whose firm represents only women in divorce
cases, is more specific. 'Indian men are male chauvinist pigs. They have not
been able to accept that women are going to work or come to terms with the
new woman.'
He adds that divorce is no longer the dirty word it used to be even a decade
ago and that, although statistics are not easily available, divorce cases in
Indian courts have increased dramatically over the last decade.
The 'new Indian women' - and the new man - belong to the English-speaking
urban elite, and come to terms with divorce in much the same way as couples
in the West do.
Most marital breakdowns are terribly boring and have nothing specifically
Indian about them. But there are also local features such as the tragic
recent case of a young mother of three, who died of 100 per cent burns. The
police, writing off her death as an accident, said it was not their practice
to investigate the state of a dead woman's marriage where she had been
married for more than seven years.
She was an example of a woman caught in the web between tradition and
modernity. She was educated enough to leave her family in the countryside to
come to Delhi and live with the man she loved, but she missed the security
she felt an arranged marriage would have provided her.
She defied her mother-in-law and insisted that she and her husband have a
separate home. Even though her husband battered her, she felt obliged to
defend him.
Her death recalled the investigation carried out by women's rights groups,
and later the police, into a spate of cases in the early 1980s in which
wives died by fire in their homes.
Indian women who cannot afford to use gas, cook on kerosene stoves on the
floor, and sometimes their clothes catch fire or the stove explodes and they
die.
What emerged was that in several cases the fatal fires had been caused by
the women's husbands, (often with the help of the husband's families), who
thereby became free to marry again for another dowry. While there was no
suggestion that she had died in this way, there was no evidence that her
husband had tried to save her life.
'Ours was a love marriage,' she once told a friend. 'I made a mistake not
marrying the man my parents chose for me. This way I expected too much, and
that's why I got so little.'

The Financial Times


London Page XX

941108

