FT942-15498

FT  15 APR 94 / Anger as Leipzig counts the cost


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   LEIPZIG


'Damn him and his greed]' said Horst, who has been working on reconstruction
of Leipzig's once elegant Hotel Furstenhof for the Jurgen Schneider property
group.
'This bloke comes with all the money from the west, thinks he can do what he
wants and then dumps us. He had better not come back here. Because if he
does, well, I'd rather not say what I would do with him.'
Horst and his colleagues were told yesterday morning to pack their tools and
leave the building site - a vast hole flanked by a fragile 19th century
facade. 'We won't be coming back here for a while unless the banks do
something. Huh]'
They are not alone in Leipzig in reacting with anger, underpinned by
Schadenfreude, to the collapse of the Schneider group and the disappearence
of its founder.
The city is asking local banks to help support more than 3,000 contractors
and subcontractors after the collapse.
Mr Hinrich Lehmann-Grube, the mayor, has set up a working group comprising
the city, the association of enterprises in Saxony and the local trade and
industry chambers.
'We have to limit the damage as much as possible,' said Mr Christoph Sorge,
a spokesman for the city. 'The Schneider case has created a serious
psychological problem with respect to the market and property prices.'
'That guy pushed up the rents too much in Leipzig,' said one retailer. 'He
tried to control the most prestigious parts of the town centre. He has got
what he deserves. But a lot of people will suffer.'
He had rented from CIP, Mr Schneider's property agent, whose offices are
located on the second floor of the beautiful Madler-Passage, one of the most
sought-after sites in the heart of Leipzig.
The retailer, who asked not to be named, initially said he had rented the
property for DM80 (Pounds 32) a square metre. Pressed further, however, he
said: 'OK, OK, we have to pay DM200 per square metre. I have to pay monthly.
I don't know if I can cope. It really is high. I am running up debts.'
By mid-morning, there were only four people in the dozen or so small,
elegant shops, whose goods - targeted at tourists and professionals - are
too highly priced for most Leipzigers.
Mr Ulrich Thevas, an employee at CIP, tried to play down the affair. 'We
have no problems with our clients. Everything will be fine. We have rented
out every square metre.'
The retailers are beginning to question the rents charged for the location.
'The going rate in the centre of the city for office space is about DM50 per
square metre', said Mr Matthias Happ of Jones Lang Wootton, the
international property consultant which has 120,000 square metres of
property in Leipzig on its books.
But the going rate for retail property in the city centre is now between
DM120 and DM150, according to another consultant. He said Schneider had been
able to raise retail rental rates beyond that level because of the shortage
of prime renovated property in the centre of Leipzig.
Mr Schneider arrived in Leipzig soon after the collapse of the Berlin Wall
in November 1989. 'He took one look at some buildings and went for them,'
one official from the city council said. Mr Sorge elaborated: 'In some
cases, he bought directly from the state itself - in fact three properties.
But he paid up. The city is not owed any money.'
In other cases, Mr Schneider approached former Jewish owners who had been
forced to flee Nazi Germany before or during the second world war. One of
them was the Bamberg family, now living in Canada, who had once owned a
large clothes shop at the Konigsbau, in the theatre quarter.
'Mr Bamberg had the right to get his property back,' said another city
official. 'When Mr Schneider heard about this man returning, he offered Mr
Bamberg a price which I think he found difficult to refuse - and I believe
above the market rate at the time.
'The thing is that Mr Schneider then had to jack-up the rents to cover the
purchasing and renovation costs,' he added.
As Mr Schneider raised rents, prices in the property market, which went
through a boom in 1991 and 1992, started to fall. A recent report from Jones
Lang Wootton says: 'Top rents have come down from the peak achieved for
short-term letting in 1991 to a more sustainable DM35-DM40 a square metre.'
'The guy got his fingers burned,' a property consultant said. 'But what
amazes me is that it took him ages to start developing property. The Hotel
Furstenhof is a classic example. Doing nothing costs lots of money. Surely
the banks knew. I wonder - is the Schneider case the tip of the iceberg?'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940415

