FT943-13264

FT  20 JUL 94 / International Company News: Citicorp writes off Latin
American investments


   By RICHARD WATERS


   WASHINGTON


Citicorp has written Dollars 157m off the value of some of its Latin
American investments, and is sending a senior executive to the region to
take charge of its interests there.
The bank would not provide any details of the write-downs, although they are
believed to have been made mainly in equity investments acquired in
debt-equity swap agreements.
These are arrangements under which the bank took an equity interest in local
companies in return for giving up part of its debt claims against them. They
were part of the debt reduction plans that stemmed from the Latin American
debt crisis of the 1980s.
Citicorp said yesterday Mr Mike deGraffenried, an executive vice-president
who had represented it in the negotiations over Brazil's foreign debt, was
moving to Buenos Aires to oversee its equity interests in Latin America.
These include both the results of debt-equity swaps and investments in
financial companies in the region. He is 'being dispatched to maximise
values from debt-equity swaps,' the bank said.
The effects of the write-downs, taken in the second quarter, were offset by
profits of Dollars 244m during the same three-month period on bonds the bank
holds as a result of Brazil's debt restructuring agreements. Some Dollars
173m came from recording bonds issued as part of a recent agreement at
market value, with the rest from the sale of bonds issued in a previous
restructuring. Citicorp said the events were unrelated.
Against this background, and the benefit of a Dollars 150m deferred tax
adjustment, second quarter earnings were ahead of market expectations.
The US's biggest commercial bank reported net income of Dollars 877m, or
Dollars 1.64 a share (fully diluted), compared with Dollars 446m, or 82
cents, a year ago.
The figures confirmed its continuing recovery from the credit problems of
the early 1980s. Commercial non-performing loans dropped by Dollars 1.3bn,
the bank said, while the loan loss provision for the latest period fell to
Dollars 361m from Dollars 442m. Revenues fell marginally from a year before,
though, to Dollars 4.2bn. For the first six months, net income rose to
Dollars 1.5bn, or Dollars 3.07 a share, from Dollars 816m, or Dollars 1.59,
a year before.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940720

