FT941-3500

FT  16 MAR 94 / Muddle over rail privatisation forces special bill


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


The government has been forced to draw up a special bill to correct a rail
privatisation muddle which accidentally reduced the powers of the British
Transport Police.
The decision follows claims by the Transport Police Federation that an error
in the Railway Privatisation Act could leave railway police virtually
powerless in an emergency.
The error arose because the act defined the powers of the transport police
on the basis of the 1949 act, which nationalised the railways.
The clause dealing with police powers ignored several amendments to the 1949
act that significantly widened the powers of the 2,200 transport police
officers. In effect, the new act allows transport police to deal with
incidents affecting privatised railway companies, but prevents them carrying
out further inquiries.
Transport police officers say the act also makes it unclear whether they
would have the authority to pursue offenders outside railway property.
The government intended to correct the error during the later stages of the
privatisation bill, but ran out of time.
Ministers then hoped to use the police and magistrates courts bill or the
criminal justice bill to amend the privatisation act.
However, ministers have been forced to accept that neither bill will become
law before April 1, when British Rail's track and infrastructure will pass
into the ownership of Railtrack.
Earl Ferrers, the Home Office minister of state, said the government would
table a special one-clause bill to take effect later this month.
Mr Mike Bevan, the federation's chairman, said transport ministers were
warned about the error several times before the act became law in November.
Opposition MPs said the muddle reflected the government's determination to
force the bill through without sufficient debate. 'This is a classic example
of ministerial arrogance at its worst,' said Mr Andrew MacKinlay, Labour MP
for Thurrock.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940316

