FT941-5649

FT  05 MAR 94 / Thais pick GEC-Alsthom consortium: Anglo-French group to
enter negotiations to build Dollars 1bn rail network in Bangkok


   By VICTOR MALLET


   BANGKOK


The company planning to build a Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) elevated railway
network for Bangkok announced yesterday that it had chosen a consortium
including GEC-Alsthom, the Anglo-French engineering group, as priority
bidder for the turnkey construction contract.
Mr Kasame Chatikavanij, chairman of Bangkok Transit System Corp (BTSC), said
he was confident that construction of the system could start 'within the
next few weeks'.
Details of the turnkey contract must be negotiated within one month, and if
the talks fail BTSC can approach the other three consortia; one is led by
Siemens, one by Itochu and the other by Mitsui.
The contract price for building the 24km system is expected to be about
Bt26bn (Pounds 690m), while the total project cost up to the time trains are
supposed to start running in early 1997 is put at Bt37bn.
Executives of BTSC - a subsidiary of the Thai property group Tanayong which
was awarded a 30-year 'build-operate-transfer' concession by the Bangkok
authorities - insisted there would be no problem with financing the deal, in
spite of protests by international bankers over the the Thai government's
handling of a separate Dollars 1bn project to build an elevated motorway.
'We have more than 100 per cent coverage of the total project cost
requirements,' said Mr Edward Chow, BTSC chief financial officer. 'We are in
a chooser's position rather than in a worried position.'
Between a quarter and a third of the cost will be covered by equity.
Tanayong has also raised Dollars 130m through a convertible eurobond issue,
and expects to launch a baht debenture on the Thai stock market worth
another Dollars 100m. The International Finance Corporation is also expected
to help fund the project.
The construction consortium will procure supplier credits covering its
costs. Paribas is leading a group of banks backing GEC-Alsthom's bid. The
consortium also includes Italian-Thai Corp, a Thai construction company,
BTSC and GEC-Alsthom directors dismissed fears that the project would not be
able to pay for itself, arguing that there was great suppressed demand for a
mass transit system in a city as large and as congested as Bangkok.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940305

