FT942-14354

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (27): Airports of the world - O'Hare
drawback is congestion / Chicago


   By LAURIE MORSE


Chicago's O'Hare Airport served 66m passengers in 1993, making it one of the
world's largest, and often among the most frustrating, transit points for
business travellers. Local politics have constrained badly-needed runway
expansion at O'Hare, resulting in air traffic congestion and flight delays.
The congestion extends to the highways that surround the airport. Interstate
94, the main artery between O'Hare and downtown Chicago, is under
construction throughout this summer, with the project planned to extend into
1995. Ground transportation delays are expected to peak during the weekends
preceding the May 30 and July 4 US holidays, and between June 14 and July 2,
when more than 60,000 foreign visitors will come to Chicago for the World
Cup soccer tournament.
Airport officials encourage travellers to use Chicago's train system to get
into the city, since traffic gridlock can turn a 40-minute taxi or rental
car ride into a two-hour ordeal at peak times. Chicago Transit Authority
trains can be caught right at the airport, and deliver passengers to the
central business district, the Chicago 'loop', in about 40 minutes for a
fare of Dollars 1.50. Taxi fares to the city run to about Dollars 30.
The CTA trains offer the noisy, untidy jolting of a carnival ride, and have
no provision for luggage. However, they provide unexpected views of
Chicago's mean streets, multi-ethnic neighborhoods, and some of the best
graffiti art in the US. Train travel is only recommended during daylight
hours, with cab or limousine service available after dark.
Last May a new Dollars 618m International Terminal (terminal 5) opened at
O'Hare. This bright facility offers a buffet of Chicago fast-food
specialties, including Chicago-style frankfurters and pizza. There is a
6,000 sq ft duty-free shop; one of the largest in the US; and information
booths with friendly multi-lingual attendants on both terminal levels.
But travellers should note that the international terminal is located away
from the main airport, and that connections can be made only by taking a
five-minute trip on the new Dollars 127m airport transit train.
While major international carriers are now using the new terminal, US
airlines that make international flights are still operating out of their
own terminals. International travellers departing from O'Hare should check
with their airlines for departure location.
O'Hare's largest concentration of business services is in Terminal 3 near
the American Airlines gates. It is equipped with 17 conference rooms with
video conferencing capabilities, all available for short or long-term
rental.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940420

