FT942-15920

FT  13 APR 94 / NHS condemned over Pounds 180m staff absence costs


   By JOHN WILLMAN, Public Policy Editor


Poor human resource management is costing the National Health Service Pounds
180m a year in unnecessary sickness absence, the Audit Commission says in a
report published today.
The commission, a local government and health service watchdog, says bad
organisation and management in health service trusts is creating wide
discrepancies in their performance.
More than 90 per cent of NHS hospitals and community health organisations
are now organised as independent self-governing trusts.
Some trusts are up to 50 per cent more efficient in treating patients than
others, the report says. Much of the variation stems from the way services
are organised and managed.
The report identifies bad staff communications, inadequate training and lack
of performance appraisal as causes of high sickness absence and staff
turnover.
A survey of staff in 10 hospitals found that more than half did not feel
well informed about what the trust was doing.
Training initiatives are lagging behind changes in the health service, and
many trusts do not use performance appraisal to tell staff how they are
progressing.
Trust boards must do more to establish a strategic direction and monitor
their performance against targets, said Mr Andrew Foster, Audit Commission
controller.
He said: 'It is clear from this report that there is much to be done if
trusts are to make full use of the potential freedoms they have been given.
Boards need to focus on strategic direction, accountability and monitoring
performance.'
Welcoming the report, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, urged trusts
to seize the opportunities offered by their managerial independence.
'The commission is right to point to the variations in performance between
different trusts and the potential that exists to improve standards
everywhere to the level of the best,' she said.
Mrs Bottomley urged trust chairmen and chief executives to improve staff
communication to create teamwork, involvement and ownership.
'Where this is working well, there have been substantial benefits for
patients,' she added.
Trusting in the Future: Towards an Audit Agenda for NHS Providers. HMSO.
Pounds 8.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940413

