FT942-14430

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: Citicorp hit by heavy fall in
trading income


   By RICHARD WATERS


   NEW YORK


Trading income at Citicorp tumbled by nearly Dollars 400m in recent weeks as
the US bank took an unexpected hit in the world's turbulent foreign exchange
and fixed-income markets.
The debacle cut the US bank's trading revenues to just Dollars 71m during
the first three months of the year, from Dollars 457m a year ago.
The news was surprising, given that Citicorp is not known for taking big
bets on the direction of financial markets. In the past, much of its income
has come from handling trades for customers in the foreign exchange markets,
where it is the world's biggest trader.
Foreign exchange trading income fell to Dollars 66m from Dollars 240m a year
ago, while the bank's trading account - principally comprising fixed-income
securities - turned in income of just Dollars 5m, down from Dollars 217m.
Speaking at the bank's annual meeting in New York yesterday, Mr John Reed,
chairman, described the results as 'very poor'. He added that trading 'is
important, but it is not the dominant part of our business.'
The bank did not provide details of trading losses, except to say:
'Interest-rate and currency environments in Europe and North America were
volatile, and market prices declined in Latin American securities.'
Other banks active in the emerging securities markets have also reported
poor trading results in the area, with First Chicago putting its loss in the
markets at Dollars 54m.
Other parts of Citicorp's operations performed above market expectations
during the period, continuing the turnround of recent quarters and
off-setting the poor trading results.
Before accounting changes in both periods, after-tax profits of Dollars
609m, or Dollars 1.12 a share, were up from Dollars 370m, or 67 cents, a
year before. They were broadly in line with market estimates.
Loan-loss provisions for the period fell to Dollars 415m, from Dollars 689m
a year before and Dollars 571m in the final three months of 1993.
Citicorp continued to report growth in consumer banking around the world,
with revenues of Dollars 2.49bn, up 11 per cent from a year before. With
expenses rising by only 5 per cent, and lower loan-loss provisions, the
consumer businesses recorded net income of Dollars 427m, up from Dollars
296m.
The poor trading results, meanwhile, cut revenues in the wholesale banking
area to 1.2bn, 17 per cent below the level of a year before.
Net income in these operations was Dollars 264m, down from Dollars 380m.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940420

