FT941-5554

FT  05 MAR 94 / US trade move on Japan sparks fears


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS, MICHIYO NAKAMOTO and FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


The US decision to reactivate its Super 301 trade law provision, opening the
way for sanctions against Japan, was greeted with concern yesterday in
Europe and Asia.
Sir Leon Brittan, European Union chief trade negotiator, was disappointed at
President Bill Clinton's renewal of the provision allowing the US to single
out countries for sanctions. 'The European Union will be examining the
import of these measures very carefully,' he said.
One senior European Commission official said the renewal of Super 301 could
signal a new, tougher US trade stance, based on bilateral muscle.
The US move sparked anxiety from South Korea and Australia, which feared a
setback to free trade. The revival of Super 301 was 'regrettable at a time
when countries are expected to engage in more liberal trade', said a Seoul
government spokesman.
He said trade disputes should be settled under the World Trade Organisation,
to be set up as the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
not by the 'domestic legal procedures of one nation'.
Mr Bob McMullan, the Australian trade minister, warned: 'We don't support
the US opening up the Japanese market in a unilateral and retaliatory way.'
In Japan, Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary, said unilateral
trade action against another country would be contrary to WTO rules. But
Tokyo recognised 'the need for a restrained response', he said. Japan would
continue to work on plans to open markets. Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime
minister, promised to redouble efforts to cut regulatory trade barriers.
Asian leaders were assured by Mr Jeffrey Garten, US undersecretary of
commerce for international trade, that US problems with Japan 'were quite
unique'.
Frances Williams adds from Geneva: Mr David Woods, spokesman for Gatt, said
the reinstatement of Super 301 should be viewed with 'a sense of
proportion'. It should not be assumed a trade war would follow, and there
was no evidence the US intended to violate Gatt rules.
Japan surpluses rise, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940305

