FT942-15476

FT  15 APR 94 / Russia seeks to bind CIS economies


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


The most far-reaching attempt to unite the members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States into a single economic unit will be launched today at a
CIS summit.
Russia, which hosts the meeting, will propose creation of an Inter-state
Economic Committee to be based in Minsk, the capital both of Belarus and of
the CIS. The Committee's responsibilities have not been defined, but it is
likely to be seen as forerunner of a central bank for states within the
economic union.
Also on the agenda of the one-day meeting will be creation of a free trade
zone, creation of transnational companies and the concept of a 'payments
union'.
The plan for the new institutions follows an accord between Russia and
Belarus on a close economic union under which Belarus would lose effective
economic independence, its temporary currency and its independent central
bank.
Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, Russian prime minister, has made as sure as he can
through active lobbying that the accord will be ratified by the Russian
parliament, while the Belarus chamber, dominated by pro-Russian deputies, is
also likely to produce the two-thirds majority required.
Mr Stanislav Bogdankevich, governor of the Belarus Bank who signed the
agreement in Moscow, said in Minsk that he did so with the reservation that
it contravenes the Belarus constitution and that until that is settled, he
would regard the agreement as inoperative.
Mr Thomas Wolf, a senior official of the International Monetary Fund, said
yesterday that the agreement could spark off 'a new round of inflation' in
Russia, depending on the rate at which the rouble was exchanged for the
Belarus coupon - known as the 'bunny'.
At the CIS summit, the main problems will be with the leaderships of the two
states closest - after Belarus - to Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
Tension is still high between Moscow and Kiev after the weekend incidents in
Odessa where a Russian ship of the Black Sea Fleet seized radar equipment
and Ukrainian militia arrested Russian officers.
A Ukrainian government spokesman said yesterday three Russian ships were
sailing towards Odessa to collect the eight naval families there but, he
said 'why do you need such an armada for eight families?'
Talks in Kiev on Tuesday failed to solve the underlying question of the
fleet's ownership, and the issue will again be put before Presidents Boris
Yeltsin of Russia and Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine.
One certain absentee today will be President Nursultan Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan.
Mr Nazarbayev had proposed a 'Euro-Asiatic Union of the Slav and Asiatic
states in order to bind the western countries of Ukraine, Belarus and Russia
more tightly into association with the Central Asian ones - but had been
rebuffed by the Russian foreign ministry, which said it 'lacked detail.'
Mr Nazarbayev was said by the Kazakh embassy in Moscow to have been suddenly
taken ill yesterday.
'It's a real illness,' said the embassy spokesman, Mr Vyacheslav Kovolov.
'It's not a diplomatic one.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940415

