FT941-16997

FT  06 JAN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Focus switches to the FT-SE Mid 250
stocks - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The managers of the big investment funds took a hard look at their
pre-Christmas profits yesterday and began to reshape their portfolios, often
moving out of blue chips and into second line issues. Their endeavours
brought contrasting performances by market indices: the FT-SE 100-share
Index abandoned the 3,400 mark to close nearly 30 points off, while the
FT-SE Mid 250 Index, covering a wider range of stocks, jumped a further 21
points to a new high of 3,820.4.
The process of repositioning was hurried along by another reversal of
fortunes in the March Footsie fut-ure, which was sold off in the second half
of the session, and by fresh losses in UK government bonds.
Trading volume was heavy, and yesterday's Seaq total of 907.7m shares traded
was spared the distortions of the previous day when just in excess of 1bn
shares passed through the electronic system; nearly 70 per cent of
yesterday's trade was in non-Footsie stocks. Tuesday's retail trade in
equities was worth Pounds 1.47bn, well up to the high levels recorded in the
London market before Christmas.
At the final reading the FT-SE 100 was 29.3 off at 3,379.2. UK equities had
opened hopefully, responding to a better performance from Wall Street
overnight than had been expected in view of the concerns that US interest
rates might be about to move higher. But after breaking through the 3,400
mark with a gain of 10.9 at 3,419.4, the market ran into a determined seller
of stock index futures, on which the premium against the underlying index
was quickly replaced by a discount.
The institutions showed themselves very selective in trading activity, and
concentrated on specific areas of the market. Media stocks continued to
attract significant support as investors assessed the implications of the UK
government's proposed review of cross media ownership. But the
pharmaceuticals sector suffered heavily following reports of proposed
changes in Italian health care.
Some Channel ferry operators fell as the shipowners began to respond to
reports of Eurotunnel's fares plans. And UK retail stores, still nervously
awaiting details of the Christmas selling season, were sold down.
The final picture of the Footsie stocks was more mixed than the fall in the
index suggested. Oil shares steadied on hints that the Opec ministers may
meet again this month and attempt to stabilise crude prices. Insurance
stocks attracted support but shares in the leading banks, which led the
market last month, eased back ahead of their profits reporting season; the
exception was TSB.
The London market tried to rally in mid-afternoon but found further cause
for discouragement when Wall Street and other European markets looked
hesitant. The close was the low point of the day, and equity traders feared
that the weakness which has characterised UK stocks since the return from
the new year break could well continue for a while.
Some sources looked for a move on German interest rates at today's meeting
of the Bundesbank council. But the hopes for a cut in UK base rates, which
helped to drive the stock market to new highs before Christmas, have waned
somewhat on fears that they may be held back until the spring, when the
Budget tax rises will begin to hit consumers and the economy.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940106

