FT941-13144

FT  27 JAN 94 / Reynolds hopeful of IRA response


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


The Dublin government yesterday said it remained hopeful that the UK-Irish
initiative would bring peace to Northern Ireland but stressed that it was
not interested in erecting artificial deadlines for a response from the IRA
and Sinn Fein.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, told the Dail (parliament)
that there was a deep debate in the two organisations and that Ireland as a
whole would welcome a response from republicans 'at the earliest possible
time'.
His remarks came ahead of tomorrow's meeting in Dublin of the first session
of the Anglo-Irish intergovernmental conference since the two governments
unveiled their joint peace initiative at the end of last year.
The conference is likely to provide the opportunity for both governments to
reaffirm their joint position on the peace initiative and to make clear that
their demands for a cessation of violence remain a prerequisite to any
progress on a settlement.
Tomorrow will also see a Sinn Fein conference in Londonderry, called to give
members another opportunity to express views on the peace proposals. The
meeting will be addressed by Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president.
With British ministers increasingly pessimistic about the prospects for a
positive IRA response, Mr Reynolds continued to stress his optimism. He
said: 'I am not privy to the internal debate that is going on. But there is
clearly an intense debate.
'I have repeatedly made it clear since the declaration was signed that I did
not expect an early response. We are trying to find a resolution to a
centuries-old conflict.
'I am as hopeful as I was on the first day of the declaration. But time is
needed, and there can be no artificial deadlines. We are trying to change
direction, and take the gun out of Irish politics. I would still give it a
fair chance of success.'
He stressed that there had been no contact with Sinn Fein over the
'clarification' it had demanded before making a decision.
Ulster police last night put the province on a firebomb alert amid fears
that the IRA was about to strike against business and commercial property.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940127

