FT942-14470

FT  20 APR 94 / Bankers Trust hit by market turmoil


   By RICHARD WATERS and REUTER


   NEW YORK


The turmoil in international financial markets in February and March all but
wiped out reported trading profits at Bankers Trust, the US commercial bank
which has been one of the pioneers of the derivatives markets in recent
years.
The bank said trading income was Dollars 14m (Pounds 9.5m) in the first
quarter, down from a record Dollars 449m in the previous three months and
Dollars 346m in the first quarter of 1993.
It added that this did not represent a complete picture of its overall
trading results. Some Dollars 177m, reported as net interest income, had
been earned on holdings of bonds. If this is added in, overall trading
income was Dollars 191m, compared with Dollars 463m last year. The bank
blamed the decline on 'sharply lower revenue from proprietary trading and
positioning activities'. Trading in foreign exchange, government bonds and
emerging market debt and equity securities suffered the most, it added.
The fall in trading income was offset in part by higher income from selling
derivatives and other risk management instruments, Bankers Trust said.
These activities are under a cloud following threatened legal action last
week by Procter & Gamble, which incurred after-tax losses of Dollars 102m on
two interest rate swaps contracts it bought from Bankers Trust.
Mr Charles Sanford, Bankers Trust chairman and chief executive, told the
annual meeting: 'We will win if they (Procter & Gamble) want to sue us.' He
declined to comment further other than to say Bankers Trust has no legal
liability.
Despite the deteriorating trading results, the bank limited the fall in its
after-tax profits to Dollars 164m, or Dollars 1.90 a share, from Dollars
230m, or Dollars 2.64 a share, a year ago (before accounting changes).
Bonuses paid to staff tumbled by Dollars 109m, to Dollars 162m. Other
sources of income, such as fund management fees and other fees and
commissions, rose by around Dollars 100m.
Citibank also reported a sharp drop in its trading revenues in the first
quarter. It earned Dollars 71m, down from Dollars 457m a year before.
Gibson Greetings, a US greetings card and gift-wrap producer, said it had
taken a Dollars 16.7m charge against first-quarter earnings from unrealised
losses on interest rate derivatives transactions with Bankers Trust, Reuter
reports. 'The company should never have been put in a position like this as
we relied on Bankers Trust to advise us on these transactions,' Gibson said.
Bankers Trust said its actions had been legal and proper.
Other US bank results, Page 32

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940420

