FT943-12622

FT  23 JUL 94 / Dr, about this alien . . .: Christina Lamb meets an eminent
Harvard professor who believes that large-scale cosmic rape has been taking
place on earth


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


An anti-rational boom is sweeping America and, suddenly, I do not feel I
missed out on the 1960s. Recently, four of the 10 best-selling books were on
themes of near-death experiences, spirituality, and the immortality of love
and consciousness.
Psychics and palmists' salons are proliferating and weighty magazine
articles are questioning memory, some even denying the Holocaust. Men and
women are seeking happiness through wonder drugs such as Prozac and are
forming electronic communities on Internet with people they have never seen.
It was just a matter of time before someone added unidentified flying
objects to this potent mix. Recently, book store displays were joined by a
weighty tome about little grey aliens with blank eyes abducting large
numbers of Americans and forcing them to have sex inside spaceships,
followed by lectures on ecology.
It would be easy to dismiss Abduction (published in the UK and US by
Scribners) as crazy except for one detail. Dr John Mack, its 64-year-old
author, is an eminent Harvard professor and psychiatrist and winner of the
Pulitzer prize for his previous book, a biography of TE Lawrence. He used
clinical methods to interview 90 people who claim to have been abducted (13
appear in the book). And he believes them.
Or so he says. On a sunny spring morning in Cambridge, Massachusetts, I met
Mack inside a wooden box of a house with a yard full of tangled weeds. Tired
from appearances on such talk shows as Oprah Winfrey and Larry King, he
asked about the FT's circulation before settling on a pink velvet chaise
longue to tell how he moved from scepticism to believing in large-scale
cosmic rape.
According to the publisher's hype, one in 50 Americans has experienced an
alien encounter. Mack was introduced to the phenomenon by Budd Hopkins, a
New York-based artist and father of the UFO abduction movement, whom he met
in January 1990. Hopkins told him of more than 200 people across the US who
had, apparently, been kidnapped by aliens.
Mack recalls: 'My first reaction was that there must be something wrong with
him and that he was dealing with some contemporary form of mental illness.
But I met the people and they were of sound mind, telling their stories
reluctantly, scared of being ridiculed.
'Their stories were so similar, and told with such intensity and detail,
that they could not be explained psychiatrically. It could only be real
experience. That shook me up. If it's real, what is it?' He began seeing
abductees in spring 1990 and says that only a handful of the 90 he has
interviewed have some form of mental illness or effects of a trauma.
In his book, he details a handy do-it-yourself guide on how to recognise
when you are experiencing an alien abduction and not simply the effects of
overwork or excess alcohol. Abductions usually begin at home in bed or while
driving at night. The first sign is a flood of blue or white light, an odd
hum or sighting of a being or craft. A beam of light then floats you through
the wall into a spaceship.
In a large room, lined with flashing computer consoles, small grey beings
with large heads and long arms undress the abductee and remove hair, skin
and sperm samples. Female abductees are often impregnated and the foetus
later removed.
Mack's book quotes Ed, who remembers a silver-blonde alien woman taking a
sperm sample from him inside a 'pod' while at high school 30 years earlier;
Dave, who as a child had his pants removed behind a bush by aliens; Jenny,
who gave birth to a human alien hybrid; and Peter, who had an alien wife in
a 'parallel universe'.
These are aliens with a purpose - to save us from ourselves. After being
raped or examined, abductees are lectured on how mankind is destroying the
earth. Images, given either telepathically or through giant screens, show
vast areas of polluted water or parts of the planet disintegrating.
If the true motive of the little grey men is to turn us green, why are they
not appearing to world leaders or those who could do something to ward off
this impending ecological catastrophe?
Mack claims they are. 'Prestigious people are worried about their
reputations so they don't want their identities revealed. We have good
evidence that one world leader, at least, has been taken. We've talked to
him and he doesn't deny it.'
He adds: 'I have patients from all walks of society. A prison guard and
female gas station attendant, at one end of the spectrum, to a prominent
business executive, high-level diplomat and someone running for Congress at
the other.'
The first known abduction case was in 1957 in Brazil, a country with a fine
line between reality and fiction. In the US, the first documented case
occurred in 1966. Betty and Barney Hill, a retired couple who had got lost
one night in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, underwent hypnosis and
'remembered' being kidnapped by aliens. Their experience led to books, films
and TV dramas.
Abduction appears to be almost entirely a US phenomenon. Mack says this is
simply because the country has a large number of trained psychotherapists to
help people 'remember'. But there is much controversy at present over
aggressive, memory-enhancing techniques used by therapists to 'recall'
events so traumatic that, apparently, they had been repressed.
A California court recently awarded Dollars 500,000 (Pounds 329,000) to a
father who accused therapists of conning his bulimia-afflicted adult
daughter into 'remembering' childhood incidents of incest that he said had
never occurred. As a result of her charges, the man lost his job and his
wife.
Mack gives little detail on his methodology except to say that it involves
hypnosis and breathing techniques. He writes that 'memory of an abduction
may be outside of consciousness until triggered' and sweeps away suggestions
that his subjects were people already familiar with UFO literature.
'These are real powerful emotions from the core of their being,' he says.
'We can't invent memories like that. Furthermore, there are physical
findings - cuts, scoop marks, lacerated and triangular lesions, implants and
inexplicable nose-bleeds. Accounts of abductions often coincide with other
reports of UFOs in the vicinity.' He adds: 'Maybe the phenomenon is
mysterious and has no place in our world view. But it's not false.
'The problem is with western culture, which is just not ready to accept the
idea of life on other planets. Other cultures, like native American and
Buddhist, don't have problems with this. But we have become so arrogant that
we don't want to think we are not in control. No other people in the history
of mankind has been so denying of the existence of other intelligence.'
That said, he rubs his blue eyes and says: 'I think you've got enough
there,' before moving wearily on to the next interview. Even aliens, it
seems, need publicity.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940723

