FT943-896

FT  27 SEP 94 / Rail strike still on after talks fail to secure deal: Tube
workers to take action on Friday over pay


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


Hopes of averting further widespread rail disruption from midnight tomorrow
suffered a setback when the latest session of talks to resolve the
four-month signal workers dispute was adjourned late last night.
The failure to achieve a breakthrough came as members of the RMT transport
union on London Underground prepared for a 24-hour strike on Friday after
talks on their separate pay claim broke down unexpectedly yesterday.
The talks on the signal workers dispute will resume at 11am today at Acas,
the conciliation service. Last night's failure to reach a successful
conclusion suggests some difficult issues remain unresolved. Earlier both
sides had expressed hopes that they were coming together.
The RMT and the state-owned Railtrack, which operates the network's
infrastructure, have been negotiating for 60 hours over six consecutive days
on a productivity package.
Neither side would make any formal statement at the end of of the latest
session of the marathon talks. Mr Vernon Hince, the RMT's chief negotiator,
said: 'There is still a bit of work to be done.' When asked whether the
48-hour strike due to begin at midnight tomorrow was still on he replied:
'Yes, certainly.'
Mr David Armstrong, Railtrack's industrial relations director, said there
was 'a lot of talking still to be done'.
Earlier in the day negotiations between RMT and London Transport lasted only
45 minutes. The union demanded a 5 per cent pay rise for its 7,000 members
who work on the Underground.
London Transport said it could not improve on a 2.5 per cent increase this
year on basic rates, already accepted by the two other rail unions. The RMT
secured a large majority in a ballot for strike action, but LT management
pointed out that no more than one in four of their members had backed a
strike.
Further disruption can be expected on the Underground after Friday but LT
said it hoped that half the network would be running through any action.
On the railways, it might be too late to call off the 48-hour stoppage even
if a deal is reached before tomorrow night. In that case, British Rail
expects more than half the services to run, with about 60 per cent of the
network being kept open by managers and supervisors operating signal boxes.
The intensity of the negotiations reflects an awareness that September 30 is
the legal deadline for a settlement. After that, British Rail's pension fund
will be redistributed as a result of the privatisation, and the signal
workers stand to lose substantial amounts of money if their basic pay rate
has not been agreed.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940927

