FT941-5622

FT  05 MAR 94 / Thorp decision likely to stir nuclear review


   By MICHAEL SMITH and DAVID LASCELLES


The government is expected to launch its long-awaited nuclear review soon,
probably within the next month, following yesterday's High Court decision to
allow the opening and commissioning of the Thorp reprocessing plant.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, is believed to be taking
an increasing interest and wants to leave open the possibility of
privatising Nuclear Electric, the generating company, before the next
election.
Civil servants estimate that a decision on privatisation would need to be
made by the summer if the sell-off is to be achieved before the next general
election.
That puts pressure on the Department of Trade and Industry to announce the
terms of reference for the review as soon as possible.
The review has been held up both by inter-departmental disagreement over the
terms and by the judicial uncertainties created by Greenpeace's action in
the High Court.
However, the delay appears to have shifted ministerial preferences towards a
more wide-ranging review than was originally planned.
Last year ministers were tending towards a narrow review which focused
mainly on the prospects for privatising the nuclear power industry.
This was strongly opposed by Nuclear Electric, which believes that its
ambitions to be privatised would be best served by a review which included
wider factors, such as environmental considerations.
The review is now likely to cover the balance sheet of the nuclear power
industry, the assets and liabilities, and treat privatisation as just one of
several options available.
The back-end costs, including decommissioning and reprocessing, are also
likely to be scrutinised. Another issue to be resolved, either as part of
the review or alongside it, is that of contracts between the generators and
British Nuclear Fuels for reprocessing.
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, rebuked Nuclear Electric recently for its
high profile campaign to be privatised.
He made clear his support for the privatisation of the generation industry
in the long run but raised questions about the practicability of it
happening quickly. The future of the industry would be in the private
sector, he said, but added that the question was how and when it got there.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940305

