FT942-12459

FT  29 APR 94 / Leading Article: Euro-networks


Last December Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission president, won
qualified approval from EU government leaders for a long-term plan to
integrate the region's transport, energy and telecommunications networks. Mr
Delors argues that such trans-European networks are needed because the EU's
single market will be incomplete while its infrastructure remains fragmented
along national lines.
Mr Delors is right in his diagnosis. However, his chosen remedy, an
ambitious programme of trans-border official co-operation backed by public
expenditure totalling Ecu400bn, looks misconceived. As currently envisaged,
it risks proving a wasteful irrelevance, and could even make unattainable
the very goal it sets out to achieve.
The reason is that the networks the programme aims to integrate are mostly
operated by monopolies, which have long enjoyed immunity from competition in
return for staying within national or regional borders. It is their
introverted attitudes and stubborn determination to cling to historic
privileges and captive markets - not the existence of national borders per
se - which pose the biggest obstacle to a true single market in Europe.
That is clear from the fact the liberalisation has encountered most
resistance in areas traditionally dominated by national monopolies. Even in
air transport, where progress has been greatest, France has reneged on its
commitments by keeping Orly airport closed to competition. In
telecommunications services, no real liberalisation is planned before 1998,
while in energy there has been almost no movement at all.
That is not for lack of prodding by the Commission, which showed commendable
firmness this week in ordering France to open up Orly. Brussels' call for
full liberalisation of mobile telecommunications is also a positive step. It
is, however, a sorry fact that even in this area, where a pan-European
service was planned from the outset, its achievement has been blocked by
national policy and technical differences.
It is regrettable that the Commission's powers to act against state
monopolies are less than clear-cut. They may have been further clouded by a
European Court decision this week upholding a Dutch energy utility's
monopoly-selling arrangements. Nonetheless, it is vital that Brussels
continues to seek ways to promote competition. One would be to advance the
date for full liberalisation of telecommunications.
Failure to keep up the attack on monopolies will enable them to hi-jack the
trans-European networks plan, at the expense of the rest of the economy.
Truly open markets, by contrast, could render such a grand,
officially-planned scheme unnecessary by stimulating service providers
spontaneously to innovate, compete and collaborate across borders. Unless
preceded by vigorous liberalisation, Mr Delors' blueprint for further
integration will remain an empty dream.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940429

