FT944-14380

FT  24 OCT 94 / Dublin must revise claim to Ulster, says Major


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and JOHN MURRAY-BROWN


   LONDON, DUBLIN


Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, will tell his Irish counterpart Mr
Albert Reynolds today that hopes for an overall political settlement in
Northern Ireland depend on a radical revision of Dublin's constitutional
claim to the province.
But ahead of their planned talks at Chequers, there were signs of Irish
irritation at a move by Mr Major to separate plans for an Ulster assembly
from wider talks on the province's status.
The meeting will follow British denial of a claim by Mr Martin McGuinness, a
leading official of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, about private
assurances by the British government.
Mr McGuinness said on BBC television that during secret contacts last year,
a British civil servant had said London was working towards a united
Ireland. Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, said the claim
was 'nonsense'.
Mr Major hopes to persuade Mr Reynolds that the territorial claim to Ulster
in Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish constitution is the main obstacle to an
agreed approach. Dublin has agreed to modify the claim, but the British side
will argue that unless Mr Reynolds goes further, moderate unionists in
Northern Ireland will reject a proposed framework document for talks on the
province's future.
The Irish prime minister, meanwhile, is concerned that Mr Major appears to
have weakened Britain's commitment to the comprehensive 'three-stranded'
approach to negotiations.
Mr Major said last week that proposals for strand one - the creation of an
assembly - were separate from the Anglo-Irish framework document, which
would cover strands two and three. Those concern relations between north and
south and between London and Dublin.
Mr Reynolds spelt out his demands yesterday that the proposed cross-border
institutions in strand two of the process must be given 'executive
functions'. He said: 'Such institutions also must address some of the key
interests common to north and south on a pragmatic basis.'
Irish officials said Mr Reynolds wanted today's meeting to 'pick up the
pace'. He was anxious to harness Sinn Fein to the political process quickly
to bolster Republican moderates. Dublin will also press for flexibility on
the issue of the surrender of IRA arms. Mr Reynolds repeated his view that
the question 'had to be confronted and dealt with but is not a precondition
for talks'.
In a move underlying Irish concerns, police in the republic detained several
people over the weekend in a four-county operation against 'elements of Sinn
Fein-IRA who may try to destabilise the peace process'.
One Irish newspaper yesterday said the IRA would review its ceasefire
decision in the spring. Mr McGuinness warned: 'If the central issues at the
heart of this conflict are not addressed or resolved, there will continue to
be conflict.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941024

