FT942-14277

FT  21 APR 94 / Hoover 'free flights' scheme costs Pounds 48m


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM, Wales and West Correspondent


Hoover's ill-fated 'free flights' promotion has cost the company Pounds
48.2m, far more than it originally feared.
Early last year the company's US parent, Maytag, took a Dollars 30m charge
(then about Pounds 20m) to cover the costs of the promotion, launched in
autumn 1992.
People who bought Hoover products costing Pounds 100 or more were offered
two air tickets to continental Europe or the US. Hoover was swamped by the
response and thousands of customers complained they were unable to obtain
the flights they wanted.
Hoover, based at Merthyr Tydfil, south Wales, yesterday said that the total
cost was now put by Maytag at Dollars 72.6m. It said the extent of the
problem had not been known when Maytag originally set aside Dollars 30m.
Under the offer, 220,000 people have already flown or are booked to do so by
the end of this month when the main promotion closes.
'Everyone who followed the rules and the conditions will have been offered
flights,' Hoover said.
Three senior executives lost their jobs over the promotion and a taskforce
of 250 people was set up to handle the flight applications. Two tour
operators were put under contract to make bookings.
Mr Richard Rankin, co-chairman of the taskforce, said: 'We have devoted
enormous resources, both financial and human, to resolving the situation.'
About 70 claims for compensation have been brought against Hoover under the
small claims procedure. The company said it had lost about 20 per cent of
the cases. 'There is still a steady trickle of claims and our policy is to
defend them.'
An action group of dissatisfied Hoover customers intends to send a
delegation to Maytag in Iowa tomorrow. But Maytag said no meeting had been
arranged and it saw no purpose in such a meeting.
In February Maytag reported that Hoover Europe had lost Pounds 6.9m in the
final quarter of last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940421

