FT942-16188

FT  12 APR 94 / UK Elections - Major's Campaign: Tories appear down and out
in 'stronghold' - Parliamentary by-elections / The next eight weeks will see
voters deliver a comprehensive mid-term judgement on John Major's embattled
Conservative government. As campaigns get under way in local and European
polls and in five parliamentary by-elections. FT writers survey the
electoral battlegrounds


   By ROLAND RUDD


The two main opposition parties are fighting the parliamentary by-election
in Eastleigh as if the date had already been fixed. Judging by the leaflets
distributed by Liberal Democrats and Labour, which attack each other with a
ferocity usually reserved for the government, the electors could be forgiven
for thinking it was a straight fight between them.
In reality, the Conservative candidate, Mr Stephen Reid, leader of
Basingstoke council, is defending a 17,702 majority. The by-election was
caused by the death of Mr Stephen Milligan, the Conservative MP, in
February.
It is one of five by-elections due soon. Three others are in east London
constituencies and one in Rotherham. These are regarded as safe Labour
seats.
Given the Liberal Democrats' recent success in beating the Tories in the
apparent strongholds of Newbury and Christchurch - when they overturned
majorities of more than 12,000 and 23,000 respectively - the opposition
parties have all but discounted the Tories' chances of holding Eastleigh.
There is ample evidence to suggest they may be right, with many Conservative
voters incredulous at the qualified majority voting dispute in Europe and
angry about the increase in taxation.
That may explain why the government has yet to announce a date for the
by-election.
It was assumed that it would be called on May 5, the date of the local
government elections. But Mr Gerald Malone, Conservative deputy chairman,
yesterday indicated that it may be delayed until June.
The past record of by-elections suggests the party which is placed second
will be the main beneficiary if the Conservative vote collapses.
In Eastleigh, the Liberal Democrats came second in the 1992 general election
with 21,296 votes. They need a swing of 11.5 per cent to seize the
constituency. In Christchurch the swing against the Conservatives was more
than three times that.
But Labour came a strong third with 15,768 votes in Eastleigh, and cannot
afford to leave the field open to the Liberal Democrats as it did in Newbury
and Christchurch.
Eight members of the shadow cabinet, including Mr John Smith, labour leader,
Mr Tony Blair, and Mr Gordon Brown, regarded as the party's stars, have
campaigned in Eastleigh.
Labour's strategy is high risk as anything but a win may be seen as a
setback to its presentation of itself as the main alternative to the
government in the south.
The Liberal Democrats, wary of starting as front runners, have warned
supporters not to be complacent.
Labour is expected to call Rotherham, caused by the death of Mr James Boyce,
on May 5, and the three other by-elections on June 9, the date of the
European elections.
The three east London constituencies are Newham North East and Barking,
which were held by the late Mr Ron Leighton and Ms Jo Richardson, and
Dagenham, where Mr Bryan Gould has announced his intention to resign.
All four are traditional Labour strongholds. Labour hopes the race issue
does not affect its vote in the three east London contests.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940412

