FT941-16859

FT  07 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Curbing the cost of drugs


Countries struggling to cut their healthcare costs find the budget for
prescribed drugs an irresistible target. Spending on pharmaceuticals in the
advanced economies is typically about 10 per cent of health expenditure. But
as the Italian government has just discovered, cutting the cost of drugs can
unite doctors, pharmacists and pharmaceutical companies in a powerful lobby
against change.
Yet the differences between the amounts spent on drugs in European countries
indicate scope for cuts. Some countries are spending twice as much on
medicines per head as others, without achieving greater improvements in life
expectancies. Doctors in France prescribe five times as many items as UK
doctors and six times as many as in Denmark. Many of the drugs prescribed in
high-volume markets such as France are of little proven efficacy and are not
used outside those countries.
Cost-cutting reforms to the German healthcare system introduced last year
focused heavily on tighter controls over drug prescribing. As a result, more
than 20 per cent was saved on medicines between January and June 1993, with
a significant switch to cheaper, off-patent, generic medicines. Opposition
from the health professionals and the drugs industry was no less vociferous
than in Italy. But after a loss of DM9bn in 1992, the health insurance
system reported a surplus of DM2.6bn in the first six months of 1993.
Medicine sales
Italy is among the more profligate of European countries in its spending on
drugs. Pharmaceutical expenditure reached 15 per cent of the total health
budget in 1991, compared with an EU average of about 10 per cent. In the
first half of 1993, prescription medicine sales through pharmacists were
Dollars 78 a head, compared with only Dollars 46 in the UK and Dollars 54 in
the Netherlands. A recent Italian survey estimated that 10 of the top 50
products sold in that country offered no therapeutic benefit.
In an attempt to cut costs, the Italian government has increased the number
of drugs for which patients must pay some or all of the costs. It is also
trying to crack down on unauthorised drug dispensing and fraud, which have
swollen the bill. This should encourage greater responsibility in consuming
pharmaceuticals and may even promote healthier lifestyles.
Generic products
Yet more needs to be done to curb drugs spending. The UK's drugs bill is
kept down through measures such as giving doctors budget guidelines for
prescriptions, pressure to prescribe lower doses of some medicines and
widespread use of generic products. According to a report from National
Economic Research Associates - sponsored by 40 of the world's largest
pharmaceuticals companies - generic medicines are 'virtually absent' from
the Italian prescription market. Family doctors have no incentive to
prescribe them, while manufacturers, wholesalers and pharmacists enjoy
superior profit margins on branded medicines.
Simply bearing down on pharmaceutical costs may also have unintended
consequences elsewhere in the health system. Prescribing some drugs, for
example, may allow patients to be discharged earlier from hospital - or
avoid in-patient treatment altogether. Falling drugs bills could mean rising
costs of hospital and out-patient treatment.
It is overprescribing which needs to be eliminated, not prescribing as such.
Healthcare reform needs to look at the whole system to ensure that all the
players have the right incentives to provide no more treatment than is
needed.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940107

