FT943-12856

FT  22 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Atlantic sinks


It is hard to believe that the financial collapse of Atlantic Computers  -
which also caused the demise of its parent, British & Commonwealth - was
only four years ago. The story, so trenchantly retold yesterday in a DTI
report, belongs to a distant age.
The chief protagonists in the Atlantic/B&C tale are the late John Foulston,
the founder of the computer company who died in a motor-racing accident, and
John Gunn, who for a while transformed B&C into a seemingly dynamic
financial services group.
Mr Foulston and his successors constructed an elaborate house of cards out
of Atlantic, which was founded in 1975, came to the stock market in 1983
with a value of Pounds 40m and was eventually sold to B&C in 1988 for Pounds
408m.
Throughout its history, questions had been raised about whether Atlantic's
profits were being inflated by inappropriate accounting policies. Yet it was
not until 1990 that the truth emerged, when it collapsed with a deficiency
in excess of Pounds 90m.
As the DTI inspectors say, if the group had used prudent accounting
policies, it would probably never have been able to report a profit
throughout its existence. Yet between 1983 and 1988, it reported aggregate
pre - tax profits of Pounds 127.6m.
This deception was made possible in part because of the inadequacies of
accounting rules, many of which have since been reformed. However the
inspectors believe a more important factor lay with the City firms, in
particular Spicer and Pegler, Atlantic's auditor, which too readily placed
confidence in half truths provided by Atlantic directors about potential
leasing losses.
B&C's directors, notably Mr Gunn, the chairman, and Peter Goldie, the chief
executive, are also blamed for acquiring Atlantic without having a
sufficiently deep understanding of it. After the deal went through, Mr Gunn,
Mr Goldie and the finance director, Mr Rusty Ashman, quickly learned about
Atlantic's appalling financial condition, but then prevaricated for months
before disclosing the disaster to outside shareholders. Though the
inspectors say that they did not act dishonestly or seek to defraud anyone,
the DTI is probably right to seek their disqualification as directors.
Though the market conditions which allowed Atlantic to prosper are long
passed, the report uncovers one area of City of London practice which needs
urgent reform. BZW, which was B&C's merchant bank adviser, allowed its name
to be used to endorse the wisdom of the Atlantic takeover in B&C's letter to
shareholders about it. Shareholders take comfort when such assurances are
given by a merchant bank, yet the level of investigation which a merchant
bank carries out when giving such an endorsement is minimal. BZW did not
even carry out the normal minimum - but the inspectors suggest that even if
it had, it might not have uncovered the truth about Atlantic.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940722

