FT941-4043

FT  12 MAR 94 / How To Spend It: Take two kitchens and stir very carefully -
If you can't stand the heat . . . delegate when decision-making in the home.
Lucia van der Post on two radical examples of refurbishing


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


For those who own old and beautiful houses the challenge of respecting the
antiquity, tradition and fabric of the building, while acquiring a few
modern comforts and technology is sometimes overwhelming.
Nowhere is the potential contradiction between old and new-fangled worlds
more difficult to resolve than in the kitchen.
Notions of the ideal kitchen vary and the skilled kitchen refurbisher can
dabble in them all, from sleek city slicker to rural rustic dream, from
pastel Provencal to a touch of tribal primitive. Kitchens are often the
repository of romantic dreams.
Even in this day and age, when the cooking of Lady Sieff (aka Marks &
Spencer) is in such hot demand, and when many a family relies on what in
America are known as 'food contacts', instead of roasts and proper puddings,
the kitchen is still seen as the centre of family life.
Yuppies, who rush home merely to lay down their heads before ordering a
take-away, lovingly plan replicas of Tuscan kitchens. In urban loft-houses,
those who have only come upon bruschetta on a restaurant menu, happily order
wooden counter-tops.
But the one thing that they all have in common is that the romantic dream
has to be reconciled with technical requirements. Even the most rustic of
modern kitchens needs a cooker, a fridge, a freezer, plugs for kettles and
toasters, work surfaces that are easy to clean and storage space. For
others, espresso machines, juicers and microwaves are also essential.
The Douglas Stephen Partnership, of The Annex, 140-142 St John Street,
London EC1V 4JT (tel: 071-336-7884) was recently asked to provide a kitchen
for a grand Jacobean house in Suffolk. The house is lovely, a Grade I listed
building, and structural changes have to be approved by English Heritage and
the local planning authority. In the event, very little of the main
structure was altered - one doorway was moved slightly.
The architects decided that there was no point in trying to be slavishly
faithful to the period - an impossibility as the Jacobean kitchen is so
different to our own - or to recreate too olde worlde a country-house
kitchen. Instead, they tackled the problem by imbuing the overall design
with an air of solidity and grandeur.
The kitchen had not been touched for years and needed to be completely
gutted. The house is lived in by a family with three young children and the
brief was to provide a very useful, fully-equipped area for family use that
matched the mood of the house.
There were two main constraints - one was that the family had a vast
American Amana fridge/freezer, which could not be hidden behind wooden
cupboards. This led to the decision to keep most of the rest of the
equipment visible as a counterbalance to the fridge. A black Aga was already
positioned across one corner and this was flanked by two smaller cabinets,
leaving the centre of the room open for the kitchen table. The owner was
insistent on a square-edge, straight-sided Belfast sink.
The kitchen had several low windows which meant it was impractical to put in
rows of cabinets. No-one liked the notion of a gleaming modern 'Euro'
kitchen so, free-standing units, new versions of the traditional dressers
and side-boards, were combined with some fitted cabinets.
The kitchen is a tall room and the height was broken by using the client's
collection of pottery around the room. A glass shelf was used for the
collection to give the impression of a frieze and the lights help to give
the idea that the glass floats above the cabinets.
Lots of storage space was sought and, as you can see from one of the
photographs below, at least one of the doors has storage on the inside.
The kitchen had to be replastered and repainted. A yellow-ochre lime-wash
was used on the walls. The floor had to be redone. Large, terracotta tiles
from China - each looks hand-made and slightly uneven  - were used so the
effect is of great age. With the use of low-voltage lights and the splendid
collection of ceramic pots the entire kitchen looks as if has been there for
years.
Simon Stocker of Stocker Furniture, 191-197 Archway Road, London N6 5BN
(081-341-7322) was responsible for all the timber work and the glass
shelves. He used limed oak for the casing, dressers and sideboards, and
chunky oiled teak for the worktops, which gives an air of great solidity.
The handles on the cabinet doors have a resolutely industrial air - made
from sleek, polished stainless steel they come from Elementa, the
architectural ironmongers.
As Simon Stocker puts it: 'The whole is a very successful blend of modern
design using glass and polished stainless steel with a respectful
genuflexion to the past with the use of limed oak for the cabinets and a
generous three inches of teak for the work tops.
'It was a joy to make and I love it.'
This kind of kitchen, of course, does not come cheap. All the cabinet work
was specially made and Simon Stocker's work alone came to about Pounds
19,000.
Then, of course, there was the replastering, the repainting, the flooring
and the cost of the very expensive, state-of-the art equipment.
Not all the costs can be separated out - the builders were also restoring
the rest of the house - but around Pounds 40,000 would probably be near the
ultimate cost.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940312

