FT942-12729

FT  28 APR 94 / Technology: The personal touch - Italian industry and
universities are coming together as the state loosens its grip on research
planning


   By JOHN SIMKINS


The tourist authorities at Massa, on the coast of Tuscany, and the port of
Marina di Carrara a few miles north, suffer from different aspects of the
same problem. The currents are denuding Massa's beach of sand while filling
Carrara's harbour with deposits.
When Massa heard the port had to be dredged, it expressed an interest in
having some sand back. But was it polluted? A study by the Pisa Research
Consortium concluded that at 3m down the sand was perfectly suitable for
sunbathing.
The consortium is one of nine attached to universities set up in the 1980s
to help meet a need not fully catered for in Italy's highly centralised and
bureaucratic research system: to transfer innovative technology from
universities to industry. Francesco Archetti, general director of the Milan
Research Consortium, describes them as 'merchant banks for research, setting
up design projects which people in universities carry out'.
His consortium is, however, directly involved in a project called Improd,
which has Ecu5.5m (Pounds 4.3m) of funding and comes under the European
Union's Esprit information technology research initiative. In collaboration
with research bodies and companies including SGS-Thomson, the French-Italian
group which is the world leader in integrated circuits, the consortium's
computer scientists are developing a tool to provide built-in quality. The
consortium believes it improves on existing programs in that it forecasts
out-of-control situations and diagnoses where the manufacturing process is
going wrong.
The Improd approach has involved applied research, with consortium staff
working on shifts at the Milan plant of SGS-Thomson, which is sufficiently
pleased with the project to have introduced the second version of the
technique at its factories worldwide. The tool is being refined a third time
and could eventually be introduced at all European semiconductor plants.
The Pisa and Milan consortiums each have an annual budget of L5bn (Pounds
2.1m) and were set up by IRI, the industrial state holding company, and the
National Research Council (CNR) which is the biggest of the public-sector
research bodies with more than 250 units, about 100 of which are inside
universities.
The state plays a bigger role in research planning than in most OECD
countries and the most common complaint is about excessive bureaucracy.
'Italian researchers are very aware of the legal framework within which they
operate and can quote the reference numbers of a wide range of laws,' notes
a recent British Council study.
But in the same way that the country's dominant state-controlled industry is
being unwound by privatisation, a little freedom is filtering into the
academic system. This year, in line with reforms set in motion by Antonio
Ruberti, former universities and research minister and now EU education
commissioner, universities will be handed control over their own budgets,
which will force them to face tough spending choices.
Moreover, a university's base-line funding could be affected by the
ministry's view of its efficiency, including its research performance. This
implies a departure from the traditional a pioggia approach to research
funding in which resources are distributed like a shower of rain, evenly but
thinly, with insufficient attention paid to the respective merits of
projects and sparse evaluation of results.
The reforms should encourage stronger ties between universities and
industry, which are weak compared with the rest of northern Europe, at a
time when Italy is trying to tackle its budget deficit. 'This should produce
an electric effect but I don't think it has sunk in yet,' says a foreign
observer.
One university rector who is aware of the challenge is Luciano Modica, at
Pisa. 'We can't hope any longer that the money will just arrive. We must
contact industry and offer our services.' Research contracts at Pisa,
including the consortium, amount to only 3 per cent of the university's
budget. 'This is too little,' says Modica. 'It ought eventually to be 15 per
cent.'
The irony is that Pisa is overflowing with researchers - there are 2,400 in
a town with a population of 100,000. Besides the university and consortium,
there is a cluster of CNR units and the elite college of Scuola Normale
Superiore founded by Napoleon. One three-year course at the college for
science graduates is sponsored by the chemicals group Montedison and ENI,
the state energy group.
Within the consortium, besides the environmental technology centre which
conducted the Marina di Carrara study, there is a space technology centre
which, together with the aerospace company BPD, is developing advanced
thrusters for space propulsion.
'Because of its futuristic character, this project could not have been
undertaken in strictly industrial surroundings,' says Mariano Andrenucci,
head of Pisa Research Consortium.
One approach Pisa university intends to follow is to compete for big
contracts attracting public funds, such as the Mediterranean basin
environmental programme. Also, it will offer its laboratories as incubators
to small companies developing products. On another front, at the request of
the Fiat motor group, the university is setting up a training course for
using supercomputers in simulation tests.
One reason why university research has had a largely academic orientation,
says Modica, is because contact with industry was felt to be the domain of
CNR. Indeed, the five-year progetti finalizzati - targeted projects - chosen
by CNR remain a main point of contact between researchers and industry.
But CNR operates within a bureaucratic straitjacket typical of a
public-sector research system which benefits big companies familiar with red
tape. Small enterprises rely more on the constant dynamic of Italian
business - personal contact. This throws up centres of excellence and, as
one professor put it, makes the Italian research picture maculata, or
non-uniform.
The personal touch is likely to remain the main lubricator, even given
reforms. 'Our visiting cards are our graduates,' says Modica. 'They often
return to Pisa and say: 'Our company needs this.''
Next week: South Africa

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940428

