FT942-14570

FT  20 APR 94 / World Trade News: Progress by poorest countries still weak


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


The world's poorest countries notched up average output growth of 2 per cent
last year, up from 0.4 per cent in 1992 but still not enough to stem the
decline in income per head.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in its latest
report* on the least-developed countries, published today predicts economic
expansion of 2.8 per cent this year, 'assuming normal weather'. That would
slightly outpace population growth.
Despite the dismal overall picture, Unctad notes that about a quarter of the
47 UN-defined LDCs show welcome, if halting, signs of progress - a revival
of growth, deepening economic reform and better governance (improved
management and less corruption).
Most of these nations are in Asia, where output of LDCs grew by 4.7 per cent
in 1993. Similar growth is expected this year. Asian LDCs have benefited
from the general economic dynamism of the region, though some African
nations have also performed better than the LDC average.
Overall, however, African LDCs showed little or no growth in 1993, after
three consecutive years of GDP decline. Unctad predicts another year of
stagnation in 1994.
Many African nations have been ravaged by war which has halted development.
The continent's predominantly agrarian economies have also been hit by poor
weather, including drought.
Unctad notes that falling output per head has taken a terrible human toll in
terms of reduced calorie intakes, increased mortality and sickness, lower
school enrolment and further immiseration of women and children, society's
weakest members.
Most LDCs have responded with further policy reforms, but the extra
financial support from donor nations needed to underpin those reforms, has
not been adequate, the report says. More vigorous debt relief measures are
also needed.
Unctad is particularly concerned that many cash-strapped countries have been
unable to improve or even maintain basic health and education services
essential for development. These services, free to users, must be a priority
for LDCs and aid donors, the report says.
*Unctad, The least developed countries: 1993-1994 report; UN Sales No. E94.
II. D4; on general sale or from UN Sales Sections, New York and Geneva.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940420

