FT944-14465

FT  22 OCT 94 / Markets: Ideas - the very life blood of investment - Serious
Money


   Gillian O'Connor, personal finance editor
Most personal investors will have very different aims from professionals
managing a portfolio of investment trusts. But they can still benefit from
understanding how the market works. This year's investment trust annual from
NatWest Securities* provides many useful insights.
The annual is a self-proclaimed tool for professional investors. Somewhat
apologetically, its 124 pages are devoted to analysing the FT-SE-A
investment trust index, and the proposed new sub-sectors.
Split-capital trusts (see page VI) are excluded from the index and will form
their own group. Conventional trusts will be divided into UK, Europe,
International, Geographic Specialists, and Venture and Development capital.
NatWest gives a mildly barbed welcome to these groupings, but its real
objective is practical rather than academic.
The annual explains to clients how to ensure their portfolios do not lag
behind the index: a 'Bluffer's Guide to Running an Investment Trust
Portfolio'. It also suggests some ways in which the new classifications
system might itself influence the behaviour of investors - and, hence, of
share prices.
The index is dominated disproportionately by a fairly small number of
stocks. Get these 'performance shapers' right and you can expect to stay
fairly close to the index with minimum effort - and invest selectively in
the smaller trusts to try to achieve an outstanding performance. But there
are often hidden barriers to getting the desired 'weightings' in some trusts
because many of the shares are held tightly.
NatWest has - with commendable cautions - produced a list of 'The hardest
stocks to buy'. Top of the list is venture capital trust 3i, the recent
history of which provides a good example of how scarcity can affect a share
price.
One reason it has done so well since it came to the stockmarket this summer
is that half the shares are still held by the big banks. So, professional
investors have had to buy steadily to try to get a holding in the company
proportionate to its status as the largest investment trust - and a FT-SE
100 member, to boot.
Such considerations are quite irrelevant to most personal investors. But
they can take advantage of the tribal totems and customs laid bare in the
annual.
NatWest suggests, for instance, that the splintering of the index could
throw up other funds which are hotly sought-after purely because of their
importance to a sub-index. A speculative buying opportunity?
Another useful concept for the numerate investor is 'cluster analysis'. The
point of this exercise is to find out which trusts within a particular
sector tend to move together.
Professional investors use this kind of information to construct the type of
portfolio they want as efficiently as possible. Why hold six stocks when
three can do the same job? The private investor can use this analysis for
his own purposes.
The fact, say, that a German smaller company trust has been sluggish while a
French equivalent has doubled is very material to the small company addict.
This weak correlation between two seemingly similar trusts does not
necessarily mean that he should avoid the German one - it could be that its
big leap was yet to come - but the divergence is worth investigating. Ideas
are the life blood of investment.
The amount of money invested through authorised UK unit trusts is nearly
Pounds 100bn, roughly five times the market value of all UK investment
trusts. A clutch of top notch stockbrokers publish heavyweight research into
investment trusts. Only one relatively small firm produces serious
qualitative analysis of unit trusts. Odd?
Not really. Investment trust shares are bought mainly by professional
investors, while unit trusts are sold mainly to personal investors.
Professional investors get good comparative analysis free from brokers who
hope to get their business. Private investors foot the bill for the
commission handed over to financial advisers by the unit trust managers
themselves.
Most of the total marketing spend goes on persuading people to buy, not on
researching which unit trusts are worth buying.
But this is not because it does not matter which unit trust you buy. For
example, the latest Emerging Markets annual review from Fund Research shows
wider disparities than ever before. The best global fund rose by 67 per
cent, the worst by just over 6 per cent.
Time for some cluster analysis?
*1994-95 Investment Trust Annual: Pounds 10 from NatWest Stockbrokers, 55
Mansell Street, London E1 8AN. Mark your order 'Attn Mr Clewlow' or 'phone
071-895 5880.

The Financial Times


London Page II

941022

