FT944-2401

FT  16 DEC 94 / Property: Docklands dreams again - The revival of optimism
in east London


   By SIMON LONDON


London Docklands is a barometer of the wider mood of the property market.
Grand plans for the regeneration of the area to the east of the City of
London - including the massive Canary Wharf development - were the products
of economic over-optimism.
The sudden downturn in the property market left docklands stranded, with its
unsettling mix of very old buildings, very new buildings and derelict sites.
Now the mood is one of cautious optimism. Attention is slowly turning from
damage limitation to future expansion.
This is most apparent in residential housing. The stock of empty homes in
docklands has been sold and a minor development boom is under way.
In business space, the over-building of the late 1980s will take longer to
sort out. Out of a total 13m sq ft of office space in docklands, about 4.5m
sq ft is still vacant - an occupancy rate of just 65 per cent.
Yet the overhang of space is steadily being eroded. More than 1m sq ft of
offices has been let this year, up from 800,000 sq ft in 1993, 332,000 sq ft
in 1992 and 192,000 sq ft in 1991.
Even Canary Wharf, the grandiose monument to the last development boom, is
on the way to being fully let. If negotiations with investment bank Barclays
de Zoete Wedd over 500,000 sq ft are successfully concluded, less than 1m sq
ft of the 4.5m sq ft development will remain unoccupied.
Mr Mike Bignell, head of property development for the London Docklands
Development Corporation, said that there was potential for another 10m sq ft
of office space in docklands, including further phases of Canary Wharf.
While the immediate priority must be to fill vacant space, the next phases
of development are already on the horizon as distant possibilities.
Survey evidence is certainly encouraging for docklands. A poll of central
London office occupiers by Jones Lang Wootton, the surveyors, found that
many companies were again thinking about moving out of the City and West
End, after a lull during the depths of recession.
The motivation was not outright cost, but the desire to rationalise sites
and bring operations under one roof. Favoured destinations were areas within
the immediate orbit of central London - including docklands - which could
offer modern space at prices a shade cheaper than the City or West End.
Against this background, it is not beyond the realms of possibility that
Canary Wharf and the LDDC will be dusting off development plans within a
couple of years.
Sir Peter Levene, chairman and chief executive of Canary Wharf for the past
18 months, recognises that the nature of his task is turning from crisis
management to long-term development.
With piecemeal lettings taking place all the time - this week the Personal
Investment Authority confirmed that it is sub-letting one floor of the
Canada Square tower - the existing buildings are achieving critical mass in
terms of tenants.
'The Jubilee Line extension will be with us by 1998, cutting journey times
into the West End to 15 minutes and linking us with Waterloo and London
Bridge stations. That will fundamentally change perceptions of Canary Wharf
and, in planning terms, is not far away,' commented Sir Peter.
The original design for Canary Wharf envisaged 12m sq ft of office space.
The foundations have already been dug for two further buildings - numbers 17
and 20 Columbus Courtyard - amounting to 340,000 sq ft.
Canary Wharf is also in negotiations which could lead to the development of
its remaining river frontage. The area is currently a temporary car park,
but permission has been granted for 1m sq ft of mixed use residential and
office buildings.
With so much empty space to let, at present the LDDC is confining its
development activity to non-office schemes. But that does not imply any lack
of activity.
In the mainly derelict Royal Docks area at the eastern extremity of
docklands, there are plans for an exhibition centre the size of Earls Court
and Olympia combined, an urban village, a university, science park, commerce
park and retail development.
Plans for the exhibition centre are the most advanced, with the LDDC set to
announce its favoured development partner within the next few weeks. Work is
scheduled to start on the 85-acre site before the end of next year.
Just over the water at West Silvertown, an urban village of up to 1,500
homes will be built by Wimpey, the housebuilder. Work should begin as soon
as the planning process - controlled by the LDDC rather than the local
authority - has been completed.
While the Royal Docks development programme will not add directly to the
stock of office space, it could give docklands critical mass in other
respects which would add to its attractions as a business location.
So what will be the effect on the City and West End if Canary Wharf and the
Isle of Dogs do - finally - establish themselves as London's third business
district?
Sir Peter Levene recognises that rents at Canary Wharf will have to remain
below those charged by the best buildings in core City locations. While the
differential will narrow as Canary Wharf gains credibility and improved
infrastructure, the availability of cheaper space to the east of the City
and West End will present real competition, especially for pre-let
developments.
'It is not safe to assume that docklands is not real competition and that
there will be no further development,' said Mr David Price, head of central
London agency for Hillier Parker, the surveyors. 'Paddington, King's Cross
or Spitafields would be preferred locations for some occupiers but not for
all. And they cannot turn the key on new development as fast as Canary
Wharf.'
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Commercial and industrial space (million sq ft)
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Status              Isle of   Surrey   Wapping/   Royal
                       Dogs    Docks   Limehouse  Docks
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Completed              14.6      4.0      3.3       2.2
Under construction      0.2        -        -         -
Planned development     0.5      1.6      0.4       1.2
Potential              24.6      2.3      1.9      12.6
Total                  39.9      7.9      5.6      16.0
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: LDDC
 --------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941216

