FT941-12927

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (12): Start with a sweet smile - Alan Spence
reviews the numerous options, besides going to law, available to suppliers
worried about possible non-payment of bills / Debt Recovery / Chasing the
late payers


   By ALAN SPENCE


Delayed or lost payments are now a common feature of recession-hit
international trade. Infuriating, but usually manageable for major
corporations, they can nevertheless pose serious problems for
small-to-medium-sized companies (SMEs).
A delay or a loss too many for an already heavily-indebted SME could push it
over the edge if its bankers finally take fright.
Given the availability of instruments to help secure payment and indemnify
exporters against losses - ranging from various types of letters of credit
and export credit insurance to specialist collection and funding services,
such as those offered by factoring companies - companies should, at least in
theory, be well-protected against delays and losses.
In practice, however, this is often not the case. Protection comes at a
cost, which many exporters are not prepared to pay, especially if recession
is already squeezing profit margins.
Some exporters are simply unaware of the types of security available; others
argue that in addition to costs, they impose other constraints - factoring
companies may take up valuable exporting time deciding on a buyer's credit
worthiness; claiming on a credit insurance policy may be viewed as a
time-consuming and lengthy process.
Whether there is merit in their arguments or not, the result is that many
exporters finish up with delayed or even delinquent payments as a result of
unprotected open account trading. At that point there is no going back to
credit insurance companies or, for example, factoring companies or invoice
discounters.
Lombard Natwest, which provides both factoring and invoice discounting
services, says that under no circumstances would it provide a collection or
discounting service for debts which are overdue. As is the case with
providers of similar services, David Kilburn, marketing manager, stresses
that exporters seeking factoring or invoice discounting services must
establish their requirements prior to exporting, thus allowing Lombard
Natwest the opportunity of assessing buyer risk.
So what are their options in terms of taking steps to secure eventual
payment and protect cashflow? James Fairrie, manager, banks and exports, at
UK credit insurer Trade Indemnity, advises that companies caught with
unprotected debts should initially examine the possibility of gently
mobilising personal contacts within or associated with the buyer
organisation.
'Very often the major non-paying culprits are the bigger companies and the
sufferers are the smaller companies. They are in a weak position to rattle
the sabre; if the big company feels it's getting hassled, it may merely
further delay payment and go elsewhere for future supplies', Mr Fairrie
adds.
'Make use of personal contacts, make use of friendships, contact other
suppliers to the same client and try to enlist their help.' Mr Fairrie also
suggests that the exporter should consider requesting part payment. He
cautions against applying legal pressure at an early stage. 'The last thing
to do is go to a lawyer. It's expensive, you have little direct control over
what the lawyer might say and it could upset future relations with the
buyer.'
However, he does advise the exporter to discuss the situation with its banks
with a view to the latter applying gentle pressure. 'If the bank is helpful,
then it could send a letter to the buyer pointing out that its client is
expecting funds and enquiring whether payment has been made or perhaps
inadvertently misdirected. Depending on the bank's international presence,
the buyer may take such a letter to be a potential reflection on its overall
credit rating if news of its slow payment spreads around the banking
community - and pay up.'
A more usual alternative may be for the exporter's bank to approach his
client's customer's bank in a similar manner designed to create a similar
effect. At this point the exporter is probably beginning to risk upsetting
future relations with the buyer and must take a view on the outlook for the
latter's future custom and balance it against current cashflow
considerations.
If the exporter decides to apply more pressure it could, for example,
harness the help of a specialist debt collection service such as Trade
Indemnity Collections or Graydon International. Trade Indemnity Collections
will seek payment on quasi-delinquent corporate debts - usually defined as
debts more than 180 days overdue - at costs ranging between one and five per
cent of the recovered amount, though it can be higher, depending on the time
and the amount involved and the country.
The exporter is also liable for additional legal expenses. According to
Graydon International, chasing unpaid debts is a common problem - even for
larger companies. Charges vary according to the value and location, but
normal commissions would usually amount to between 10 and 15 per cent of the
amount recovered. If Graydon needs to use local agents, that could involve a
lot more expense for the exporter - perhaps up to a further 10-20 per cent
of the recovered amount, depending on the country.
Again, incurred legal expenses will be additionally applied. In the event of
non-recoveries by collection services a handling charge is common. Finally,
there is the pure legal option - litigation. Given the expense involved,
this approach may only be viable for larger companies with substantial
debts.
Selecting which law firm to use can be important. Some specialise in certain
markets, such as, for example, London-based solicitors Hartwig in Germany
where it is highly experienced at pressing for payment through local courts.
But suing a company outside its local courts may be a more practical option
in certain cases.
Take the case of an unpaid bill in Iran. Roger Baggallay, of London-based
law firm Clifford Chance, says that priority should be given to suing the
client outside the Iranian courts. The main procedure would be to try to go
after any assets outside the buyer's own country. The legal option, on the
other hand, may only produce a big bill. In either event, it will probably
curtail future dealings between exporter and client.
Alan Spence is editor of International Trade Finance, a fortnightly
newsletter published by FT Business Enterprises

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940127

