FT942-12341

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (7): Rising yields
should act as a reminder that values can fall - A regular income 4 / Gilts /
This year's shake-up in financial markets has enabled private investors to
lock into a decent income. But what about their capital?


   By SARA WEBB


UK government bonds, known as gilts, have been a popular source of income
for private investors in recent years, and a prominent feature in many a
small investor's portfolio.
But, given the decline in inflation and the fall in interest rates in the UK
during the 1990s, investors in search of income may need to think carefully
about whether to invest new money in gilts. For example, the yield on a
long-dated (15-year) gilt had fallen from 12.05 per cent in 1990 to a low of
6.389 per cent by the end of 1993.
However, since the start of this year, there has been a considerable
shake-up in the world's financial markets, sparked by the US Federal
Reserve's decision to raise US short-term interest rates in February and
again in March as a pre-emptive strike against inflationary pressures. The
result in the gilt market has been to push up yields again, with 15-year
yields rising from 6.39 per cent to a 1994 high of 7.948 per cent.
The recent shake-up means that private investors have been able to lock into
more attractive yields compared with a few weeks ago. But the rise in yields
(and corresponding fall in prices) should also serve as a warning that gilt
prices can go down as well as up. If you had invested money in gilts at the
start of the year, the value of the securities would have fallen back
dramatically.
Gilts come with an assortment of coupons, maturities and forms (whether
conventional or index-linked). When you buy a conventional gilt, you are
entitled to receive a fixed stream of income over a specified period of
time.
To take an example: say you buy Pounds 1,000 nominal amount of ten-year
stock, such as the Treasury 6 3/4 per cent 2004. This does not mean you are
paying Pounds 1,000 for the stock: the price you pay for the gilt may be
more or less than that. What it means is that, when the stock reaches
maturity in 2004, you will receive a capital repayment of Pounds 1,000. The
coupon is 6 3/4 per cent, which is the rate of interest applied to the
nominal value of the holding, to determine the size of the interest payment
or dividend. Dividends are usually paid every six months.
If you buy Pounds 1,000 nominal of this particular stock, you will receive
Pounds 67.50 in income a year. In fact, as an investor you would not
necessarily pay Pounds 1,000 for Pounds 1,000 nominal of stock. The price of
the stock will fluctuate - just as a share price fluctuates - in response to
investor demand, and that can be determined by a variety of factors, such as
the prospect of new gilt supply, or the outlook for inflation and for
interest rates.
The yield is the interest rate based on the actual buying price. The flat
yield is calculated by dividing the coupon by the price and multiplying by
100. The redemption yield, which is also usually quoted for gilts, gives a
picture of the total return, as it takes into account the capital gain (or
loss) from holding the stock to maturity and assumes that the investor
reinvests interest payments in the stock.
Assuming you have decided that this is the time to buy your gilts, in order
to obtain a steady income, there are two main ways of buying gilts - through
the National Savings Stock Register (NSSR) or through a bank or broker.
The NSSR method has the advantage of being cheap in terms of commission, and
convenient in that you receive your dividend income gross - although it is
important to remember that taxpayers are obliged to declare the income.
The NSSR offers the complete range of gilts. You fill in an application
form, available from most post offices, and send it off with your cheque.
The NSSR is the best way of buying small amounts of stock, because the
commissions are low - Pounds 1 for amounts up to Pounds 250. Above Pounds
250, there is an extra 50p for each multiple of Pounds 125 purchased.
The main disadvantage, however, is that you have no say in the price you pay
for the individual stock, because the NSSR may not be able to process your
application immediately, even though it aims to process applications the
morning they arrive. In volatile market conditions, such as the gilt market
has seen from time to time in the past couple of years, you could find that
a day's delay makes a significant difference to the price at which you buy
the stock.
Alternatively, if you buy or sell gilts through a bank or stockbroker, the
commissions charged vary, and tend to be higher than those charged by the
NSSR. Although the bank or broker route is more expensive, you do have more
flexibility when it comes to choosing when to buy or sell. Your broker
should also be able to advise you about particular issues, and tell you
whether the stock is ex-dividend or approaching the dividend payment date.
Income from gilts is taxable, but capital gains are tax-exempt. However,
capital losses on gilts cannot be used to offset other capital gains. If you
buy gilts through a broker, you are buying them from the Bank of England
register, and your income will be paid net.
While non-taxpayers can reclaim the tax, you can arrange to receive income
gross by transferring up to Pounds 5,000 nominal of any one stock in any
given calendar year from the Bank of England register to the NSSR.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

940429

