FT942-15875

FT  13 APR 94 / Leading Article: Mediation in Natal


If South African politicians had any doubts about the cost of the country's
constitutional crisis, these must by now have been dispelled. In the early
hours of Saturday morning a peace summit collapsed. When trading began on
Monday, the financial rand, the country's investment currency, followed
suit. If this message, coupled with the rising death toll in Natal, does not
concentrate minds, then the team of international negotiators which arrived
in Johannesburg yesterday has embarked on a hopeless mission.
As it is, there is no quick fix, for the odds are heavily stacked against
Lord Carrington, the former British foreign secretary, Mr Henry Kissinger,
ex-US secretary of state, and their colleagues.
It is a month since the initiative was first mooted by South Africa's main
leaders. In that time positions have, if anything, hardened. Friday's summit
showed that Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the leader of the Inkatha Freedom
party, remains determined to boycott the April 26-28 election. The Zulu
king, Goodwill Zwelithini, reasserted his claim for Zulu sovereignty in
Natal. President FW de Klerk can do little more than stand in the wings, for
power slips daily from his grasp.
The ANC is more determined than ever that the poll should go ahead. The ANC
is probably right. The option of postponement may have existed a month ago,
but it has now gone. Delay would create too much uncertainty, straining the
stability of an already fragile administration.
With positions entrenched and little time left, the negotiators' task
appears impossible. The constitutional question at stake is fundamental to
South Africa's future, involving the relationship between central government
and the country's nine provincial assemblies. But the mediators' journey
need not be in vain. For the first time since the negotiating process began,
outside intervention has been sought. The world has a responsibility to
respond constructively.
At this stage, it may well be that all the mediators can do is to take stock
and assess whether South Africa's leaders have truly made their best efforts
to resolve the crisis. If they judge not, the mediators would be doing a
service if they said so, bluntly and publicly. They might also warn that,
although elections may go ahead, the problem of Natal will not go away. The
crackdown on the province expected imminently can at best only be a
palliative. Without a political solution it could well exacerbate the
conflict in the longer term. Nor is it likely that Chief Buthelezi, required
by law to surrender his position of chief minister of kwaZulu after election
day, will go quietly.
Whether as mediators in a deepening civil conflict, or trying to resolve a
constitutional impasse, the good offices of outsiders will be surely
required. The first visit of Lord Carrington and Mr Kissinger may be a short
one, but sooner or later, South Africa's politicians will probably have to
invite them back.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940413

