FT942-15492

FT  15 APR 94 / US jets down own helicopters over Iraq


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


US Air Force jets accidentally shot down two US Army helicopters over
northern Iraq yesterday, killing all 26 people on board, including two
British officers. President Bill Clinton expressed 'deep sorrow' at the loss
of the lives of those on 'a mission of mercy' to protect Iraqi Kurds, and
promised a full inquiry.
Those killed included 15 US military personnel as well as three Turkish, two
British and one French officer and five Kurdish passengers, Lt Gen Richard
Keller, chief of staff of the US European Command, told reporters in the US
by telephone from Stuttgart, Germany.
Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, assumed 'full responsibility' for
the disaster, but was able to report only 'sketchy' details in a preliminary
morning briefing. The incident took place, he said, about 0850 GMT, 34 miles
north of Irbil in Iraq. Two US F15C fighters mistook the UH60 Blackhawk
helicopters for Iraqi Soviet-made Hind helicopters violating the 'no-fly
zone' over northern Iraq, and fired missiles at them.
The zone was established by the United Nations in 1991 to protect the Kurds
from attack by the Iraqi military in the wake of the Gulf war. A comparable
prohibition on Iraqi aircraft covers the south of the country, protecting
Shia Moslems.
Both Mr Perry and General John Shalikashvili, chairman of the joint chiefs
of staff, were unable immediately to explain the misidentification both by
the F15s, which could see the helicopters, and by a patrolling Awacs radar
aircraft. It was also unclear whether the helicopters had filed necessary
flight plans and whether there had been any voice communication between the
fighters and the helicopters before both jets fired their missiles. 'Clearly
something went wrong,' General Shalikashvili said.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, visiting Washington, said the
incident was particularly serious because 'it happened not at a time when we
are at war, nor when visibility was poor.'
A Kurdish spokesman said the helicopters were ferrying officials from the UN
office in Zakho, near the Turkish border, to a meeting with Kurdish leaders
in Salahaddin in the central Kurdish region.
About 70 US, British and French fighter aircraft operate their no-fly zone
patrols from the Nato base at Incirlik, in southern Turkey. First reports
were that Iraqi jets had downed the helicopters. But Baghdad radio,
initially silent, later said Iraqi forces had not been involved.
The US administration will be obliged to produce a speedy public inquiry. Mr
Perry has postponed a trip to Korea and Japan scheduled to begin today.
The inquiry is certain to centre on the rules of engagement under UN
mandate. General Shalikashvili refused for reasons of operational security
to reveal what these rules of engagement were. But in Bosnia, the rules vest
considerable discretion in local commanders and UN officials and do not
necessarily require, for the US military, prior approval from Washington.
A UN spokesman yesterday said the organisation was not directly involved in
the flight of the downed Blackhawks.
Immediate political reaction in Washington was neutral. Mr Tom Foley,
speaker of the House, described the accident as 'a very serious matter'.
Fatal aerial engagement, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940415

