FT941-16985

FT  06 JAN 94 / US warns Japan against relying on a weaker yen


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The US yesterday renewed its call for the Japanese government to stimulate
the country's economy, and warned it not to hope for a weaker yen to pull it
out of recession.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, said Japan still had a huge
trade surplus and could not look to the US and other countries to make up
for slack domestic demand.
'Allowing the yen to slide is not an acceptable way out of recession for
Japan,' Mr Bentsen said in a speech yesterday at the Brookings Institution,
a Washington think-tank.
Although foreign exchange traders had been waiting for Mr Bentsen's speech,
the yen strengthened only modestly on his remarks.
Mr Bentsen said he wanted to see economic policies that would stimulate
demand in Japan and help Japanese consumers. 'I think if they do that the
yen will reflect it,' he added.
Presenting an overview of the Clinton administration's economic policies, Mr
Bentsen expressed confidence that the steps already taken to reduce the US
federal budget deficit would bring more economic good news in 1994.
Growth had accelerated steadily throughout 1993 and should reach between 4
and 5 per cent in the fourth quarter, he said, while the inflation rate of
2.8 per cent was as low as it had been for years.
'This year I'd like to see us achieve a solid 3 per cent real growth - and
hold inflation to approximately 3 per cent. That should allow interest rates
to remain relatively low and reduce further the unemployment rate,' Mr
Bentsen said.
Noting that, like millions of US homeowners, he had refinanced his mortgage
last year to take advantage of lower interest rates, Mr Bentsen said he had
selected an adjustable rate mortgage, 'which means I'm optimistic about
what's going to happen to interest rates'.
Although he said the budget deficit for the 1995 fiscal year, starting
October 1, would be only about Dollars 190bn, much lower than the
administration had earlier forecast, he warned that the budget would be very
tight.

The Financial Times


International Page 12

940106

