FT944-6089

FT  30 NOV 94 / OECD ends wrangling over top job


   By JOHN RIDDING


A protracted dispute over the leadership of the OECD was resolved last night
with an agreement to renew the mandate of Mr Jean-Claude Paye of France
until June 1996, when he will be replaced by Mr Donald Johnston, former
Canadian finance minister.
The agreement was announced after a late night meeting of the Council of the
OECD, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The
council is the top decision-making body of the 25-member Paris-based
organisation.
The solution is a compromise between the French government, which had pushed
for a further five-year mandate for Mr Paye, and non-European members of the
OECD. The US, in particular, had sought to put a non-European at the head of
the organisation.
The dispute grew over the past 10 months, causing deadlock and resulting in
appointment of an interim secretary general after the expiry of Mr Paye's
second five-year term on September 30. The mandate of Mr Staffan Sohlman,
the Swedish ambassador to the OECD who was appointed as temporary head of
the organisation, expired at midnight last night.
Diplomats yesterday expressed dismay at the wrangling and at the way a
compromise was reached between France and Canada.
'It was a messy business and we have reservations about the way in which the
deal was reached,' said a diplomat from one member country. 'We had to end
the hiatus but this cannot happen again.'
At the centre of the dispute was the desire by several countries, including
Canada, the US and Japan, to end the European dominance of the top post. 'It
is time for a change. We need new ideas and an acceptance of the growing
economic role of non-European countries,' said one official.
The Netherlands had resisted the Franco-Canadian compromise and had
considered Mr Ruud Lubbers, the former prime minister, as a possible
candidate.
The stalemate was linked to jockeying for top jobs in other international
bodies, including the head of the World Trade Organisation, successor to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
Diplomats indicated that another five-year term for Mr Paye would have
strengthened the position of non-European candidates for the post. These
candidates include Mr Kim Chul-su, the South Korean trade and industry
minister, and Mr Carlos Salinas, Mexico's departing president.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941130

