FT942-16284

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (6): Business begins to dig
in - Peru


   By SALLY BOWEN


'Peru has suddenly become a fashionable country for investors,' said a
senior Citibank analyst on a late March visit to Lima. 'Foreign governments
may still have reservations about issues like democracy and human rights,
but business people are digging in here already.'
He is right. In the past three months, there have been many indications that
Peru can again be considered a fully-fledged member of the international
financial community. The principal goals set by the government of President
Alberto Fujimori when it took office in July 1990 have been largely - if
painfully - achieved.
Tight monetary policy has brought inflation down to steady levels of between
1.5 and 2 per cent a month: this year's target is 20 per cent. Deregulation
and economic liberalisation have struck further and faster against
deep-rooted statism than in any other country of the continent. And fences
have been rebuilt with the multilateral organisations: Peru's debt with the
IMF, IADB, World Bank and the Paris Club has been rescheduled and fresh
credits are flowing.
For the past two years, Lima's small but active stock market has flourished
with a flurry of investment from abroad. The 1992 performance (when the
index rose 125 per cent in dollar terms) made Lima the world's second most
profitable emerging market. Significant foreign funds now account for
two-thirds of all trading, which is averaging more than Dollars 20m a day.
Even more encouraging are recent signs of investor willingness to commit
medium- to long-term money to Peru. Spain's Telefonica on February 28 bid
more than Dollars 2bn for a 35 per cent controlling stake in the country's
twin telecommunications companies CPT and Entel - the highest price paid in
any Latin American telephone privatisation.
Royal Dutch Shell, meanwhile, is signing a contract with the Peruvian
government for feasibility studies which will lead to development of the
vast Camisea gas fields they discovered in 1986. Political problems had
stymied earlier accords but now, if all goes as expected, Shell will be
making the largest direct investment in Peruvian history (anything between
Dollars 1bn and Dollars 2bn).
Other big-name foreign companies are entering Peru through the sweeping
privatisations programme which is now forging ahead. Anglo American, Cyprus
Minerals and China's Shougang Corporation have already bought important
copper and iron deposits. RTZ and Phelps Dodge are among front-runners for
forthcoming minerals sell-offs.
There is keen Latin American interest in Peru's largely decapitalised
industrial sector. Chileans have bought into the bottled gas and paint
industries as well as supermarkets and private pension funds; they are also
keen to snap up parts of the electricity generation and distribution system
due for sale later this year.
Mexicans have acquired the state-owned airline, Venezuelans have embarked on
joint ventures in fishing and fish meal, while Colombians and Argentinines
have made direct investments in a series of manufacturing concerns.
All are betting on strong and sustained domestic growth. GDP plummeted 25
per cent in the five years 1988-92, driving per capita income back to around
the levels of 1970. But last year, global output expanded 7 per cent - the
highest growth in the continent.
In some respects, however, the revival of foreign investor interest has
proved a mixed blessing. Short-term capital inflows - now running between
Dollars 100m and Dollars 150m a month - have kept the sol sharply
overvalued. Exporters are struggling to survive while export earnings have
remained static for 15 years around or below Dollars 3.5bn.
The avalanche of dollars from privatisations - now expected to top Dollars
3bn this year - is paradoxically another headache. By law, revenue from
sell-offs is earmarked for poverty alleviation (half of Peru's 22m
population live in 'extreme poverty'), but the state lacks the managerial
capacity to spend such amounts. Additionally, injecting into the economy
sums in excess of the Dollars 450m already agreed with the IMF would be
highly inflationary.
One solution, which may prove politically unattractive but necessary, would
be to set aside a portion of the windfall against a future Brady plan. Peru
has so far made no real overtures to its commercial banking creditors to
whom it owes some Dollars 7bn of a total foreign debt of Dollars 22bn. The
commercial debt has not been serviced for 11 years.
Mr Jorge Camet, economy minister, has indicated he would like to embark on a
Brady before the end of 1994. That, were it possible to conclude
negotiations in such a short time span, should set the seal on what
Peruvians call their 'financial reinsertion'.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940411

