FT941-12806

FT  28 JAN 94 / Alcan may join bid for coal mine: Canadian company links up
with Ryan Group


   By MICHAEL SMITH and CHRIS TIGHE


Alcan of Canada yesterday became the first overseas company to declare an
interest in bidding for part of British Coal.
It is considering joining a bid to buy the north-east section of British
Coal as a means of securing cheaper supplies for its aluminium smelter at
Lynemouth, Northumberland.
British Alcan Aluminium, its UK subsidiary, yesterday announced a joint
venture with Ryan Group, the coal mining company, to evaluate the operations
which are likely to include the Ellington pit, the last working mine in the
area, and seven opencast sites.
Alcan is the first company not already involved in coal mining to declare it
is interested in buying part of British Coal.
Ryan is thought to be considering bids for others among the five British
Coal regions that the government has said it will sell off, particularly
Scotland and Wales. It already operates opencast sites and underground
mines, mainly in south Wales and the north-east of England.
Alcan's interest in bidding for the north-east follows attempts to force
down the price at which British Coal supplies it with coal, mainly from
Ellington.
It recently signed a deal to buy 1.25m tonnes of coal until March next year
at prices subsidised by the govern-ment.
British Alcan's plant was built in 1972, and the choice of site was
influenced by the availability of low-cost coal. It says that difficult
world markets for aluminium and high power costs have caused successive
reductions in output.
Mr Paul Belanger, managing director of Alcan Primary and Recycling UK, said
the plant had been unprofitable since 1990. His company wanted to preserve
jobs at the smelter, which employs 355 people.
Mr Crispian Hotson, Ryan chief executive, said there was a good chance the
evaluation would lead to a bid.
Alcan's Lynemouth is the only remaining coal-fired electricity plant in the
north-east apart from Blyth power station, whose long-term future is in
doubt.
Mr Ian Lavery, secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers at Ellington,
said the union remained opposed to privatisation, but the chances of
stopping it were increasingly remote.
'It's a small crumb of comfort to have the knowledge that any prospective
buyers are interested in the colliery,' he said. 'I would rather people show
their interest before any possible hasty decision by British Coal to close
the colliery.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940128

