FT944-10971

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (10): Tough going
for managers - Stock markets / Martin Dickson discusses prospects for global
equities


   By MARTIN DICKSON


Equity fund managers have found 1994 tough going as global markets have
painfully adapted to a fundamental economic shift from a world of falling
interest rates to one of monetary tightening - or the threat of it - in many
western nations.
The big turning point in investor sentiment occurred last February when the
US Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy for the first time in five
years as a cyclical upswing in the American economy gathered strength.
The turn in the interest rate cycle sent US and European bond prices
tumbling, and the fixed income market's reversal was accentuated by a
liquidity squeeze on speculative traders and a sudden concern that the Fed
was doing too little, too late, to stop a resurgence of inflation.
US equities were inevitably dragged down by the rising trend of interest
rates, as were many principal European markets and some emerging markets -
and for much of the year stock markets have found it hard to escape the
volatile and bearish mood in the fixed income sector.
That said, the correction in the equity markets has been less severe than
that in bonds and a somewhat more stable atmosphere in the fixed income
sector around the middle of the year underpinned a brief, modest rally in
stocks.
The FT-Actuaries World Index stood roughly 7 per cent higher on the year in
dollar terms at the end of October, though that advance shrinks to a mere
1.6 per cent once Japan is excluded. Japan's stock market rally since the
start of the year is a mere 8.3 per cent in yen terms but totals 24 per cent
in dollar terms, thanks to the appreciation of the Japanese currency.
The main question now is the extent to which global equity markets can build
on this modest advance at a time when two powerful forces are pushing the
main western markets in opposite directions.
One is rising bond yields, which tend to have a depressing effect on share
prices, both because they make fixed income investments relatively more
attractive and because they push up corporations' funding costs.
The other is economic recovery - which is relatively mature in the US but is
just getting into its stride in continental Europe and is likely to produce
a strong burst of earnings growth over the next year or two.
An important factor in this tussle will be the future direction of bond
prices. While short-term interest rates seem set for a substantial
tightening, more bullish analysts argue that long-term bond yields are
already discounting far more inflation than is likely to materialise in the
main western economies in the near term.
They point out that inflation is currently very subdued on both sides of the
Atlantic and argue that it will remain modest, despite economic expansion,
thanks to factors such as increased productivity and increased global
competition. The implication is that long bond yields have reached a
plateau, allowing equity prices to rise as earnings increase or as bond
yields drop.
More bearish analysts argue that inflation will accelerate significantly
over the next year or two, due to central bank complacency in failing to
tighten monetary policy aggressively, and this will continue to exert upward
pressure on bond yields and hold back equities.
In particular, they argue that the economic recovery in the US - which tends
to set sentiment in other markets around the world - is now very mature, and
it cannot be long before an eventual slowdown in the growth of earnings is
reflected in stock prices.
In the US, the Dow Jones Industrial Average suffered a correction of around
10 per cent in the two months following the Fed's February tightening and
since then has gradually gained ground, so that at the start of November it
stood just 70 points short of its all-time high of 3978.36, reached at the
end of January.
As for Europe, the FT-Actuaries World Index for the region showed a mere 3.2
per cent advance in dollar terms in 1994 up to the end of October, with the
British and French components slightly down and Germany slightly ahead. The
Nordic countries showed a 22.3 per cent advance. The Italian market was up
15 per cent, though that represented a sharp drop from the 40 per cent surge
it enjoyed early in the year during the national election campaign.
Many analysts think European equity markets as a whole should do well over
the next 12 months, with Germany particularly favoured, thanks to recovering
earnings and political stability in the wake of the Kohl government's
re-election last month.
Opinions are more sharply divided over Japan, where the equity market gained
strongly in the first half of the year as foreign investors anticipated
economic recovery. But since then the market has fallen back sharply -
despite analysts' forecasts of better earnings in 1995 - as domestic
investors have held back. One question is the extent to which the Japanese
financial system and industry still need to be restructured.
Emerging equity markets have also displayed a very mixed picture over the
past year. Many suffered sharp setbacks in the early months of the year in
the backwash from the Federal Reserve's February tightening and have spent
the succeeding months clawing back a substantial part of those losses.
Substantial outperformers include South Korea, where share prices rose some
30 per cent in local currency terms between the year's April low point and
mid-October, helped by a recovering economy and easing of tension with North
Korea; and Brazil, where the indices have soared on the back of the
government's successful attack on inflation and a national election outcome
liked by the financial markets.
Significant underperformers include Hong Kong, weighed down by concern over
local property prices, rising US interest rates and rising economic
difficulties in mainland China.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

941108

