FT944-14470

FT  22 OCT 94 / Major paves way for start of talks with Sinn Fein: PM
reopens border crossings and ends mainland ban on nationalists


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and JOHN MURRAY-BROWN


   LONDON, BELFAST


Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, moved to entrench peace in Northern
Ireland yesterday with an extensive package of confidence building measures.
He announced the government was ready to open exploratory talks with Sinn
Fein, the IRA's political wing, before the end of the year.
In a landmark speech in Belfast in which he confirmed the government's
'working assumption' that the IRA intended a permanent end to violence, Mr
Major disclosed plans for a steady easing of security measures in the
province.
His comments evoked a warm response in Dublin, modest encouragement from the
Ulster Unionists and calls from Sinn Fein for direct negotiations not to be
delayed. But Dr Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionists, accused Mr
Major of 'caving in' to the IRA.
Mr Major, who is to meet Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, on
Monday, also emphasised his determination to accelerate negotiations on a
new political settlement.
In spite of the refusal of Sinn Fein explicitly to renounce violence for
good, he said, the actions of the Republican movement during its six-week
ceasefire pointed to a permanent end to the violence.
The orders excluding Mr Gerry Adams and Mr Martin McGuinness, the two
leading spokesmen for Sinn Fein, from the British mainland were lifted. All
border crossings with the Republic are being reopened.
Declaring that 'from this moment we are in a new phase of the peace
process', the prime minister said measures marked the start of a 'full
return to democratic life'. The aim was 'to make a return to violence
unthinkable'.
Mr Major spelled out plans to create a new Ulster assembly and laid out the
principles that would guide negotiations with the Irish Republic on a
constitutional framework for the province.
His speech included also a commitment to a large-scale initiative to rebuild
the Northern Ireland economy with a concerted effort to encourage inward
investment and substantial European Union aid.
Overall, it marked a carefully balanced effort to reassure the unionist
community of their continuing veto over the province's constitutional future
while meeting the concerns of the nationalist community.
The prime minister's talks with Mr Reynolds are designed to remove the
remaining obstacles to a joint framework document on relations between the
two governments and between Northern Ireland and the Republic.
Mr Major indicated that once the document is completed, the British side
will publish also its ideas for a new, devolved assembly in Northern
Ireland.
The proposed assembly, which would be elected under a system of proportional
voting, would give representation to all differing shades of opinion within
the province.
But in a warning of the difficulties to come, Mr Major said that a lasting
peace could be guaranteed only when the IRA and loyalist groups had
surrendered their guns and explosives. He said the London government
intended to establish a joint approach with Dublin.
Mr Mitchel McLaughlin, northern chairman of Sinn Fein, said he saw 'the
discussion on the political issues as part of the taking the gun out of
Irish politics . . . Clearly there would have to be agreement on political
structures to remove the potential for political violence. That political
violence arose out of a lack of agreement.'
Ulster peace process: Page 5
Paisley sees IRA 'victory'
Major takes risks
Sinn Fein aims to unite
Editorial Comment: Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941022

