FT944-5932

FT  01 DEC 94 / Arts: Elton and Cyndi - Pop


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Elton John is currently filling the Albert Hall for a prodigious number of
nights: well, a man must when there is a new album (Believe) to promote.
This is the new Elt, the scaled down, minimalist, version, both in
production values (just a percussionist to share his stage), and
personality. Gone are the Donald Duck outfits; the neon specs. Sure, he
wears an orange PVC suit and his one party trick, playing the piano prone
with fingers just reaching the keys, is a mild gesture for a man who used to
kick his instrument to death.
Dropping the razzmatazz is no bad idea: it always seemed a way for Elton to
hide an insecure personality behind layers of artifice. Now you get the man
himself and he seems genuinely nice: diffident, keen to please, relaxed. And
his accompanyist is Ray Cooper, who could make a garden hoe sound rhythmic.
If there is a problem it is the piano, which Elton plays very loudly,
over-dosing on arpeggios and minor chords, the keys jangling under
relentless muscle power. It endangers the subtleties in songs like 'Sorry
seems to be the hardest word' and makes the new album come across as
plangent.
But this is a minor grouse. Elton ranges far and wide across 25 years of
creativity and he does not refuse his fans the plums, even if he can only
bear to play 'Crocodile rock' as a ballad, which inevitably picks up speed.
Well over two hours later comes 'Candle in the Wind', a song which could
have been written about him rather than Marilyn Monroe but which now,
thankfully, seems a memory of a tumultuous past.
Madonna was a mistake: it should have been Cyndi Lauper. The lippie New
Yorker with the 'in your face' image, cheeky stage set, and politically
incorrect songs like 'Girls Just Want to Have Fun', should have consumed the
1980s like a hungry piranha. Instead the blonde from the boondocks got in
quick and Cyndi spent her time managing wrestlers and finding God.
But you cannot tie an outrageous ego down and now she is back with a 'Twelve
Deadly Cyns' tour which is the current hot ticket. She made an impact at the
Shepherd's Bush Empire. She needed to: the audience had been kept waiting,
and standing, two hours, thanks to that ingrained insolence pop promoters
manage to get away with.
But the very sight of this professional scream, with her flouncy tulle skirt
and frightening white wig, which she removed to reveal a yellow Worsel
Gummidge cut, was re- assuring: here was eccentricity on the grand scale. As
she passed like a parcel along the front row, squeaking out 'What's going
on', the place took off. Cyndi caught the mood and soon cast off her dress
and top to reveal a bustier a French maid might die for, and way beyond the
ambitions of most 41-year-olds.
Lauper is no fool. She has good material; a band that looks weird and sounds
fine; and the back chat that clings after more than 20 years in the
business. This led her astray in the middle of her set with some serious
statements - and a folk ballad - that killed the mood of joyous weirdness,
but when you hold in reserve songs like 'Time After Time' you cannot really
fail.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941201

