FT943-769

FT  28 SEP 94 / German Elections, October 16: Ex-communists sure of seats in
Bundestag - East Germany's former rulers expect to win in east Berlin


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


Forty years of accepting the ideological certainty of Marxism-Leninism may
be one reason why the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS), the successor to
east Germany's former communist party, is not plagued by doubt. The PDS is
certain it will enter the Bundestag, or lower house of Germany's federal
parliament, but not through winning 5 per cent of the federal vote, the
minimum required by any party for parliamentary representation.
Instead, it is concentrating all its efforts on winning outright three
constituencies. This would mean the party would automatically qualify for
representation according to whatever proportion of the national vote it won.
If it wins three constituencies, the PDS would then gain about 18 seats in
the Bundestag. It could be in a position to play an important role in
shaping the composition of the next government.
'We are very optimistic about winning three seats in east Berlin. We might
even pick up one in Potsdam and (the island of) Rugen,' says Mr Hanno
Harnisch, the PDS's ebullient spokesman. The lastest Allensbach opinion poll
gives the PDS 4 per cent of the national vote and 19.5 per cent of the east
German vote.
But what makes the PDS so sure of victory in east Berlin? 'We've got a good
membership, the right candidates, and we are helped by a stupid campaign by
the political establishment,' says Mr Harnisch.
There is no disputing the membership. The PDS boasts a membership of 23,000
in east Berlin, compared to Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats'
3,000, the Social Democrats' 2,600 and the Free Democrats' mere 1,078. Many
PDS members - over 90 per cent belonged to the former Communist party - are
active at the grassroots level.
'I know these local PDS people,' says 83-year-old Mrs Herta Plache. 'They
visit me and visit the pensioners' club. The other political parties don't
seem to care about our problems. I don't care if the PDS are former
communists.'
The party has also capitalised on the city's unemployment rate, in some
regions as high as 40 per cent. About 80 per cent of scientists no longer
have jobs, either because the jobs no longer exist, or because the
scientists have been sacked for their previous political activities. 'This
last group forms one of the main planks of the party's support,' says Mr
Harnisch.
But the choice of candidates - all known locally - has also played a big
role in boosting the party's chances. Mr Gregor Gysi, the PDS's charismatic
anchorman, is standing in Marzahn-Hellersdorf, a sprawling high-rise suburb
in the east of the city, where unemployment is running at 40 per cent. 'I'm
voting for Gysi because I know him. He speaks our language. He stands up to
the Wessis (west Germans), who are always accusing us of being fascists
painted red,' said Ms Birgit Kuhne, a 36-year-old unemployed engineer.
Mr Stefan Heym, whose novels written under the former communist system tried
to expose the regime's corruption of the socialist ideal, is standing in
Berlin Mitte/Prenzlauer Berg, home to east Berlin's intellectuals and youth
culture. The PDS is certain he will win, but the SPD is fielding a strong
candidate - Mr Wolfgang Thierse, a member of the party's executive board.
To counter the PDS's support, some CDU officials fear that voters might
switch from the CDU to the SPD in order to keep out the PDS. But Mr Harnisch
discounts this idea, as indeed do CDU supporters in the capital. 'Can a
voter really swing that much just to keep us out? No]' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940928

