FT942-16408

FT  11 APR 94 / Consumer credit holds up despite tax rise fears


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


Borrowing by consumers appeared to hold up well in February in spite of
publicity about the negative impact on disposable incomes of this month's
tax increases.
Two reports published today point to a strong increase in borrowing to
finance car purchases and increased borrowing for other high-value items
compared with the year before.
Infolink, a credit information organisation, said February's credit demand
continued 'to suggest a steady economic improvement'. The Finance & Leasing
Association said its February consumer credit figures were 'the strongest
since the recession began', although Mr Tony Mallin, chairman, warned that
members were concerned about whether the recovery could be sustained in the
wake of higher taxes.
The association, which represents providers of 80 per cent of consumer
credit and about 30 per cent of finance for investment in plant and
equipment, reported that consumer credit in February totalled Pounds 1.24bn,
a 49 per cent increase compared with February 1993. Consumers borrowed
Pounds 567m to buy cars, an increase of 58 per cent compared with the year
before, while association members reported a 35 per cent year-on-year
increase in personal loans to Pounds 191m and 47 per cent growth in retail
credit to Pounds 373m compared with February 1993.
Infolink, which estimates consumer credit demand through the number of
credit inquiries it receives, reported a 16.7 per cent increase in requests
for new car loans in February compared with the same period last year. But
requests for credit from finance houses and retail outlets showed weaker
growth of 9.3 per cent and 5.9 per cent respectively compared with February
last year.
The association's figures for February showed 4 per cent growth in consumer
credit compared with January. While personal loans, secured loans and car
finance increased between January and February, retail credit was down 9 per
cent over the month. 'This was to be expected following heavy discounting in
the January sales,' the association said. Business finance and leasing
totalled Pounds 920m in February, up 13 per cent compared with February 1993
but down 12 per cent from January, it said.
The Central Statistical Office publishes figures for consumer borrowing in
February today, which, unlike the association's data, are seasonally
adjusted.
The consensus of City economists polled last week by MMS International, a
financial information company, points to a slight increase in net consumer
credit to a seasonally adjusted Pounds 250m in February from Pounds 235m in
January.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940411

