FT943-980

FT  27 SEP 94 / Ulster Tories seek to rock conference boat


   By DAVID OWEN


Conservatives from Northern Ireland are moving to rock the boat before next
month's Tory conference by urging the party 'actively to persuade' the
people of the province that their best future lies within the UK.
They are trying to force a vote on this by canvassing support among Tory
constituency organisations.
Their amendment to the motion on Northern Ireland that will be debated at
the conference also calls for the deletion of a reference to the courage of
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister. A letter to constituency
chairmen from Mr Leonard Fee, the senior unpaid Tory in the province, argues
that it would be 'distasteful to ask the party conference to praise Mr
Reynolds'.
The move emerged yesterday as Downing Street renewed its demands for an
unambiguous assurance that the IRA has ended violence for good. The
government's remarks came after Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, said
during his US visit that he wanted 'a permanent peace'. 'I am not interested
in any temporary suspension,' Mr Adams said.
Mr Michael Mates, the former Northern Ireland minister sent by the
government to shadow Mr Adams's US tour, said the remarks 'take us a little
further. I happen to believe that the intention is that the end should be
permanent, but he cannot say it.'
The government has promised to start preliminary talks on how to admit Sinn
Fein to the political process within three months of a permanent end to IRA
violence.
Tory party rules vest the 'absolute right' to decide whether to call
amendments with the conference chairman, making it unlikely the Northern
Ireland amendment will be voted on.
However Mr Fee, chairman of the Tories' Northern Ireland Area Council,
believes the party's high command could be embarrassed if a significant
number of constituencies write in to express their support.
He points out that although the vast majority of Ulster-related motions
submitted to conference are concerned with 'strengthening the union and
governing Northern Ireland as the rest of the United Kingdom,' these
sentiments are not reflected in the motion selected for debate.
Meanwhile, Ulster Unionist party members on their return from a US trip said
they were interested in an all-party visit. Mr Jeffrey Donaldson, party
secretary, said the UUP was 'keen to explore ways in which there could be a
joint effort by the political parties in working for inward investment'.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940927

