FT944-14610

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (17): What else is
new?


   By BARBARA ELLIS


Regulatory changes due at the end of the year have begun casting shadows
ahead. Scottish Amicable acknowledges designing its new distribution bond
with a very conscious eye to the disclosure of commission and charges
required after January 1, 1995.
The distribution bond, a single-premium insurance bond taking a minimum of
Pounds 5,000, is linked to a fund investing in a mix of UK equities,
fixed-interest securities and property. Scottish Amicable says the target
for the 'distributions' or dividend payments which give the bond its name is
5 per cent after basic rate tax, to be met out of income only, unless a
holder requests a higher pay-out recognising that part of the capital will
be eroded to produce it.
Unlike other distribution bonds currently marketed, Scottish Amicable's
version will have a nil bid/offer spread - no upfront charge. The annual
fund management charge will be 1.5 per cent for the first five years, then
0.75 per cent a year. Investors who cash in a significant porportion or the
full amount of the bond within the first five years will have to pay an exit
charge, starting at 7 1/2 per cent in year one but dropping by 1.5
percentage points a year. However, this penalty will not apply to
withdrawals of up to 7 per cent of the value each year.
HSBC Unit Management, replacing James Capel as a brand-name, has just
launched Elector plan, seeing this as a rival to traditional distribution
bonds. The minimum investment is Pounds 5,000, with a pay-out level selected
each year to be delivered on a monthly basis. Elector uses HSBC's newly
launched Balanced Fund, a unit trust investing 55 per cent in UK equities,
30 per cent in fixed-interest securities and 15 per cent in convertibles.
Charges on the Balanced Fund are an initial 5.25 per cent and an annual 1.5
per cent taken out of capital.
The yield is expected to be 5 per cent - or 6.25 per cent if held through a
Pep.
Framlington Unit Management has launched a low-cost, unit-trust pension
plan, with charges designed to secure the group a ranking among the top 10
per cent of most competitive pension products. Minimum contributions are
either Pounds 50 monthly or Pounds 2,000 initially, with no limit on further
payments. The money is to be invested in Framlington's Exempt Balanced Fund,
and the charges are a plan fee of Pounds 100 in year one followed by Pounds
50 in each subsequent year. There is an initial charge of 5 per cent of each
contribution, reduced to 3 per cent if the investment is Pounds 2,000 or
more, and the annual management fee is 0.4 per cent, taken from income.
November will see three more investment trust launches, from Fleming, Legal
& General and Murray Johnstone.
Fleming's Natural Resources investment trust is expected to require a
minimum investment of Pounds 2,500, and will carry an annual management
charge of 0.6 per
cent plus a performance-related fee. The portfolio will consist roughly of
30 per cent oil and gas shares, 30 per cent in base metals, 30 per cent gold
and precious metals and 10 per cent other raw materials. The fund managers
will be Ian Henderson and Mark Lawson-Statham, who run commodity, energy and
gold unit trusts for Fleming's Save & Prosper subsidiary.
Legal & General's Recovery investment trust has yet to fix details such as
minimum investment and annual charge, but the insurer says the aim is for
the new trust to qualify for Peps from the start, introducing a savings plan
at a later stage.
With a life of not more than 10 years, the L&G recovery trust will have
about three-quarters of its portfolio in non-FT-SE shares, but will not hold
any unquoted companies. The fund manager is to be Ms Lesley Hooper,
currently running L&G's Pounds 89m UK Recovery unit trust, which ranked 4th
out of 116 unit trusts in the UK equity growth sector over the last five
years, according to Micropal, showing a gain of 85 per cent.
Murray Johnstone's Emerging Economies investment trust will require a
minimum investment of Pounds 500 and carry an annual management fee of 1.25
per cent - with 25 per cent of this taken from revenue and 75 per cent from
capital. Murray Emerging Economies trust is to be managed by Glasgow-based
Rodger Scullion, who already runs Murray Smaller Markets, top of its sector
over the past one, 5 and 10 years, according to statistics from the
Association of Investment Trust Companies.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

941021

