FT941-4098

FT  12 MAR 94 / Keep out: a frontier state holds the line: A city battles to
repel illegal immigrants. Nicholas Woodsworth joins a border patrol and
reports on the depressing process


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


Imagine a city on the margins of western Europe - Trieste, Helsinki or
Marseilles, perhaps - perpetually beseiged by hoardes of frantic people.
Victims of social and economic collapse in their own countries to the east
and south, they have little to lose. What stands between them and a better
life is that most tangible of imaginary lines, a border.
They cross the frontier and its defences by any means possible - by small
boat, over fences and roof-tops, through underground drains, in blind mass
charges over empty wasteground. They are so numerous - more than 10,000
every night - that the authorities are overwhelmed. Those who are caught jam
the jails and detention centres and clog the legal system. Those who are not
caught disappear inside illegal immigrant communities, flood job markets and
bring social services to a point of collapse. More and more, Trieste,
Helsinki or Marseilles resembles the desperate, lawless places these
immigrants have left.
Such an inundation might appear far-fetched in western Europe. Apocalyptic
visions of this kind are usually raised by extremist groups concerned with
tightening already-rigorous immigration laws. But in one western city, it is
a reality.
The city is El Paso, in west Texas, on the US-Mexico border, where US
authorities have instituted unprecedented measures to staunch a flow of
illegal immigration. Recently I went riding with the US Border Patrol to see
what Operation Hold-the-Line, and opposition to it, is all about.
I drove into El Paso from the east along the Rio Grande River. As a natural
feature separating two countries the Rio Grande is unimpressive. It is so
narrow and shallow in parts that the name 'wetback', traditionally applied
to illegal Mexican immigrants who swam the river, hardly seemed to apply. On
several isolated stretches near the Santa Elena canyon I was able to wade
back and forth to Mexico without even getting my knees wet.
But the river has an ally in the land that surrounds it: the Chihuahua
Desert forms some of the most inhospitable country on the continent. Only
the most determined and well-organised 'illegals' try to make their way to
American cities on the northern side of this vast, empty tract of scrub and
cactus.
None the less, even here there are foreign nationals - Mexicans for the most
part, but also other Latin Americans and immigrants from as ar away as east
Asia - who make their way across the border with the hired help of Mexican
'coyotes', skilled guides with local knowledge.
Their ruses are many. Illegals have been known to walk backwards for miles
across the desert to confuse their trackers, or even to attach horseshoes to
wooden blocks on their feet. And the stakes can be high. Not long ago a
group of Chinese illegals paid Dollars 30,000 apiece for the privilege of
being smuggled across the Chihuahua desert into the US. They did not make
it.
From time to time as I drove through the desert I came across the highway
check-points and the green and white off-road vehicles of the US Border
Patrol. With slightly more than 4,000 men, the patrol is the first line of
defence against illegal immigration into the US.
El Paso, the patrol headquarters for this section of the frontier, took me
by surprise. It has long ceased to be the romantic cowboy town of western
legend. Today it is a busy military, commercial and industrial centre, the
largest on the frontier between Houston and San Diego. In El Paso I watched
spooky-looking Stealth bombers fly over the city from the runways of Fort
Bliss; got caught in horrific freeway traffic jams on Interstate 10; and
breathed desert air perfumed by a thick brown layer of factory smog. A
graceless, booming, nose-to-the-grindstone sort of place, El Paso was not a
city I found attractive.
But attraction is a relative matter. Directly opposite El Paso, a mere
three-minute walk over the Santa Fe International Bridge, lies the city of
Juarez, the fourth largest in Mexico. Separated by nothing more than a few
feet of shallow and muddy Rio Grande water, two worlds meet head on. One is
wealthy, productive and full of opportunity; the other is poor, corrupt,
underdeveloped and overcrowded. Seen from the other side of the river, El
Paso is a land of plenty.
'Hey, you wanna wake up in time for work?'
I was standing on a broken sidewalk at the bottom of Benito Juarez Avenue in
downtown Juarez, and talking to Frank, who was trying to sell me an alarm
clock. Juarez Avenue runs south from the international bridge. Catering to
the needs and weaknesses of day-tripping American tourists, it is a seedy,
garish street of ill-lit drinking places and souvenir shops, off-track
betting offices and strip joints, taco bars and dance halls. On the sidewalk
you can buy anything from stolen windscreen wipers to young girls. Frank was
hawking cheap watches and alarm clocks from a cardboard tray.
Frank had returned to Juarez after years as an illegal farm worker in
Fresno, California. Life was bad there for illegals, he told me, but the
money was good. He came back because he was falling apart. He was drinking
and smoking too much marijuana, and had become mixed up in hard drugs and
gang life. 'I almost died. Now I live clean, go to church every day, and
sell clocks for people to wake up.'
Frank is an exception. No matter how difficult life may be for Mexican
illegals - they are thought to number millions - few voluntarily return to
the grinding poverty of home. Nor has their presence, in the past at least,
been entirely unwelcome in the US. For decades, American business and
agricultural interests, especially in southern California, encouraged
illegal immigration because cheap Mexican labour meant bigger profits. From
time to time the US government cracked down on illegal immigration, but
there was a tacit acceptance that what was good for business was good for
America, and a blind eye was turned.
Order a meal in a Los Angeles restaurant today and the chances still are
that the salad you eat was grown, transported, prepared and served by
illegal labour. But it is no longer easy to enter the US. American
recession, unemployment, rocketing health and education costs, growing crime
and social problems and sheer weight of numbers has brought a dramatic
hardening of attitude. One of the toughest reactions is Operation
Hold-the-Line.
'We used to cross the river to work in El Paso and come back to Juarez to
sleep,' Frank told me. 'Hell, I knew guys who used to come home for lunch.
Now we have people here from central Mexico, with nothing to eat and nowhere
to stay, sleeping on cardboard and waiting days or weeks for a chance to
sneak over. Most often they don't get it.'
Operation Hold-the-Line, begun last September, was a radical change of
strategy for the El Paso Border Patrol. In the past, the 650 patrol agents
in the sector ran mobile patrols throughout their territory - 160 miles of
border and 125,000 square miles of rough, uninhabited desert frontierland
adjacent to it.
Although the patrol was arresting between 800 and 1,300 Mexicans a day, it
estimated 10 times that number, about 10,000 people a day, were regularly
getting through. The vast majority were crossing through the city itself.
Today El Paso is no longer an open corridor. Hold-the-Line adopts tactics of
permanent concentration where crossings are greatest: there is now one
patrol agent stationed every 400 yards from the Ysleta Spanish Mission on
the border in east El Paso to Sunland Park in the west, a distance of 20
miles. With such a blockade in force 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
illegal crossings are down by 90 per cent.
Originally called Operation Blockade and accompanied by a proposal to build
an impenetrable steel fence between El Paso and Juarez, the strategy
initially brought vigorous protest from the Mexican government, US civil
rights groups and the locally-powerful Catholic church. To some it was a
Berlin Wall. I got in touch with Monsignor Remundo Pena, the Bishop of El
Paso, to find out why Hold-the-Line had caused such a stir.
What, I asked the bishop, who began his career working with illegal Mexican
farm labourers in the lower Rio Grande Valley, was wrong with the border
patrol enforcing the law? Nothing, he replied. What needed looking into was
the law itself.
For the bishop, Hold-the-Line is an historical, economic and political
contradiction. Until last century, El Paso, and much of the south-western
US, was Mexican territory. Today, 70 per cent of the city's US population is
Hispanic. For many in the region, the border is an illogical inconvenience.
Work, too, unites rather than separates El Paso and Juarez. For decades, the
maquiladora, or twin plant system, has linked the cities. More than 70
corporations, including Honeywell, General Motors, Siemens, Toshiba and
Sony, manufacture goods in El Paso but have them cheaply assembled in
Juarez.
Above all, though, it is the alliances of the future that make Hold-the-Line
a non sequitur. With the signing last year of Nafta, the North American Free
Trade Agreement, the two cities on the border have become, in theory at
least, a symbol of a strong new partnership. How, asked the bishop, can you
promote Juarez-El Paso as a single international city of free trade, welcome
your new business partner, but then slam the door on his family? I went out
that evening to see how that exclusion process worked.
In the border patrol processing centre at the foot of the Santa Fe bridge I
watched patrolmen working under bright fluorescent lights. They were
searching newly apprehended illegals, questioning and registering them, and
placing them in holding cells prior to their return to Mexico.
Business was slow. A few teenagers came through, a prostitute, a couple of
children caught shoplifting. But bright light is not the patrolman's natural
element. His real work takes place in the dark of the night, when the vast
majority of illegals take their chances in an obscure, smog-ridden gloom.
'It's not just the Mexican factories that make the smoke,' said patrolman
Mike Moon as we bounced through the dark in a border patrol 4x4. 'People
sleeping rough along the river on the Juarez side get cold  - they burn old
tyres, cardboard, polystyrene boxes, anything they can get hold of. Some
nights it's hard to breathe down here.'
If breathing was difficult down beside the Rio Grande, seeing anything was
more difficult still. Here in the city the river is little more than a
shallow channel of water contained between concrete walls and the border
zone is a dim, half-lit world, an urban no-man's-land of abandoned waste
ground, barricaded no-go streets, empty railway yards, fenced-off
warehouses, chained gates, prohibited access zones and long stretches of
chain-link fences riddled with holes.
It is eerie, and slightly ominous. As we drove along the concrete banks of
the river, at regular intervals we passed parked vehicles in which uniformed
men sat hour after hour, eyes glued to binoculars and infra-red
night-sights, the only sound being the buzz and crackle of two-way radios.
Men sitting by roadside fires, women walking along the highway, boys
loitering in the shadows - nothing on the other side of the river went
unnoticed. After years on the job, Moon told me, patrolmen develop a sixth
sense for who, and who is not, waiting to make a dash over the border.
We drove further. Moon showed me marshalling yards where, prior to
Hold-the-Line, up to 80 Mexicans at a time would rush the border and freight
trains pulling out of El Paso. I saw school grounds where young illegals can
blend into a student population in seconds. Along the river I was shown
places where, during high summer water, boatmen landed their passengers in
the full view of Mexican authorities paid to look the other way. In the Sand
Hills area, where miles of Juarez slums back right on to the border, we
watched trackers set out after a group of illegals who had split up and gone
separate ways.
'Mike, we got a hit,' the radio buzzed a few minutes later. In patrol
parlance, a 'hit' is a signal from one of the thousands of magnetic sensors
concealed along the border. In this case it had come from a railway trestle
bridge spanning the Rio Grande. Already Ferny Melendez, a colleague of
Moon's, was tracking the intruders' passage along the bottom of a narrow
gully on the US side.
Fifteen minutes later Moon and I were waiting in a parking lot where the
gully rose steeply. Melendez had trailed his prey a mile and a half from the
bridge. For these unlucky immigrants, there was no way out except forward.
Our quarry was trapped.
I was expecting some tough hombres - drug runners maybe, or one of the gangs
of men who sometimes turn nasty. In the event, Mike Moon had to help his
catch out of the gully: two mothers, two children, two babies and two young
men in jeans and T-shirts. They did not seem angry or resentful as we
bundled them into the 4x4 for processing and deportation back to Mexico -
just hopeless and bone-weary. They were just six of 157 illegal immigrants
arrested that night.
Could the same situation, the same solution, develop in post-communist
Europe? I hope not. I found the whole process a miserable and depressing
one. But like North America, Europe also has its great contradiction: a
strategic need for economic unity on a continent of vast economic disparity.
Contrasts between east and western Europe are not diminishing, but growing
more acute. El Paso may seem far away, but the immigration dilemmas facing
the city in the desert may not be so far-fetched and remote after all.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940312

