FT943-868

FT  27 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Flextech obtains part in original cable
drama


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Flextech, the oil services company which became a media group, yesterday
announced what it believes is the largest co-production deal to make
original programmes for cable and satellite channels.
The deal with Hallmark Entertainment of the US could involve total spending
of up to Dollars 140m (Pounds 89m).
The agreement covers the making of 30 feature-length original dramas in the
UK or other parts of the EU over the next two years. The deal also covers
eight original animated features and four original animated series of up to
26 episodes each.
'It's a huge deal,' Mr Roger Luard, chief executive of Flextech said
yesterday. Flextech, which holds 20 per cent of HTV and is controlled by TCI
of Denver, the largest US cable operator, manages or has interests in 11
cable and satellite channels including The Children's Channel, The Family
Channel, UK Gold and Bravo, which at the moment mainly shows old films.
The new dramas would probably be shown on either The Family Channel or on
Bravo.
Hallmark makes network movies and mini-series, including Lonesome Dove and
Scarlett, the sequel to Gone with the Wind, and has won 102 Emmy awards.
Flextech is believed to be paying considerably less than one third of the
total budget for the UK, Benelux and Scandinavian rights and Eastern
hemisphere rights for the animated programmes.
Mr Luard said Flextech was determined to build up a library of programme
rights as part of its business.
In a separate agreement with Hallmark, Flextech will acquire UK rights to
all the US company's productions for two years with an option for a third
year. This will cover a minimum of 125 hours of programming a year.
Mr Adam Singer, vice president international of TCI, said: 'This is the
first step in fulfilling cable television's promise that it would supply
quality British television drama the equal of anything currently made in the
UK.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940927

