FT942-14787

FT  19 APR 94 / Business and the Law: Fortune in VAT rests on company car
rule - An appeal to lift a Customs & Excise order may involve a government
bill of up to Pounds 15bn


   By ROBERT RICE


A British Customs & Excise 'blocking order' which prevents businesses from
recovering Value Added Tax on the purchase of company cars is illegal and
should be lifted, according to several UK clearing banks.
The banks, led by Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland, have lodged an appeal
with the VAT Tribunal which claims the blocking order is incompatible with
the European Sixth Directive on VAT. That forms the principal measure for
the harmonisation of VAT in the European Union.
If they win their case, the banks stand to recover hundreds of millions of
pounds in VAT paid by their leasing operations on the purchase of cars for
leasing since 1978 when the Sixth Directive came into effect in the UK.
That may be only the tip of the iceberg. Since news of the appeal first
leaked out, some of the 'Big Six' accountancy firms have been advising their
leasing company clients to lodge claims for repayment of VAT with the VAT
tribunal as a precautionary measure.
According to Mr Dominic Taylor, a VAT specialist with City solicitors
Ashurst Morris Crisp, who has been advising the banks on the issue, six
weeks ago a total of 37 companies had lodged protective claims involving
amounts up to Pounds 1bn. Since then, claims have been coming in on a daily
basis.
Customs & Excise estimates that if the blocking order is declared unlawful
and the government has to repay VAT on the purchase of cars back to 1978, it
may face a repayment bill of up to Pounds 6bn for the leasing companies
alone. If it has to repay all the UK companies who have purchased cars for
business use during the same period, the total bill could be as high as
Pounds 15bn.
Sources at Barclays indicate that the appeal was lodged in order to force a
change in the law, not to recover huge sums in VAT repayments. Other leasing
companies are thought to feel the same way. But Mr Taylor says many of
Britain's companies operating large company car fleets will have no such
qualms. In either case,the government faces a significant tax problem.
By the VAT regime, businesses which make goods or provide services subject
to VAT are allowed to deduct the VAT or 'input tax' on goods and services
which they buy-in. This ensures that VAT is not paid on more than the full
value of the finished product.
The UK has had a blocking order in place since 1973 which generally prevents
deduction of input tax on cars. The order does not apply to car dealers, who
re-sell cars as new, to taxis, or to cars bought for short term hire by
companies such as Hertz. The impact of this blocking order on cars bought by
leasing companies for leasing purposes is dramatic.
If a leasing company buys a car for Pounds 10,000, it pays VAT at 17.5 per
cent on the purchase price which it is not allowed to deduct. The total cost
of the car is thus Pounds 11,750. If it then leases the car on a three-year
lease to another company, the leasing charge will be calculated on a base
cost of Pounds 11,750, to which will be added interest over three years plus
charges for maintenance and so-on.
That figure is divided by 36 to give the monthly charge of the lease, on
which a further 17.5 per cent VAT is payable by the lessee. 'This clearly
represents a form of double taxation which is contrary to the principles of
the European Sixth VAT directive', says Mr Taylor.
The impact of the blocking order on companies which make goods or provide
services subject to VAT is not so significant, as they can deduct the 17.5
per cent VAT on the actual leasing payments, he adds.
But the order has the effect that it raises the base cost of leasing cars,
thereby putting UK company fleet hirers at a disadvantage to other EU member
states where the deduction of VAT on the purchase of cars is allowed.
That is of concern to the UK leasing industry, which is worried that, as the
European single market becomes more firmly established, it may lose the
custom of UK company fleets to the more competitively priced European
market.
But their real concern is that the blocking order severely restricts the car
leasing market in the UK by making leasing prohibitively expensive for
businesses such as banks and insurance companies, which do not supply
taxable goods or services, and which therefore can not deduct VAT on lease
rentals.
A bank which wanted to lease a car for an employee would effectively be
taxed on the lease at a VAT rate equivalent of between 38-40 per cent, Mr
Taylor says.
The net result is that banks and insurance companies, the Post Office, the
health service, educational establishments, and other big business users of
cars, do not lease cars. Perhaps more importantly, neither do private
individuals, who tend instead to opt for hire purchase agreements where
there is only one charge to tax.
For companies which buy rather than lease their cars, there is arguably an
element of double taxation in the VAT paid by consumers on the final value
of their goods and services. Most would be happy for the blocking order to
be lifted so that the cost of purchasing company cars for business use could
be reduced.
Why, if the blocking order was outlawed in 1978 by the Sixth Directive, has
it taken so long for the leasing companies via their parent banks to
challenge its legality?
Mr Taylor says that, until recently, they had assumed the order was legal
and that there was little they could do to change it. The directive allows
states to retain some blocking orders if they were in place before it came
into force. But it now appears that the UK cars order does not fall into the
category of allowable blocking orders.
The banks made a complaint two years ago to the European Commission in
Brussels against the UK as they recognised that the approaching Single
market could further undermine their position in the leasing market. That
took place under article 169 of the Rome Treaty, for failure to implement
properly the directive.
The Commission took it up and began discussions with the UK government,
which has until June to remedy the situation or face proceedings in the
European Court of Justice.
The banks then challenged Customs about the blocking order, asking them to
lift it. Customs refused, so they lodged an appeal with the VAT tribunal and
put in claims for repayment of tax not deducted going back to 1978.
Barclays insists that was done purely 'to gain Customs' attention', not to
recover the tax. It appears to have worked. Mr Taylor says that although
Customs is believed to have been aware that the order might be illegal for
more than five years, it has now responded positively. It has carried out a
review of the blocking order and put a paper to ministers. The likely
outcome is that the blocking order will be abolished in next year's finance
bill.
There will be a quid pro quo however. Part of the reason for not allowing
VAT deduction on cars is the high proportion of private use of company cars.
Leasing companies do not use cars at all for private use, so they should get
the full VAT deduction once the order is lifted. But in companies where
there is a degree of private as well as business use, Customs wants a charge
to VAT to reflect the extent to which cars are used for private purposes.
It is considering introducing a VAT scale charge along the lines of the
Inland Revenue's scale benefit charge to income tax paid by individuals on
their company cars. The VAT charge would be payable by companies, but there
would still be a saving to the extent that the charge would not be payable
on business use. Companies such as British Telecom, which only allow company
cars to be used for business purposes, should escape the VAT charge
altogether.
If these changes are made, the only outstanding issue will be the extent of
the government's liability to repay VAT going back to 1978.
When the VAT tribunal considers the appeals later this year, Mr Taylor
considers it nearly certain to refer the issue to the European Court in
Luxembourg. It is likely to be at least two years before the issue is
resolved. Even were the court to rule the blocking order illegal, it is not
certain to order that all the tax should be repaid. There is a principle of
'unjust enrichment' to be tested, Mr Taylor says.
Whatever the outcome, the government will not escape scot-free. Customs
estimates that the cost of transition to a new system of charging private
use will be Pounds 1bn in the first year - representing the shortfall
between what it would have received in VAT on the sale of cars to businesses
and what it will receive under the new scale charge. That is estimated to
reduce to Pounds 600m in the second year and to zero by the third year. But
Mr Taylor believes that these 'back of the envelope' calculations may yet
prove wildly optimistic.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940419

