FT942-12698

FT  28 APR 94 / France ordered to open up routes from Orly airport


   By DAVID GARDNER and JOHN RIDDING


   BRUSSELS, PARIS


The European Commission yesterday ordered the French government to open Orly
airport in Paris to Air France's rivals on routes to London, Toulouse and
Marseilles.
The demand is a serious test of Brussels' will to enforce the EU's 'open
skies' policy. France said it would immediately appeal against the ruling to
the European Court of Justice.
'The decision taken in Brussels has serious consequences in opening, without
a period of transition, France's internal network,' said Mr Bernard Bosson,
transport minister.
The Commission found that Air France and its subsidiary Air Inter, which
also plans to appeal, were in breach of the rules in the so-called Third
Aviation Package of liberalisation measures which came into force last year.
This was designed to promote greater competition. The Commission's decision
follows complaints brought last September by TAT, the French airline 49.9
per cent owned by British Airways, that it was the victim of a monopoly at
Orly.
French authorities were told to open up the Orly-London route immediately,
and given a six-month breathing space to open up the lucrative routes to
Toulouse and Marseilles, the EU's third and fourth busiest routes.
The controversial decision has been held up through fear of upsetting
delicate French government negotiations with Air France unions over
restructuring the state-owned airline.
The sensitivity of the decision was underlined yesterday when Mr Jacques
Delors, Commission president, abstained and the other French commissioner,
Mrs Christiane Scrivener, voted against the action.
Yesterday's move presents a dilemma for the French government, which is
seeking European Commission approval for a FFr20bn (Pounds 2.34bn) capital
injection for Air France. Liberalisation of the French airline market could
be a condition for approval of the state aid.
Paris has a month to appeal to the Council of Ministers, which could
overturn the order with a qualified majority. The solid bloc of airline
liberals led by the UK makes this recourse unlikely, leaving France the
possibility of action through the European Court of Justice.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940428

