FT941-5504

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: Fun with fish out of water - Video


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


Fifteen-odd years ago, in the dawn of 'high-concept' thinking, Hollywood
suddenly had a brainwave. 'Fish out of water]' it cried, smiting its brow at
a power breakfast somewhere on Sunset Boulevard. It had had the idea for a
surefire plot device. This was to throw the main characters of movies into
alien environments or predicaments to see what happened.
Passing for an original notion, this caused 1980s cinema to be plagued with
wacky whimsies like Three Men And A Baby and Good Morning Vietnam. But the
well-schooled movie buff, unlike the rulers of Tinseltown, knows that every
good story is basically a fish-out-of-water one anyway.
Look at March's video releases. Old movies and new draw their panache from
the spectacle of characters out of their depth or element. For cinema has
always used its magic carpet facility - geographical or geo-spiritual - to
catalyse characters into a new awareness.
Some thrash for sexual survival, like Glenn Ford thrown on the cruel mercies
of now-married ex-girlfriend Rita Hayworth in the incomparable 'noir'
thriller Gilda (Columbia TriStar). This sizzles all the way up to and beyond
Miss H's famous glove-striptease as she sings 'Put the blame on Mame': a
sequence which seems to get into every history-of-Hollywood documentary.
Other heroes and heroines gulp more comically for air, like Cary Grant and
Irene Dunne as the married squabblers thrown from yesterday's bliss into
today's divorce proceedings in the 1937 screwball classic The Awful Truth
(Columbia TriStar); or like the all-star guests of Grand Hotel (Warner), who
include John and Lionel Barrymore and a Greta Garbo who actually says here
her famous tag-line about 'vaunting to be a-lawn.'
Other characters in film history show there can be a grimmer tragedy in
displacement: like the homesick soldiers of Renoir's La Grande Illusion
(Arthouse), the greatest of anti-war films; or like the aristocrat's
daughter (Louise Brooks) thrown into brothel, then reform school, in GW
Pabst's powerful, Lulu-esque cautionary tale from 1929 Diary Of A Lost Girl
(Tartan).
But Hollywood was right in one sense. The fish-out-of-water idea is at its
best in comedy. This month four leap to your attention. Much Ado About
Nothing (Entertainment) is one of those typical Bardic comedies where a
gaggle of English-sounding wits is found wandering for no good reason around
Italy. But how witty they are in Kenneth Branagh's film. Master Ken and Miss
Em speak the verse with relish; the improbably cast Americans excel (Denzel
Washington, Michael Keaton, Keanu Reeves); and the scenery (Tuscany for
Shakespeare's Sicily) offers the kind of burnished, beautiful terra firma
where few fish could resist jumping out of their native element.
For an American pairing of f-out-of-w comedies, what better than In The Soup
(Tartan) and El Mariachi (20: 20)? The first is about an aspiring film-maker
(Steve Buscemi) pushed by funding needs into the arms of a Mafia boss
(Seymour Cassel) with his own delusions of movie-making genius. (A modern
screwball comedy and a good one). The second film is a high-style parody
Western directed by Robert Rodriguez as if he had overdosed on the movies of
Sergio Leone. Its hero stumbles into a mistaken-identity imbroglio as
intricate as, and funnier than, Shakespeare's Comedy Of Errors.
But to conclude, what is comedy of disorientation without Tony Hancock? Fans
should rejoice that his 1963 film The Rebel (Lumiere) has at last come to
video, in which our East Cheam cultural climber goes to Paris to become an
artist. In short order he meets Salvador Dali lookalike Dennis Price, is
corrupted by dealer George Sanders, has a series of cherishably daft
Hancockian monologues, and finally returns home to his muse, inspiration and
landlady, the lovely Irene Handl. Vintage.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940305

