FT943-12836

FT  22 JUL 94 / British & Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - Hopes rise
of resolving legal tangle / Writs fly


   By JOHN MASON


John Gunn built British & Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
The DTI report into Atlantic Computers looks set to have a substantial
impact on the complex raft of legal actions spawned by British &
Commonwealth's disastrous acquisition.
A welter of large-scale litigation - with over 70 claims and counter-claims
totalling well in excess of Pounds 3bn - has been prompted by the affair.
Most leading London law firms are involved in acting for somebody caught in
the legal cross-fire. The litigation, should it ever reach court, would
prove exceptionally complex, exhausting and expensive.
The report is now being closely studied by the lawyers concerned. The
amending or even dropping of some of the actions is considered possible.
Yesterday, both lawyers and their clients were refusing to comment publicly
on the possible impact of the report on their individual legal actions.
However, there was private agreement that it could act to partially resolve
what is rapidly becoming a legal mess.
'Clearly there is now a need to re-examine the whole situation in the light
of the report,' said one participant in the legal battles.
In its conclusions, the report makes little or no criticism of the
professional advisers involved in the acquisition of Atlantic Computers by
B&C, apart from Spicer & Oppenheim, the computer company's auditors.
This lack of criticism could affect one of the largest actions outstanding -
that brought by Ernst & Young, the British & Commonwealth administrators,
against Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the securities arm of Barclays. In this
action, the administrators are suing BZW for approaching Pounds 1bn. The
auditors are alleging BZW was negligent in carrying out its role as adviser
to B&C over the acquisition.
Ernst & Young have also brought the other main claim in the welter of
litigation - a similar Pounds 1bn action against former Atlantic directors
including Mr David McCormick, the former chief executive, Mr John Tompkins,
his predecessor and Mr John Gillum, a former Atlantic chairman. In both
cases, the writs have been issued, but the actions are still in their very
early stages and no date has yet been fixed for them to reach court.
It was these claims by Ernst & Young which effectively triggered the flurry
of other writs, as other parties responded by launching their own actions to
protect themselves or creditors.
BZW responded to the administrators' claims by mounting its own series of
actions. These are against OC&C, Coopers & Lybrand, NM Rothchild and Spicer
& Oppenheim, along with three former Atlantic directors, Mr Tompkins, Mr
Nicholas Kennedy-Scott and Mr McCormick. BZW has yet to put a figure on the
scale of these claims.
In further actions, Price Waterhouse, the Atlantic administrators, are suing
Spicer & Oppenheim and former directors of the computer company - again for
sums approaching a total of Pounds 1bn.
It will be some months before the impact of the DTI report on the mountain
of litigation becomes clear.
But, as one litigant put it: 'It has become horrendous. Everyone is going
around in circles. We have got to find a way of simplifying this, otherwise
we will be arguing for years. The DTI report will clarify some of the
issues. It could trigger more claims, but hopefully it may simplify this
mess.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940722

