FT942-14596

FT  20 APR 94 / UN and Nato in search of a strategy / Reviewing the options
left after the Gorazde debacle


   By BRUCE CLARK and EDWARD MORTIMER


After the debacle at Gorazde, policy-makers at UN and Nato headquarters, and
in the capitals of the main member states, are reviewing a range of options.
It is much easier to suggest different strategies that might have been tried
at earlier stages in the Yugoslav conflict - for instance, a show of force
in late 1991 to halt the shelling of Dubrovnik and Vukovar by the Yugoslav
armed forces, or a lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia as soon as its
independence was recognised in April 1992 - than to propose one which could
plausibly be implemented now
The starting-point now has to be the presence of the UN protection force
(Unprofor). On the one hand, tens of thousands of Bosnians have become
dependent on it for relief supplies, and it is unlikely the ceasefire in
Sarajevo or many other parts of the country would survive if it was pulled
out. On the other hand, Unprofor itself is in some degree dependent on Serb
goodwill. Besides the 150 or so military observers and other personnel who
have actually been detained behind Serb lines, the whole Unprofor garrison
in Sarajevo (some 4,700 people) is virtually surrounded by Serb forces.
Unprofor was not conceived or constructed as an intervention force. Its
deployment has always been based on the assumption that all sides would
accept its presence, and few if any of the contributing governments would
allow their men to remain if it were to be reconfigured as a combat force.
But pulling it out is not an easy option either, politically or even
militarily. In the worst case, parts of it might actually have to fight
their way out, or be rescued by air.
For most imaginable new strategies, therefore, Unprofor would be more a
liability than an asset. The only other existing asset which the UN has in
its hands is the regime of sanctions imposed on the rump Yugoslavia. These
have had a devastating effect on the Serbian economy and President Slobodan
Milosevic is clearly anxious to have them lifted.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940420

