FT942-12723

FT  28 APR 94 / Arts: Buddha from Seattle - Cinema


   By STEPHEN AMIDON


LITTLE BUDDHA (12) Bernardo Bertolucci
DEADLY ADVICE (15) Mandie Fletcher
ROMEO IS BLEEDING (18) Peter Medak
MOTHER'S BOYS (15) Yves Simoneau
ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE (12) Tom Shadyac
Bernardo Bertolucci has always been fascinated by tensions arising when West
meets East, whether it be the fate of an anglicised Chinese Emperor or
American expats adrift in the Moroccan desert. Now, with his sumptuous
Little Buddha, this thematic concern becomes even more explicit as the
Italian director abandons the tragic slant of his recent work to depict an
attempted merger of the two cultures.
The film concerns a nine-year old American boy (Alex Wiesnedanger) who is
suspected by Buddhist monks of being the reincarnation of a recently
deceased saint. An ageing lama (Ying Ruocheng) travels from Bhutan to
Seattle in order to convince his parents (Bridget Fonda and Chris Isaak)
that he should be allowed to return to the monastery to see if he truly does
possess the blessed soul. Not surprisingly, the wealthy yuppies resist the
idea at first, though after suffering personal loss they agree to take the
boy East for the spiritual examination.
Bertolucci's story contains the germ of what might have been an intriguing
film. After all, what would you do if four charming, saffron-robed monks
showed up on your doorstep claiming your child was a minor deity? Send them
packing? Demand proof? See the possibility of saving money on boarding
school? Believe them?
The dramatic possibilities are rich, and the film comes to life when
Bertolucci explores them. Unfortunately, he then proceeds to add long,
digressive sequences dramatising the life of Siddhartha (Keanu Reeves), the
young prince who became the Buddha. While these lyrical passages are often
spectacularly filmed, their schools programme tone saps the film of its
dramatic strength. By the end, when the true nature of the boy's soul is
revealed and the old lama is tossed into the cosmic recycling bin, it is
hard to feel any emotional connection with either of them. That is the
problem with tackling the universal - you lose the personal. And while
abandoning the personal may be what Buddhism is about, there is little room
for it in screen storytelling.
Deadly Advice calls itself a black comedy, though a more appropriate colour
would be drab gray. Former Blackadder director Mandie Fletcher's first
feature deals with a bookish wallflower (Jane Horrocks) who decides to kill
her domineering mother (Brenda Fricker) on the strength of advice given to
her by the ghosts of notorious murderers such as Dr Crippen and Jack the
Ripper. The body count escalates as the locals become suspicious, until the
once retiring Horrocks stands ready to join the company of serial killers
who have been haunting her.
Although the film's premise is ripe for dark laughter, Fletcher and writer
Glenn Chandler have trouble raising even the lightest chuckle. Instead of
the delirious unpredictability and cheery nihilism of previous British black
comedies such as Kind Hearts and Coronets, we are instead left with a cosily
inoffensive little picture that refuses to challenge either itself or the
audience.
There is nothing cosy or inoffensive about Romeo is Bleeding, Peter Medak's
woefully misguided attempt to venture into the mean streets that belong to
Martin Scorsese and Abel Ferrara. Gary Oldman plays a corrupt New York
policeman in the pay of the mob. When they order him to murder a renegade
hitwoman (Lena Olin), he unwisely falls in love with her instead, putting
his job, marriage and life in dire jeopardy. By the time the smoke clears
there are countless victims, none in worse shape than our credulity.
Hilary Henkin's absurd and pretentious screenplay was once chosen by a
leading magazine as one of the 'Ten Best Unproduced Scripts in Hollywood',
which makes you think that, until recently anyway, Tinseltown knew what it
was doing. For his part, Medak seems to believe that if he throws enough
pace and blood at us we will not notice the mess. None of the actors fares
very well, although commiseration must be extended to the usually fine Olin,
who spends the entire film wearing Wonder Bras and little else. Even after
losing her arm she still has to play the bimbo.
For its first half hour, Mother's Boys promises to be the sort of serious
family drama Hollywood is reluctant to make these days. It concerns a
feckless woman (Jamie Lee Curtis) who comes back to her family after having
abandoned them without explanation three years earlier. Her husband (Peter
Gallagher) is none too happy about her return, especially when she announces
that she wants to resume mothering their three sons. But there is little he
can legally do to stop her, even after she shows herself intent on wrecking
his relationship with his new girlfriend.
Early on the director, Yves Simoneau, sketches this uneasy tangle of
relationships with care, particularly in the scene where Curtis performs a
mock-innocent striptease to win back the affections of her estranged
12-year-old boy. But the film soon becomes a preposterous thriller,
culminating in a final scene in which half the cast dangles on the edge of a
Californian cliff in a Volvo.
I am not sure what it says about the state of modern cinema when the most
accomplished film on offer in a week is Ace Ventura: Pet Detective, but it
cannot be good. This is the sort of shaggy dog film that some people love,
while the rest will be left slack-jawed in wonder that such daftness ever
got made. The convoluted plot of dolphin-napping is little more than an
excuse for the antics of the American comedian Jim Carrey, undoubtedly one
of the more original talents to hit the screen of late. With his rubbery
face and cartoonish voice, Carrey is like a manic blend of Pee Wee Herman
and Lassie. His Ace Ventura only takes on cases involving animals, drives
with his head out the side window and keeps a flap on his freezer door so
his pet penguins can get in and out. When his admiring girlfriend says that
he must really love animals, he answers: 'If it gets cold enough.' A must
for pet owners everywhere.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940428

