FT944-6086

FT  30 NOV 94 / Du Pont closures questioned


   By CHRIS TIGHE


A report by consultants on the decision by Du Pont, the world's largest
nylon maker, to close recently acquired plants on Teesside says it could not
detect any unexpected change in market conditions which would have prompted
the move.
The report, by chemical industry consultants Chem Systems, says the
recession from which the petrochemical industry is now emerging started well
over two years ago, so nothing 'new' had taken place. The research was
commissioned by Cleveland County Council because of the controversy over Du
Pont's plans, announced in June, to shut five plants and shed 520 jobs.
It will be discussed by councillors tomorrow. It will also be submitted to
the European Commission as part of its investigation into Du Pont's plans to
shut down the Teesside plants and invest in new adipic acid production in
Chalampe, France, in a joint venture with Rhone Poulenc.
Du Pont took over the former Imperial Chemical Industries' Teesside nylons
capacity, and 920 former ICI Teesside employees, as part of a deal with ICI
announced in 1992 and finalised in July last year.
Under that deal, approved with conditions and modifications by the European
Commission, ICI swapped its European nylons interests for Du Pont's US
acrylics business, plus potentially Pounds 235m in cash.
Since then Du Pont has announced two rounds of jobs cuts in the former ICI
nylons business.
The Chem Systems report says Du Pont would have had free access to ICI's
technical and commercial information on adipic acid during the long and
detailed discussions. It adds that demand for adipic acid, used to make
nylon polymer, is unlikely to recover to early 1990 levels.
Mr Wayne Barnacal, Du Pont's Teesside site manager, said the report was
wrong to suggest the company had used unexpected market deterioration to
justify the closures. The key reasons were the continuing downturn and the
big benefit of the joint venture.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941130

