FT944-2693

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (7): Many barriers swept
away - Transport deregulation in the European Union


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


The liberalisation of the European road haulage industry has made great
strides in recent years. Many of the barriers in what was once one of the
most highly regulated sectors have been swept away.
A progress report to the European Commission on the deregulation programme
published in July concluded that for the most part the liberalisation
process was producing benefits for the continent's economy.
'Given the importance of road haulage to the success of the economy . . .
the sector must continue to operate in as competitive a manner as possible,'
the 10-strong committee of inquiry said.
Where problems had arisen, the committee noted, they were attributable to
adverse economic conditions and the difficulties caused by the transition to
a freer transport climate,
These conclusions came as a relief to organisations such as the UK's Freight
Transport Association (FTA), representing 12,000 companies which make use of
road haulage as well as the hauliers themselves.
'The report tended to confirm that liberalisation was a good thing,' said
Chris Welsh, the FTA's Brussels representative. 'It confounded the critics
who were claiming there was a crisis in road transport.'
But there has been considerable change in the shape of the industry. In
countries where previously highly-controlled markets have been deregulated
the number of hauliers has increased sharply. In France, the number of
companies rose by 28 per cent between deregulation in 1986 and 1990 while in
Ireland the number of operators quadrupled in the seven years to 1993.
In countries with long-established liberal haulage regimes such as Belgium,
the UK and Sweden the number of operators has remained stable, the progress
report said.
In all markets small businesses continue to predominate, though a relatively
small number of the most active operators usually accounts for a
disproportionate market share.
In the UK, for example, 10 per cent of hauliers operate 60 per cent of the
vehicle fleet.
Two areas were highlighted by the committee as being of particular concern,
the need for 'a framework of harmonised standards to ensure fair
competition' and a stricter enforcement of the standards which already
exist. 'Unauthorised and illegal operations are a major distortion for the
market and need to be addressed urgently,' the report said.
The committee saw the greatest need for further harmonisation in the area of
qualifications for entering the transport profession, taxes and other
charges and working conditions.
This struck a chord with the Road Haulage Association, representing 10,000
UK hauliers.
It has long taken the view that 'the single European market in haulage was
failing to adjust quickly enough and uniformly to the liberalisation
enshrined in the Treaty of Rome'.
The inquiry committee called for a study to be made of the training methods
and professional examinations in use throughout the European Union.
It called for the establishment of a union-wide organisation to see that
standards were met. Training should include subjects such as information
technology, financial management and safety, it said.
It also called for a uniform standard to be set for the financial standing
of haulage businesses. Present diverse levels in use throughout the union
should be increased until they reach a uniform standard, the committee said.
This particular proposal was less acceptable to organisations such as the
FTA in a UK climate where government has attempted to reduce the amount of
red tape burdening business.
'We are concerned that people would pick up the negative points of the
report which refer to access to the professions,' said Mr Welsh. 'We argue
that we have adequate standards in Europe.'
But there is strong British support for the idea of greater harmonisation on
the level of charges imposed on transport businesses.
Haulage operators travelling to or through Belgium, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Germany and Luxembourg will have to pay a Pounds 1,000 annual
motorway tax per vehicle from next year.
Although operators based in these countries will also have to pay these
charges they are expected to receive a rebate on their vehicle excise duty
to compensate. Rebates have already been agreed for German and Danish
hauliers and are proposed in the other countries.
There will be no corresponding charge made by other EU member countries
although France, Spain and Italy already charge tolls on their motorways.
The result will be that British hauliers will pay for motorway use in most
EU countries while non-UK operators will have the free use of Britain's
roads.
On the subject of enforcement the committee of inquiry called for urgent
action. 'Lack of enforcement . . . is perhaps the single greatest problem
facing the (transport) sector,' it said.
It called for the application of information technology to produce documents
which are better protected against fraud and abuse; the sharing of
information between different regulatory organisations and countries; and
the more efficient monitoring of vehicle and container movements and
drivers' hours.
On-board computers could be used to maintain both driver and vehicle records
while, in future, roadside controls should be replaced with automatic
roadside reading of on-board records.
The committee also made a controversial appeal for the impounding of
vehicles when there had been a serious infringement of the regulations.
Impounding is standard policy as a means of controlling unauthorised parking
in towns but it would be more problematic, and involve greater costs, if
applied to international commercial vehicle movements.
It also urged that shippers should be made jointly liable with hauliers for
any infringements of EU regulations. At present it is only in Ireland,
Germany and Spain that shippers can be made liable if they employ
unauthorised operators. The committee called for this to be extended
throughout the EU.
Joint liability would also help to overcome the problem of legitimate
hauliers who are picked up for carrying overweight containers or hazardous
goods. The haulier usually does not know precisely what is in a sealed
container and is at the mercy of an unscrupulous or unthinking shipper who
may have loaded unauthorised goods or changed the details of the shipment.

The Financial Times


London Page III

941216

