FT941-16860

FT  07 JAN 94 / Leading Article: More shock, more therapy


The electoral success of Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky was not an infallible
prophecy. It was a sharp warning. The lesson to be drawn is not that shock
therapy has been tried and failed. It is that it has not really been tried,
that not trying has failed and that a shock therapy which just might succeed
must now be tried. What is needed is not more therapy and less shock, but
more shock and more therapy.
It has been obvious since the failure of the coup in August 1991 that reform
in Russia would enjoy but a short window of opportunity. If the opportunity
was let slip, the collapsed Soviet Union was likely to turn into a
simulacrum of the former Yugoslavia, but an order of magnitude bigger. Mr
Zhirinovsky's electoral success demonstrates that this danger is not a
theoretical one. If the Russian people do not begin to feel hope soon, they
may indeed elect a government of xenophobic reactionaries who would enjoy
the ability to blow up the planet.
The natural response to the cry of pain from the Russian electorate is to
blame its suffering on shock therapy. But it would be the wrong response.
Russians are not suffering from shock therapy. They are suffering from a
malady to which no therapy has yet been seriously applied. That malady is
the collapse of the Soviet political and economic system.
If voters are calling for a return to the past, there is no remedy to offer.
If they are calling for a better future, fast reform is the only remedy.
What, after all, do voters seem to want? They want more food. They want an
end to corruption. They want secure jobs. They want a currency they can
trust. None of these things is achievable without reform.
Rewarding prices
If consumers are to enjoy more food, farmers must enjoy rewarding prices,
while the distribution system must be made more competitive. If legal
business is to thrive, the old Soviet principle that everything is forbidden
which is not permitted must be replaced by the rule of law. If workers are
to have secure jobs, they must work for businesses that satisfy market
demand, not the planners. If the people are to possess a currency they can
trust, rather than one which loses 90 per cent of its value in a year, the
government budget must be financed in a non-inflationary way.
Achieving any of these changes demands radical reform. The slower the
reforms, the more slowly will come the benefits. In the meantime, Russia
would remain in economic chaos. That would not be anything new, since
half-hearted reform has, in effect, been the policy of the past two years.
Those compromises have demonstrably failed, both economically and
politically. If that is not warning enough, there are also the examples of
Ukraine and Romania, which have been reformed even more slowly and are in a
still more dreadful state.
The challenge is to devise and implement a programme of radical reform that
is also politically acceptable. Only close co-operation between Moscow and
the west can make that combination conceivable. Without western financial
support, there is probably no politically tolerable programme. Without
determination in Moscow, which has not been in evidence since the election,
nothing at all can be achieved. At present, however, both parties look
likely to fall short. Mr Yeltsin does not dare enough, while the west does
not seem to care enough.
Market economy
The core of such a programme must be acceleration of the move to the market.
To privatisation, the great success of the past two years, must be added
further rapid moves towards a legal basis for the market economy. There must
also be sufficient monetary discipline to provide a currency worth striving
for. An economy may survive inflation at 20 per cent a year. No economy can
thrive with inflation at 20 per cent a month.
Inflation is a monetary phenomenon. The Russian central bank's argument that
the monopolised economy rather than itself is mainly to blame for inflation
is nonsense. It should stop printing money. But since the government cannot
raise taxes to cover the demands upon it, that is at present impossible.
If the west wants the economic benefits of the shock, it must provide the
wherewithal to finance the therapy. In particular, it must help support the
incomes of workers who are already unemployed in fact, but may soon be
unemployed for all to see.
Russia's path to perdition starts off looking relatively comfortable, while
the path of hope is steep. It is the one that combines radical reform with
generous western finance of politically essential current expenditures,
including a social safety net. Designing the details of such a path can be
delegated to western international agencies. But the decision on whether or
not to follow it can only be taken by Mr Yeltsin and western heads of
government. They have been given a salutary warning. Either they act
decisively now or they risk turning an evident danger into a disaster.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940107

