FT944-2380

FT  16 DEC 94 / When the charm wears thin: Why Maurice Saatchi has angered
some shareholders


   By ROBERT PESTON and DIANE SUMMERS


Cabinet ministers in Her Majesty's government receive flowers from Maurice
Saatchi, paid for by Saatchi & Saatchi, every time they change jobs.
The chairman and founder of Saatchi & Saatchi has made a career - and a
personal fortune - out of charming the rich and powerful. Institutions as
diverse as the Conservative party, Mars and British Airways place their
advertising business with the firm, in part because of the personal
relationship between their top people and Mr Saatchi.
However, Mr Saatchi will today have to use all his persuasive powers to
prevent the Saatchi board - which contains such corporate notables as Sir
Peter Walters, former BP chairman, and Sir Paul Girolami, former Glaxo
chairman - from succumbing to shareholder pressure to have him removed.
The company's biggest shareholders, led by Mr David Herro, a 33-year-old
fund manager at the Chicago-based Harris Associates, have warned directors
that, if Mr Saatchi does not stand down at a board meeting today, they will
call an extraordinary meeting to force him out.
Some directors argue that Mr Herro represents only a minority of the group's
owners. But it is a substantial minority. Mr Herro's own fund controls 9.8
per cent of Saatchi's equity. His previous employer, the State of Wisconsin
Investment Board, controls 8.5 per cent and is backing his stand.
Other US funds with him are General Electric Pension Trust, with 6.5 per
cent, Tiger Fund Management, with 2 per cent, and Grantham Mayo, with 3 per
cent.
From the UK, unit trust group M&G - owner of 5.25 per cent - last week
joined Mr Herro in expressing considerable dissatisfaction with Mr Saatchi.
Mr Herro says that a further substantial shareholder has said it can be
counted alongside the dissidents. He believes that more than 40 per cent of
the group's investors are committed to ousting Mr Saatchi, and that a formal
poll would see the odds heavily stacked against his survival.
Carrying out such a poll, during the seven weeks before an extraordinary
meeting could be held, would do great damage to the company - and to morale
 -in a people business. For this reason, Mr Herro is convinced that the
board will 'do the right thing'.
Shareholders' ire has been aroused by several factors. For 10 years after
the company came to the stock market in 1975, investors who backed Mr
Saatchi and his brother made a lot of money. However, the shares have fallen
98 per cent against the market in the nine years since he stepped up from
chief executive to chairman.
His huge ambition - whose extreme manifestation was his never-consummated
plan in 1987 to buy Midland Bank and Hill Samuel merchant bank - was mostly
to blame.
Mr Saatchi was not content with being just an advertiser, albeit the world's
biggest one for a brief period after the 1986 acquisition of the US Ted
Bates agency. In a shopaholic's spending spree, Saatchi bought management
consultancy groups, public relations firms and a range of marketing
businesses, on the bogus theory that companies would want to purchase all
their media and consultancy requirements from a single purveyor.
To finance this expansion, he used the latest financial devices, including
issuing bonds committing the company to a substantial deferred cash payment.
The consequence was a near-disastrous postponement of the true cash cost of
these acquisitions to the turn of the decade - or the middle of possibly the
worst ever advertising recession.
The company escaped collapse only after a painful and complicated financial
reconstruction, which involved raising new money and reorganising the
balance sheet, in 1991.
The group also gained a down-to-earth chief executive, Mr Charles Scott, who
could control costs while Mr Saatchi concentrated on playing the elder
statesman, exploiting his legendary corporate contacts to win new business.
That was the theory until the end of last year, when the Saatchi board took
two actions that infuriated Mr Saatchi, according to his colleagues. On Mr
Scott's advice, the board agreed that the chairman and holding company staff
should vacate their stylish but expensive Mayfair head office - saving more
than Pounds 1m a year - to move in with the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising
subsidiary in London's Fitzrovia.
It was also decided that Mr Saatchi's enigmatic brother Charles - the much
vaunted 'creative' talent of the siblings - should leave the board.
Soon after that, a series of stories began appearing in newspapers about an
alleged feud between Mr Saatchi and Mr Scott, with Mr Saatchi reported to
believe that the 'bean counter' Scott had 'not delivered'.
It later emerged that Mr Saatchi had hired a personal public relations
adviser, Mr David Burnside, the pugnacious former public relations head of
British Airways.
Mr Herro, a supporter of Mr Scott, was outraged. 'My concern about Maurice
started with this extraordinary press campaign,' Mr Herro says. He became
even more furious when he learnt that Mr Saatchi had submitted Mr Burnside's
bill to the company. 'The company has told me it did not pay,' Mr Herro
says.
Meanwhile a debate was raging in the press about why Saatchi was doing worse
than rivals such as WPP. Was it poor operations management (Scott's
responsibility) or failure to win new clients (Maurice's role)?
Peace broke out between Scott and Saatchi in the spring, when the company
said both would stay on. As part of the settlement, Mr Saatchi appeared to
respond to the widespread investor campaign against long contracts for
public company directors. He dropped his five-year rolling contract worth
Pounds 625,000 a year for a three-year fixed-term arrangement, paying Pounds
200,000 annually. The company had become '100 per cent politically correct',
Mr Saatchi said at the time.
But Mr Saatchi's new package did not appear so PC to Mr Herro and other
shareholders when they learnt that a new 'super-option' package was being
negotiated for him, which breached guidelines laid down by the Association
of British Insurers, the fund management lobby group.
The company's remuneration committee, chaired by Sir Peter Walters, offered
Mr Saatchi options worth eight times his old salary of Pounds 625,000, which
would have given him a Pounds 5m profit in three years if the Saatchi share
price reached 300p (compared with 153 1/2 p yesterday).
The views of the company's biggest shareholders were solicited privately.
The unambiguous response from those controlling more than 40 per cent of the
shares was hostile.
Meanwhile, Mr Saatchi found himself isolated from shareholders, company
executives and directors on a different issue, that of whether his surname
should be dropped from the masthead of the holding company.
Many of them feel that like 'Thatcherism' - a brand that Mr Saatchi helped
to create - the 'Saatchi' name has passed its sell-by date for the holding
company, if not for the advertising subsidiary, Saatchi & Saatchi
Advertising Worldwide.
They feel that the development of subsidiaries such as Bates, which do not
have 'Saatchi' in their brand names, is stifled: when they win a client, the
success is usually described as a 'Saatchi' achievement.
Mr Saatchi, however, has told colleagues that removal of his name from the
holding company masthead would force his resignation.
Whether he has the luxury of choosing to go - rather than being forced out -
he will learn today. A colleague summed up the dilemma facing the board:
'Like Thatcher's colleagues, directors have to decide whether to put their
personal loyalty to him ahead of the good of the company.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

941216

