FT944-10920

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (29): World media zoom in on 150m households
 -Satellite television


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


As more than a dozen satellites swarm over Asian skies and India's
television audience expands towards 150m households by the turn of the
century, international entertainment and media companies are mounting a
space-age invasion of the country.
These are all making plans to piggyback Apstar II, a Chinese satellite that
will centre its beam over India, and some 14 new satellites to be
operational over Asia by 1996.
Together, the networks will challenge the near-monopoly that Star TV, the
pan-Asian satellite network now owned by media magnate Rupert Murdoch, has
enjoyed since it started beaming five channels to India in 1991.
Star's supremacy in the region will also be challenged from an unlikely
quarter. Doordarshan, India's state-owned TV network, has an advantage over
Star and other satellite networks because its main channels are accessible
through simple antennae and a base of 30m TV sets, giving it a formidable
reach of over 335m viewers.
Doordarshan, managed by socialist-minded bureaucrats, accustomed to taking
government orders, was certain that Star would never be able to match its
reach, especially in India's vast rural hinterland.
Reacting belatedly, the staid network has launched an ambitious
modernisation and expansion programme to increase its current six channels
to 21 in the next few years, and to bolster its flagging image.
Competition has already done wonders for Doordarshan's programming. When
Star failed to renew its contract with MTV, Doordarshan moved in, to review
two and a half hours of programming from the music video channel on its
metro channel. The launch of a new 'high-brow' channel with chat shows, and
live news programmes from the biggest names in Indian journalism this
October signals a welcome change.
The decision to schedule MTV, which has become a metaphor for all that is
'Western' (and thus 'undesirable'), is an indication of how desperately it
is trying to woo back the viewers it lost to Star.
Star TV kicked off a cultural revolution of sorts when it started
transmitting to India three years ago. Its five channels were a potpourri of
entertainment, sports, news, and sometimes Chinese language programmes. Much
of the programming made no sense to a majority of Indian viewers. But the
network seriously undermined the Indian government's stranglehold over
telecasting, especially news.
Embarking at around the same time on its economic liberalisation programme,
the Indian government was, on the one hand, encouraging the 'foreign
invasion' and the return of all things Western, and on the other battling
clumsily to ward off what was derisively termed the 'Coca Cola and MTV
culture'.
India's new middle classes, an estimated 300m, were, for the first time,
given a choice to view what they wanted - even if it was MTV - as opposed to
what the government decided was best for them.
The Indian government was particularly concerned about losing its grip on
the news, which it had previously carefully monitored and often
short-sightedly censored. It began to see that Doordarshan would no longer
be the powerful political propaganda tool it was when its monopoly was
unchallenged.
The state network's news bulletins were quickly upstaged by the BBC's slick
world service, with news on the hour offered through the Star network. The
government's helplessness in the face of the alien invasion was highlighted
when cable operators started offering PTV, the Pakistan television channel.
Cable operators are hardly an anti-national lot. Many of them heeded the
government's pleas to stop PTV broadcasts, but others decided to defy the
diktat and pander to the vast audiences for Pakistani soap operas.
The operators, mostly small businessmen and shopkeepers who diversified to
take advantage of the new business brought in by Star, hook several
households in a locality on to a satellite dish, for a small monthly fee
(Dollars 5-Dollars 10). The operators currently offer up to 20 channels, but
are gearing up to acquire more technical and sophisticated equipment to
handle the 100-odd channels likely to be available by 1996.
In September, the government promulgated an ordinance in a belated attempt
to regulate cable television. Under the Cable TV Networks (Regulation)
Ordinance, cable operators must be Indian citizens, and foreign investors
would have to limit their equity to 49 per cent. The ordinance makes it
compulsory for operators to offer at least two Doordarshan channels, and
empowers the competent authority to ban programmes 'in the public interest'.
The new rules, however, do not apply to the programmes of foreign satellite
channels which are received without using specialised decoders. It is
unlikely that networks like Star will do anything to antagonise the
governments of the countries they operate in, or the cultural or religious
sensibilities of the people in the region, for that matter. Which is why
Turner Broadcasting Corporation will exclude Porky Pig from its daily
cartoon channel to be aired in Indonesia, which is predominantly Moslem.
Responding to the increasing need for locally customised programming, Star
TV split its beam on October 15 to provide two services, one to India and
the Middle East and the other, to Greater China. It has also changed its
programme schedule to suit the split market.
Star's chief executive Mr Gary Davey has indicated that there will be a
seven-channel package for India soon, with more live sports programmes and
aggressive, more localised programming development.
Mr Davey, who is backed to the hilt by his boss Mr Murdoch, plans to use the
formula which turned around British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB), to increase
Star's flagging revenues. The difference in programming is already evident.
When Star failed to renew its contract with MTV, it launched Channel V, a
24-hour music video network laced with Hindi and other Asian languages. The
new channel has a nine-hour-a-day window for Indian audiences, and aims at
50 per cent local programming.
And Star's newest venture will be a tie-up with Zee TV, a Bombay-based Hindi
language channel - which Star relays and part-owns - to create additional
programming, and a second Hindi channel from India. Star launched its
24-hour movie channel, India's first pay channel in October. It has yet to
catch on, but the network hopes to offset some of its losses through the pay
channel.
With the cost of running the network estimated to be Dollars 150m, and a
very real threat to Star's dominance in the region looming large, the
network is working overtime to keep its Indian viewers hooked.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

941108

