FT941-5502

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: Edinburgh's new opera house - The stage will be larger
than Covent Garden's


   By JAMES BUXTON


The cynics who maintain that Edinburgh is only committed to the performing
arts during its annual festival would receive a shock if they ventured up to
Nicolson Street, not far from the city's Royal Mile. About 200 construction
workers are putting the finishing touches to a new opera house. The
Edinburgh Festival Theatre, as it will be called, will open to the public on
June 25 with a performance of Wagner's Tristan and Isolde by Scottish and
Welsh Operas.
People have been campaigning for the creation of an opera house in Edinburgh
since the late 1940s. Now Scotland's capital is to get an opera house
seating up to 1,900 people with a stage that will be slightly larger than
that of Covent Garden. It will meet all the modern requirements of comfort,
space and convenience for both audience and performers.
Although it will fulfill the technical needs of an opera house, its
promoters prefer to call it a lyric theatre. Despite its name it is not
under the wing of the Edinburgh International Festival, though it will be
used by the Festival to stage productions by international opera companies,
which Edinburgh's existing theatres have been unable to accommodate.
With the Festival Theatre open, Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet are to
double the number of weeks they spend in Edinburgh each year, and other
British opera and ballet companies will visit, along with drama companies
such as the Royal National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare Company. But
there will also be musicals, variety evenings, concerts and ice shows. Paul
Iles, the general manager, was previously general manager of the Grand
Theatre in Blackpool.
By spending about Pounds 21m Edinburgh will get a theatre that would have
cost about Pounds 50m or Pounds 60m to build from scratch, because the new
theatre is an upgrading and expansion of the old Empire Theatre, which was
first opened in 1892 and used for bingo since 1963. Its greatest asset is
the breadth of its auditorium, which puts the entire audience closer to the
stage than is normally possible in such a big theatre. The new project
leaves the auditorium largely unchanged.
However the architects, the Law and Dunbar-Naismith Partnership of
Edinburgh, have designed a much larger stage. There is a rear scene dock
which can either be separated from the main stage with an acoustic door for
the unloading of scenery, or opened up for exceptionally deep stage vistas.
The new stage is three times the size of its Edinburgh counterparts, the
King's Theatre or the Playhouse.
The upgrading has involved constructing a new stage house and a wider and
higher fly tower, building hospitality rooms alongside the auditorium and a
new glass entrance. Unfinished, the building already gives a impression of
spaciousness and light.
The Festival Theatre project became possible when the Empire Theatre came
onto the market at a knockdown price and the public and private sectors
coalesced under the prodding of Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise to fund the
project. About Pounds 16m has come from official bodies led by the local
authorities.
The private sector has put in Pounds 4m, with the Royal Bank of Scotland,
Scottish Power and United Distillers big corporate donors. The theatre will
be a non-profit distributing trust, and is raising the last Pounds 1m by
offering individual and corporate membership of a Founders Circle which will
provide priority booking for ten years in return for Pounds 2,500.
Iles will reveal the Edinburgh Festival Theatre's programme for its first
six months on April 7. But the key question is whether the city can absorb
the 20 per cent increase in theatre capacity which the new venue, with 68
separate productions in 1994, will bring.
Edinburgh already has a quarter of the seats that the West End of London
has, but only seven per cent of London's population. 'We will have to market
ourselves very hard,' Iles acknowledges.
The Festival Theatre will cooperate in programming with the other Edinburgh
venues such as including the Edinburgh Playhouse and the King's Theatre in
order to avoid obvious clashes between similar productions. But the theatres
are all in competition with each other. 'How things work out depends a lot
on how they respond to us. Every theatre could fail, including us,' says
Iles.
Some might think that adding more capacity at a time when several theatres
south of the border have closed is over-ambitious. But they may be
underestimating Edinburgh's determination to prove the cynics wrong.
Details of the Founders' Circle are available from Marianne Everett,
Edinburgh Festival Theatre, Nicolson Street, Edinburgh EH8 9BE. Tel 031 662
1112.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

940305

