FT941-4257

FT  11 MAR 94 / Government Bonds: US Treasuries fall sharply in late trading


   By PATRICK HARVERSON and CONNER MIDDELMANN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


After weakening in the morning on a higher gold price and a weak dollar, US
bonds dropped sharply yesterday afternoon.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year bond was down 1 1/4 at 91 11/32 ,
yielding 6.938 per cent, and the two-year note was down  3/32 at 99 3/8 ,
yielding 4.944 per cent.
A lack of economic statistics left the market without a clear direction at
the opening. In generally listless trading, dealers focused on a rise in the
gold price, and a decline in the dollar against leading European currencies
 -both deemed bearish for bonds. The market was also unnerved by rumours
that President Clinton was facing a political crisis because of the
Whitewater affair.
During the afternoon, however, prices turned decisively lower, triggered by
falls in the 30-year bond and the June bond futures contract below important
support levels.
True to the recent pattern, European government bonds firmed in the morning
but fell back in the afternoon on the back of weaker US Treasuries.
Traders could not identify a clear trigger for the weakness, although it was
exacerbated by rumours that the Bundesbank would revise its January M3 money
supply growth data upwards. At an annualised rate of 20.6 per cent in
January, M3 has already massively overshot its 4 to 6 per cent target range.
The market was also abuzz with talk of more hedge-fund selling, although one
observer pointed out that volume on the futures exchanges did not seem to
indicate any selling as dramatic as last week.
'We're still very much in a bear market,' said Mr Graham McDevitt, bond
strategist with market analysts IDEA. 'In the morning, the market traded up
on thin volume, but when prices fell, volume was huge,' he said. This
indicates that 'there is no one out there supporting the up-moves,' he said.
Moderately encouraging comments from senior Bundesbankers failed to stem the
late slide in bunds.
Bundesbank president Hans Tietmeyer said the pursuit of anti-inflation
policies did not mean interest rates should stay unchanged, and also
welcomed the recent pay deal in the engineering sector. However, he added
that inflation was still too high and the Bundesbank would continue tracking
M3 as a key indicator.
Bundesbank council member Hans-Jurgen Koebnick said easing monetary policy
in Germany would not be affected by a rise in US short-term rates. 'In
Germany . . . we expect inflation to fall, whereas there are fears of rising
inflation in the US. Domestic factors will primarily determine both the
tempo and the extent of the lowering of German rates.'
The dollar's weakness against the D-Mark also supported bunds. The June bund
futures contract on Liffe ended at 96.40, up 0.05 points on the day but
below its 97.01 high.
UK gilts largely tracked bunds, erasing their early gains to end little
changed. Index-linked bonds put on a strong performance in the morning but
fell in the afternoon, with traders reporting a large switch into
conventional stock. The June long gilt future ended at 112 5/8 , up 1/16 .
French bonds underperformed bunds, partly on disappointment that the Bank of
France left interest rates unchanged. The notional March bond future on
Matif fell 0.08 points to 125.34.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940311

