FT942-14275

FT  21 APR 94 / Wellcome critic on Pounds 250,000 extortion charge


   By JOHN MASON and ROBERT PESTON


A health charity official who has persistently criticised the activities of
Wellcome, the drug manufacturer, and is charged with demanding Pounds
250,000 with menaces from the company, appeared yesterday at London's
Horseferry Road magistrates court.
Mr Michael Wolfe, executive officer of the Herpes Association, was remanded
on unconditional bail until committal proceedings later in the spring.
The charge against Mr Wolfe relates to Pounds 250,000 in cash passed to him
by a senior Wellcome executive. The payment was made in August last year
after the two men went for a drive in London in the executive's car. Mr
Wolfe was arrested immediately after the payment was made.
Both Mr Wolfe and the Herpes Association have been persistent critics of
Wellcome's policy for marketing its herpes and cold sore drug treatments,
Zovirax.
Zovirax is Wellcome's biggest selling product by a significant margin,
accounting for more than a third of its Pounds 2bn annual turnover.
In September it launched an over-the-counter version of the drug in cream
form, for the treatment of cold sores. It spent an estimated Pounds 4.5m on
the launch.
The Herpes Association has accused Wellcome of 'hype and misinformation' in
exaggerating the threat posed by the virus to promote its product. It has
argued the herpes virus is an extremely common condition with less serious
implications for carriers than Wellcome's publicity material suggests.
Reporting restrictions in the case have been lifted at the request of Mr
Wolfe. This move was opposed by Wellcome.
Mr Wolfe has been an executive officer of the Herpes Association since 1985.
The main work of the association is to counsel herpes sufferers.
It has publicised research showing that about 95 per cent of adults are
infected with the virus - although the symptoms in most cases are dormant -
and that acute attacks are rare.
It has also promoted research saying that the use of Zovirax for facial cold
sores offers only marginal benefits and that the treatment of repeat
episodes of genital herpes has proved disappointing.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940421

