FT943-978

FT  27 SEP 94 / Hume will back Labour line over Irish unity


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Labour's commitment to campaign for Irish unity by consent will be bolstered
next week by Mr John Hume, leader of the nationalist SDLP, in a surprise
intervention in the party's debate on the Northern Ireland peace process.
Mr Hume, in an address to the party conference in Blackpool, will rally
support for Mr Kevin McNamara, shadow Northern Ireland secretary, in the
face of growing criticism of his pro-nationalist approach.
SDLP officials said that Mr Hume, a long-standing political ally of Mr
McNamara, would pay tribute to the 'responsible role' in the peace process
played by Labour's front bench.
The depth of concern about the party's existing policy was demonstrated
yesterday by the powerful conference arrangements' committee, which decided
to allow a number of emergency motions on Northern Ireland to be debated.
One of the motions, drawn up by the Independent Labour Publications pressure
group, calls for a full review of Irish policy in the light of the Downing
Street declaration and the IRA's open-ended ceasefire. Such a review would
raise the prospect of a more neutral Labour approach to Northern Ireland, in
line with comments by Mr Tony Blair since his election as party leader.
Some leading members of the moderate Ulster Unionist party have suggested
that the party's nine MPs might be willing to work with Labour after the
next election if Mr McNamara and the unity-by-consent formula were dumped.
Concern about Labour's nationalist approach is also spreading among MPs not
normally regarded as close participants in party debates on the issue.
Mr Mike Gapes, a member of the Commons foreign affairs committee, calls in
Co-operative News for a rethink on Northern Ireland, warning against 'glib
official slogans' such as unity by consent. He says 'Toytown trotskyist talk
of colonialism' and phrases such as 'self-determination for the Irish people
as a whole' can only worsen the province's problems.
The party's unity-by-consent policy has been under severe strain since the
IRA ceasefire. Mr Blair has given unequivocal support to the Downing Street
declaration and to the government's promise of a referendum in Northern
Ireland on constitutional changes.
However, Labour's formal conference agenda, drawn up before the IRA
ceasefire, contains only hardline nationalist resolutions.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940927

