FT941-17128

FT  06 JAN 94 / Affair that raises questions for party of family values: The
political fall-out for John Major after Tim Yeo's resignation


   By KEVIN BROWN


As Oscar Wilde might have said, losing one minister as a result of a sex
scandal looks like misfortune; losing two looks like carelessness.
Mr Tim Yeo, who resigned yesterday as minister of state for the environment,
had admitted being the father of a child born last year to an unmarried Tory
councillor.
The scandal of his extra-marital affair was less salacious than that with an
actress that contributed to the downfall of Mr David Mellor as national
heritage secretary in 1992. It is also likely to be less damaging, since Mr
Yeo was not a member of the cabinet, although he was a competent and popular
junior minister who might have gone further.
However, the events leading to Mr Yeo's resignation raise awkward questions
about the credibility of the government's campaign for traditional family
values. The affair will also reinforce concern among Tory backbenchers about
the political judgment of Mr John Major, the prime minister.
Mr Major stood by Mr Mellor until it was clear that he could not survive
because of the weight of criticism in the party and the press. He gave
similar support to Mr Michael Mates before he was forced to resign as
Norther Ireland minister because of his friendship with Mr Asil Nadir, the
fugitive head of Polly Peck.
Downing Street said nothing when Mr Yeo's extra-marital affair became
public, but the prime minister's silence was widely interpreted as a gesture
of support. It also emerged that Mr Major knew about Mr Yeo's relationship
before it was revealed in the media, further strengthening the impression
that it was not regarded as a resignation issue.
In all three cases, the prime minister's motives were a combination of
loyalty to ministers and a disinclination to allow the media to decide the
composition of the government.
Like Baroness Thatcher when she was prime minister, Mr Major has taken the
view that private behaviour need not affect a minister's suitability for
office if it is unrelated to their job.
However, the Yeo affair has left the prime minister looking indecisive just
when government strategists had hoped he would begin to demonstrate that his
authority had recovered from last year's battering over Maastricht.
The damage is not confined to Mr Major. Sir Norman Fowler, the Conservative
chairman, and Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, also gave Mr Yeo
public support - which now looks ill-judged.
Some Conservative backbenchers were saying yesterday that Mr Major should
have sacked Mr Yeo when the relationship became public on Boxing Day. The
prime minister would have then made it clear that he was determined to
pursue the traditional family values which were the focus of his speech to
the party conference in October.
That would have dispelled the air of hypocrisy which has clung to the
government since it emerged that a minister who had called for a reduction
in the number of single parent families had helped create one.
This was the factor which prompted criticism of Mr Yeo from party officials
in his Suffolk South constituency, where members were unimpressed by his
promise to take financial responsibility for the child.
There is a great deal of sympathy for Mr Yeo among Conservative
backbenchers. Mr Peter Bottomley, a former minister, said his departure was
'deeply regrettable'.
Mr Major also indicated, in a warm response to Mr Yeo's resignation letter,
that he could return to the government after a period of penance on the back
benches. This would be in line with the precedent set by the then Mr Cecil
Parkinson, who resigned from the cabinet in similar circumstances in 1983 -
but returned after the 1987 election.
Several other ministers rumoured to have had affairs will be waiting
nervously for the next blow to fall. Much appears to depend on luck.
Mr Steven Norris, transport minister, appeared doomed last year when
newspapers alleged he was involved with five mistresses. But he survived
when attention switched to the party conference and the publication of Lady
Thatcher's memoirs.
The only safety lies in the old political rubric: don't get caught. As Oscar
Wilde also said, there is no sin except stupidity, at least for politicians.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940106

