FT944-14548

FT  22 OCT 94 / Ulster Peace Process: Paisley calls move 'fresh IRA victory'


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


The Rev Ian Paisley condemned Mr John Major's speech yesterday and accused
the British prime minister, not for the first time, of reneging on his word.
In contrast to the warm welcome from across the community for Mr Major's
initiative to bring Sinn Fein into exploratory talks, a statement by Mr
Paisley - issued from the DUP's Belfast headquarters even before the prime
minister had made his address at the Europa Hotel  - described the speech as
'another victory for the IRA'.
If Ulster's jigsaw is ever to be complete, Mr Paisley and his Democratic
Unionist party represent one piece that still has to find a home.
There are no doubt some people in the province's isolated rural communities
who share this analysis. But as the peace process has inched forward, the
perception grows that it is Mr Paisley, rather than hardliners on the
nationalist side, who remains the obstacle to an agreement on a lasting
peace.
Mr Paisley has warned, often in apocalyptic terms, that the Downing Street
declaration and the ensuing peace process has put the union under threat.
He, more than other Protestant politicians, is implacably opposed to any
suggestion that Dublin has a role to play in Northern Ireland - the basis
for the cross-border institutions envisaged under the framework document now
under discussion between London and Dublin. As for reform of the 1920
Government of Ireland Act, this is almost an article of faith.
There are some who believe that Mr Paisley's deputy, the MP Mr Peter
Robinson, may yet emerge as the voice of reason in broking a way to bring Mr
Paisley in from the cold. But if that is the case, Mr Robinson's response to
yesterday's announcement did not suggest a change of heart.
Increasingly Mr Paisley appears out of step. While Mr Major has assiduously
courted the support of Mr James Molyneaux's Ulster Unionists, he has made
little effort to win over Mr Paisley, whose intemperate outbursts,
culminating in his expulsion from Number 10 on September 7, have made him
appear increasingly isolated.
The tacit backing of Mr Molyneaux has been crucial in determining the pace
at which Mr Major has proceeded. Even yesterday, in a statement aimed
largely at nationalist opinion, Mr Major held out something for the
unionists, with the proposal to restore what he called 'local
accountability'. Dublin welcomed the proposal, but emphasised that this
would be part of an overall agreement.
Exactly how Mr Major's proposed assembly will be different from, and more
durable than, earlier failed experiments in local administration is hard to
imagine. Here again, unionists are split. The DUP has long favoured a
complete devolution of powers, but is boycotting the talks being held with
Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland minister. Mr Molyneaux on the other
hand has long argued that devolution is a dilution of the union and a step
towards separation.
The road to a successful agreement is still strewn with pitfalls. If the
main challenge for both Dublin and London is to get the Ulster Unionists and
the moderate nationalist Social Democratic and Labour party together, moving
ahead without Mr Paisley is fraught with danger.
It is doubtful that Mr Paisley and his supporters can cause the massive
union disruption of the 1970s strike. But the heady Paisley cocktail of
unionism and fundamentalist Protestantism still commands considerable
popular support, particularly in rural areas of Antrim and North Down, his
stronghold.
In Dublin at least, officials believe the next big hurdle to peace is to win
the acquiescence, if not the explicit support, of Mr Paisley. The danger for
Mr Molyneaux is that with Mr Paisley outside the process, Mr Molyneaux will
face a barrage of attack. If the peace talks fail, Mr Paisley could once
again emerge as the surviving stalwart of unionist interests.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941022

