FT941-17053

FT  06 JAN 94 / Kmart to offer shares in its specialty retail subsidiaries


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Kmart, the US retailing giant which is under pressure to revitalise its
flagging financial performance, has announced that restructuring charges
aimed at improving profitability would wipe Dollars 1.3bn (Pounds 877m) off
pre-tax profits in the year to January 26.
The company warned that the effect of the charges, translating into Dollars
850m after tax, would combine with disappointing sales to produce a slump in
earnings to a level 'well below' the previous year's net income of Dollars
941m.
But it tempered the bad news with a plan to sell shares in four of its
specialty retailing subsidiaries in targeted stock offerings, aimed at
realising the hidden value of these relatively small parts of the business.
The group's shares fell Dollars  1/2 to close at Dollars 21.
The Dollars 1.3bn restructuring charge, which comes in addition to
previously announced after-tax charges of Dollars 450m relating to the
disposal of the PACE Membership Warehouse and PayLess Drug Stores
operations, will go mainly towards the cost of closing, relocating or
refurbishing Kmart's discount stores in the US and Canada.
Kmart is already entrenched in a store renewal programme announced in
February 1990, but that plan is now being expanded in an attempt to
invigorate sales.
Mr Joseph Antonini, chairman and chief executive, said discount store
profits fell in 1993 because clothing sales were flat and consumers traded
down to lower-margin goods. In addition, profits at the group's Builders
Square subsidiary were hit by severe storms last winter, the PACE membership
warehouse operation incurred an Dollars 87m operating loss in the first nine
months, and the group suffered a higher interest charge.
As part of the plan to revitalise the group, Kmart will raise cash by
selling shares representing 20-30 per cent of the equity of its four niche
retailing subsidiaries: Builders Square, OfficeMax, The Sports Authority and
Borders-Waldenbrooks.
Kmart's existing shares will become shares in the discount store operation,
with the new shares in each of the four subsidiaries trading separately.
Kmart intends to retain majority stakes in all four companies, at least
initially. The scheme is similar to that used by Ralston Purina, the animal
feed manufacturer, which issued shares in its Continental Baking subsidiary.
Mr Antonini said: 'By focusing on five strong businesses and enhancing our
financial flexibility, Kmart Corporation will be positioned for improved
strategic and financial performance in the highly competitive retail markets
of the 1990s.'
Lex, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940106

