FT942-16283

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (7): Privatisation winding
down - Argentina


   By JOHN BARHAM


Argentina's great privatisation bonanza that helped revive its capital
markets, is winding down. Privatisations are not entirely over. The
government still retains substantial minority holdings in the privatised
companies that it will float on local and international stock markets.
But the financial industry has replaced privatisation as one of the
principal magnets attracting international funds to finance Argentina's
external deficits. Argentina is expected to need Dollars 12bn in foreign
capital this year. Much of it will be raised by private companies or
channeled into equity markets.
However, the rise in US interest rates in March affected Argentine assets
more than other countries in the region, underlining the fragility of its
external financing. The assassination of Mr Luis Colosio, Mexico's leading
presidential candidate, brought further turbulence, wiping out all this
year's gains in share prices.
Mr Steven Darch, managing director of Buenos Aires' Mariva merchant bank,
says: 'Argentina is being bridged by international cash flow. (There is)
growth in the local market, but the real boost has come from international
cash flows, a lot of which is not stable.'
But he says Argentina is beginning to attract 'long-term financial and
strategic investors looking for a 7-10 year horizon'. He says these
investors, plus entirely new markets will provide the other end of the
financing bridge.
For instance, the introduction in July of a private pension fund system will
bring greater stability and breadth to the market. Contributors will soon
start channeling Dollars 200m-300m a month into financial markets. Baring
Securities forecasts pension fund assets at Dollars 30bn in 2000. And the
World Bank in March approved a Dollars 500m, 15-year backstop credit line,
the first of its kind, to support longer term finance for the private
sector.
New boutiques have sprung up in response to changing market conditions and
established houses are struggling to adapt the new market context. One new
boutique is Buenos Aires Capital Partners, set up by former JP Morgan
executives, that started out as an adviser to the government and buyers of
privatised companies.
Mergers and acquisitions are likely to emerge as a staple activity for
investment banks. Mr Timothy Gibbs, president of Buenos Aires Capital
Partners, notes a 'significant increase in interest in Argentina by
international companies, as strategic investors get comfortable with
Argentina and Latin America as a whole'.
Recent months have seen a number of acquisitions by multinationals such as
Cadbury-Schweppes and Procter and Gamble as well as companies from Brazil,
Chile and Venezuela. However, the M&A market is unlikely to explode into
life. One reason is a lack of targets. Few Argentine companies turn over
more than Dollars 100m a year. And owners, often families, give up control
of their companies only as a last resort.
Inevitably though, increased competition, lack of capital and modern
management techniques are likely to force a far greater restructuring of the
corporate scene than hitherto.
Linked to this is the resistance of private companies to raise capital on
the equity market. Little more than a dozen companies have gone public in
the past three years, even though investors will pay high prices for almost
any stock. Many medium-sized companies are unviable, while those with a
future are in the throes of restructuring and not ready for the market.
For the same reason, few Argentine companies have imitated Chilean and
Mexican companies in approaching the US equity market with ADR programmes. A
Buenos Aires banker comments that 'ADRs will pick up speed. The first phase
is the placement of debt, which is where we are now. Next will come more
IPOs locally. Only later on are we going to see a lot of ADR issues'.
Hyperinflation in 1989-90 wiped out companies' liabilities, giving them
considerable headroom to raise debt. The CNV securities commission
authorised companies to issue Dollars 523m in bonds in 1991, Dollars 1.88bn
in 1992, and Dollars 5.3bn last year. This has raised concern about
deteriorating credit risk and poor use of funds, although optimists insist
that Argentine companies are still undergeared by international standards.
Decades of neglect have left Argentina with a deficient infrastructure,
which will require substantial investments in future years. But Mr Gibbs
says banks are still unwilling to make long-term loans to Argentina. This
could mean that capital markets will play a greater role in project finance
than elsewhere.
However, as Argentine securities approach classification as investment
grade, long-term bank finance may become available. Projects may be financed
through a blend of conventional lending and imaginative capital market
instruments. The brave new world of Argentine finance will not be for
everyone. Senior staff at even large Argentine banks often have a poor grasp
of high finance.
Argentina has 170 banks and an equal number of brokerages, few of which have
much of a future. Too many are small and under-capitalised, presenting a
constant threat to the wider market.
Argentina still lacks a credible market regulator and systematic enforcement
of disclosure and trading rules. The sacking in March of Mr Martin Redrado
as president of the CNV on political grounds sent a disquieting signal to
the international financial system.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940411

