FT941-13125

FT  27 JAN 94 / Scott told of move to rein in Customs


   By JIMMY BURNS


A senior Department of Trade official tried to delay Customs and Excise
investigations into illegal arms exports because he was concerned about
safeguarding British trade with Iraq, the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry heard
yesterday.
Mr Michael Petter, the former head of the Middle East, Near East, and North
Africa exports branch at the DTI, said the view that Iraq should not be
allowed 'to go down the tubes' was shared more widely in Whitehall.
'It was the view of the DTI and the ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) which had invested heavily in Iraq. It was using one's
intelligence about the size of UK plc in the (Iraqi) market,' he said.
Mr Petter, now an assessor for Queen's Awards to Industry, said he had
wanted to delay the Customs investigations into the Iraqi supergun and the
exports of machine tools in June 1990 after the British ambassador to
Baghdad had warned of the potential damage to UK-Iraqi trade.
But he said that the proposed approach to Customs had been opposed first by
Foreign Office officials and then more widely in Whitehall.
Pressed by Lord Justice Scott to indicate whether his view about Customs may
have reflected orders from DTI ministers, Mr Petter assumed responsibility
for his actions.
'I don't think I appreciated as I ought to have done the constitutional
point about the independence of Customs,' Mr Petter said.
Whitehall documents made available to the inquiry show a growing awareness
from 1988, based on intelligence information, of Iraqi attempts to use trade
with the UK to build up its military capability.
Mr Petter recommended in August 1988, however, that officials should lift
their restrictions on the export of British machine tools after 'skimming
over very fast' intelligence reports and taking into account only the
interests of British trade.
Questioned repeatedly by Lord Justice Scott how he could justify his actions
as a civil servant, Mr Petter said: 'I felt that the whole of our trading
relationship was being driven by this problem of Iraqi procurement.'
The hearings were adjourned until tomorrow.
Due to a transcription error, yesterday's report on the Scott inquiry gave
June 19 1990 as the date of a meeting chaired by Mr Douglas Hurd, the
foreign secretary. The date of the meeting was July 19 1990.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940127

