FT942-14574

FT  20 APR 94 / South African Elections: God - and realpolitik - bring in
Buthelezi / What lay behind Zulu leader's decision to end his poll boycott


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


'It's just like a dream. Really like a dream.' For years, Anglican
Archbishop Desmond Tutu has spoken for the South African nation at great
moments in its history, and yesterday was no exception.
Outside the room where South Africa's top political leaders had just signed
a last-minute peace deal bringing the Inkatha Freedom party into next week's
elections, he was unashamedly moved: 'To all of us, it just seemed totally
impossible that this would happen. What words can we use except just to say,
thank God?'
He might have added that God moves in mysterious ways - and that so does
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Inkatha leader, who yesterday executed a
dramatic climbdown on virtually all of his constitutional and political
demands and agreed to fight an election at less than a week's notice,
despite the huge practical and logistical disadvantages which that imposes
on his party.
Inkatha negotiators involved in the talks, which were completed at lightning
speed after months of fruitless wrangling, are at a loss to offer a fully
coherent explanation for Chief Buthelezi's change of heart. Speaking
privately, they cite two factors as central: the role of religion (the chief
is a devout Christian, as are most South Africans); and the intervention of
a deus ex machina in the form of Prof Washington Okumu, the Kenyan mediator
who brokered the deal, and who is also deeply religious.
Chief Buthelezi delivered a eulogy to Prof Okumu just before signing the
agreement, which will entrench the position of Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini
in the constitution, but in only the vaguest of terms. All other
constitutional issues - including Inkatha's demand for federalism - will be
left to international mediation only after the election.
Those present at the talks said much of the credit goes to Prof Okumu, a
close friend of Chief Buthelezi for more than 20 years (they met at a prayer
breakfast in the US) who also knows the other two main protagonists - Mr
Nelson Mandela, African National Congress leader, and President FW de Klerk
 -and is a fellow African with a healthy working knowledge of the
continent's disaster stories.
'Okumu read him the African future. He told him, you're staring into the
abyss,' said one participant. Others said it was their shared religion which
explains the deal. And Chief Buthelezi himself cited the intervention of
God, saying he would not have met Prof Okumu to hear his mediation proposals
if the Zulu leader's aircraft returning him to Natal had not been forced to
turn back last Friday to Lanseria airport near Johannesburg where the
professor was waiting. 'It was as though God had prevented me from leaving -
as though Jonah had been brought back from the whale,' he said.
His advisers give a similar mystical explanation. But there seems a fair
chance that shrewder political cal-culations were also involved.
'Chief Buthelezi was thoroughly receptive when someone came along and
offered him a way out,' says a participant. 'The ground was already fertile
for Okumu,' he adds, noting that Chief Buthelezi may have come under
pressure from King Goodwill to secure his position or lose the king's
backing for the boycott.
Prof Okumu was a member of the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy, a
coalition of Kenyan opposition parties which led the calls for President
Daniel arap Moi to accept a multi-party system.
Chief Buthelezi yesterday outlined a flurry of meetings and phone calls
between Prof Okumu and the three protagonists to the conflict which
culminated at a 'Jesus rally' held in Durban on Sunday to pray for peace in
Natal. This was attended by Chief Buthelezi, Mr Jacob Zuma, ANC negotiator,
and Mr Danie Schutte, government negotiator, who took the occasion to study
a draft of yesterday's accord.
Mr Mandela and the ANC were initially said to be lukewarm about the
mediation effort. ANC hardliners - and, strangely enough, some members of
the South African government - seemed disappointed by the deal, on the
principle that Chief Buthelezi ought to have been crushed rather than
accommodated.
'The coup de grace was about to be delivered to Chief Buthelezi,' says one
of those close to the talks. 'Some wish it had been.'
This fact, and the prospect of electoral competition from Chief Buthelezi in
Natal, could explain the rather grim faces of most ANC and government
negotiators at the victory press conference.
Inkatha will certainly take votes away from Mr de Klerk's National party in
Natal province which includes Chief Buthelezi's KwaZulu 'homeland' - though
there is a chance that the two parties could form a post-election pact to
deny the ANC control of the province; and the ANC itself will be denied the
victory there which an IFP boycott would have guaranteed.
Inkatha will be disadvantaged by its short election campaign, but it could
still get 30 per cent or more of the vote in Natal. It is a disciplined
organisation which can get its message out rapidly through the system of
village chiefs which it controls. And King Goodwill's endorsement of the
elections - delivered yesterday - will be heeded by many of his 9m subjects.
The Inkatha leader has, after all, already been campaigning for months: he
has been in the news almost daily stoking ethnic loyalty to Inkatha, and
this could still pay off.
This may have been Chief Buthelezi's game plan all along: to hold out until
the very last moment, cornering as much publicity as possible along the way.
If so, it was a strategy which cost at least 500 lives in the past six
weeks.
Violence is likely to continue - probably at undiminished levels -
throughout the polling and even afterward. Indeed, Archbishop Tutu's dream
could still turn to nightmare: Chief Buthelezi could refuse to accept the
election result, citing the intimidation which will certainly occur.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940420

