FT941-12835

FT  28 JAN 94 / CBI seeks reform of EU subsidy policy


   By ANDREW BAXTER


The Confederation of British Industry yesterday unveiled a six-point plan to
reform competition policy in the European Union. It also called for the
European Commission to be given more effective powers to control state
subsidies.
The CBI's call is part of its wider review of EU law. The confederation
wants to save unnecessary cost and effort for companies and regulators.
Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, said an efficient and effective
competition policy was vital for the single market, but 'companies too often
meet delay and legal uncertainty when they seek to clear their business
plans with the commission'.
Mr Laurence Elks, of the legal firm Nabarro Nathanson, said administration
of EU merger policy was 'moving in the right direction'.
However, the prompt and realistic approach to decision-making under the
commission's three-year-old merger taskforce and its fast-track approach to
certain joint ventures needed to be emulated across the remainder of the
union's competition enforcement.
Mr Elks chaired a group of CBI members which put forward the six-point plan.
It advocates:
Applying EU competition rules only where business agreements have a genuine
effect on trade between member states.
Excluding agreements which are insignificant in terms of their competitive
effects from possible prohibition under the Treaty of Rome.
Reflecting commercial needs rather than bureaucratic convenience in
so-called 'block exemption regulations' which cover entire categories of
agreements, such as patent licensing and franchising.
Limiting commission interference in 'vertical' agreements, such as those
covering distribution or purchasing, to those where the businesses involved
have real power on the relevant market.
Directing action under the treaty only against dominant companies which are
genuinely abusing their market power.
Respecting the rules of natural justice and the rights of defence when the
commission is enforcing competition law.
The CBI says EU policy on state subsidies is broadly on the right lines in
encouraging a shift away from supporting particular business sectors to
schemes aimed at assisting needy regions. But the execution of policy must
be improved to make competition fair, it says.
Editorial comment, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940128

