FT943-1005

FT  27 SEP 94 / US health reform lost for this year


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


The centrepiece of President Bill Clinton's domestic agenda, reform of the
US healthcare system, was last night formally declared lost for this year by
the man who had fought hardest to keep it alive.
Pronouncing what has been obvious for the best part of a month, Senator
George Mitchell of Maine, Democratic majority leader in the Senate, conceded
that not even a skeletal bill, stripped of all the president's most
ambitious plans, had a chance of passing Congress in the two weeks before
the recess for Congressional elections in November.
Speaking in New York last night, the president said he was 'disappointed',
but added: 'Our mission will continue.'
The House of Representatives had given up hope of a bill some weeks ago, but
Mr Mitchell had stubbornly refused to do so while a bipartisan group of
Senate moderates was seeking a politically saleable, modest, alternative.
That effort is also now doomed, as many of its protagonists have publicly
accepted.
Mr Mitchell said that the final straw had come last week when the Republican
leaders in Congress told the president they would block approval of the
Uruguay Round trade agreement if Mr Mitchell insisted on bringing a
healthcare bill to the floor.
When he announced, earlier this year and to universal surprise, his decision
not to seek re-election in November, Senator Mitchell pledged to strive
might and main to pass a healthcare bill. His disappointment, then, is as
great as that of Mr Clinton and his wife, Hillary, a leading architect of
the president's proposals. They deserved 'enormous credit' for their
efforts, Mr Mitchell said last night.
Prospects of any such legislation next year depend heavily on the outcome of
the November elections. Predicted Republican gains, including control of
either the Senate or the House, do not augur well. Even so, partly for
tactical reasons, Senator Robert Dole, the Republican minority leader, had
proposed a bill by his party, mostly directed at reform of health insurance.
However, the Republican obstruction of healthcare reform, allied to
comparable attempts to frustrate other legislation, do give Mr Clinton and
the Democrats arguments for the congressional campaigns. The Republican view
is that this is more tolerable than having the Democrats go to the country
with great legislative success to flourish.
The administration's bill was laid before Congress a year and four days ago
by Mr Clinton, with great fanfare and considerable initial support by the
public. Its failure may be ascribed to systemic factors above and beyond
pure political partisanship.
The original blueprint, seeking to extend, by the end of the century,
insurance coverage to the estimated 37m Americans now unprotected was both
complex and controversial. Several key components, such as the creation of
insurance purchasing alliances, ran into heavy fire and the whole plan was
attacked for the controls it would have vested in the federal bureaucracy.
Special interest groups, representing the medical and insurance industries
and small businesses, poured hundreds of millions of dollars into lobbying
and advertising against the bill. This helped turn public opinion and
produced great divisions in Congress. By midsummer, four committees of the
House and Senate had recommended to their full chambers assorted legislation
 -but the differences were huge.
In August, Senator Mitchell introduced his own bill, a much lesser affair
than Mr Clinton's, so as to bridge the gaps. But the House, unwilling to act
before the Senate, delayed crucial votes. Congress then became consumed by
the crime bill.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940927

