FT942-12792

FT  28 APR 94 / Nigerian row worsens over fuel crisis


   By PAUL ADAMS


   LAGOS


Nigeria's military government has passed the blame for Nigeria's chronic
shortages of domestic fuel onto the state-owned Nigerian National Petroleum
Corporation (NNPC), as the crisis in the nation's oil industry worsens.
An ultimatum, late on Tuesday night, from Lt-Gen Oladipo Diya, chief of
general staff, threatened 'very drastic measures to redress the situation'
if the NNPC failed to ease the scarcity within a week. It is unclear what
the regime is threatening. What is more, the corporation is a parastatal
monopoly supplier under the direct control of the government since it
dismissed the NNPC board last year.
The government says that a tanker of fuel is expected to unload at Apapa
dock this week, but this is described by industry experts as 'a sticking
plaster not a cure'.
Queues for fuel in Lagos are up to a quarter of a mile long and some
motorists have become used to sleeping overnight while they wait. All of
Nigeria's refineries, which had been working well below capacity for some
time, stopped producing last month.
The black market price has reached about N12 a litre (about 25 US cents) for
petrol. Fuel at the official price of N3.25 a litre is almost unobtainable.
When tankers reach filling stations, the often violent scramble and the
increasing use of jerry cans to buy and hoard fuel are making them extremely
dangerous. Several people have been reported killed this week in fires at
petrol stations in the area around Lagos.
NNPC has oil refineries in Kaduna; it has been producing almost no fuel
since a fire last June; Warri, which is closed for long overdue maintenance
until at least July; and Port Harcourt, which has just returned to service
after being sabotaged by striking workers in February. Experts believe Port
Harcourt is still well below capacity and cannot meet domestic demand.
NNPC has been criticised by the private sector and international donors as
corrupt and inefficient. Smuggling of Nigerian fuel is common, encouraged by
the large price differential in neighbouring francophone Africa.
International oil companies say that the shortage has been caused by NNPC
offering unrealistic terms to supply imports.
But the root of the corporation's problems is under-funding.
'For years the government has plundered NNPC's funds and it is now turning
round and blaming the company because it has no money,' according to a
banker in Lagos.
The government faces acute problems in the upstream oil industry as well.
Last week Shell Nigeria, which produces half of the country's nearly 2m
barrels of oil a day, warned that the government's failure to pay its share
of the joint venture costs was sending the industry, which accounts for 95
per cent of all export earnings, into a downward spiral. The government's
arrears to the oil companies have been more than Dollars 500m (Pounds
342.4m) since last year and the industry has stopped all drilling and
development work, leading to a gradual decline in capacity and a probably
cut in the Opec quota.
Shell has also detailed a growing problem of lost production due to
community unrest in the oil producing areas leading to violent attacks on
company staff and plant.
These 'shut-ins' have caused deferred or lost production of 150,000 barrels
a day of oil in Shell' s operations alone during the past week.
The unrest is fanned by the government's failure to provide even basic
infrastructure in the area which produces nearly all of its revenue. The oil
companies are bearing the brunt of the attacks from increasingly militant
youth leaders who back up growing demands for compensation and facilities
with violence.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940428

