FT944-2358

FT  16 DEC 94 / Government plays for time on rec bids


   By MICHAEL SMITH and DAVID WIGHTON


The government said yesterday it would retain its 'golden' shares in the
regional electricity companies until March 31 1995, making impossible the
completion of a potential takeover by Trafalgar House, the conglomerate, of
Northern Electric before then.
The statement was viewed in the City as a stalling tactic while ministers
considered the political implications of a bid. It strengthened the view of
some analysts that a bid might be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. 'The government may be unwilling to make the final decision on
such a politically sensitive takeover itself,' said one.
Trafalgar House said yesterday that any offer would not be financed by
another rights issue. It is thought that Northern shareholders would be
offered high-yielding convertible shares with a cash alternative
underwritten by Hongkong Land, Trafalgar's 25 per cent shareholder.
Trafalgar shares added 1 1/2 p to 73 1/2 p yesterday after it announced
better-than-expected full-year figures. Pre-tax profits were Pounds 45.6m
compared with a loss of Pounds 347m in 1992-93.
Northern Electric is thought to have turned down a request to meet Trafalgar
board members because the potential predator has made no formal proposals.
Trafalgar announced on Wednesday it was considering a bid. Northern
yesterday requested an inquiry into the recent sharp rises in its shares.
The Stock Exchange said it was already 'carrying out inquiries into the
circumstances surrounding trading in the shares'.
Shares in Northern fell 26p yesterday to 980p yesterday, but most of the
other 11 regional electricity companies (recs) rose further. The highest
rises were at Midlands Electricity, up 32p to 834p, and East Midland
Electricity, 29p higher at 795p.
The political sensitivity of the possible bid was underlined when Mr Martin
O'Neill, Labour energy spokesman, said Trafalgar was attracted to Northern
because of a slack regulatory regime enjoyed by recs. He called for any bid
to be referred. 'The MMC should be laying down ground rules for the future
ownership of the recs once the government's special share has expired.'
Trafalgar House is still thought likely to go ahead with a bid. Although it
has not ruled out launching an offer this year, the likelihood is that it
will wait until January.
Mr John Deane, finance director of Southern Electric, who suggested earlier
this week that his company would consider mergers with other recs, yesterday
ruled out bidding for Northern. 'We would not want to get into a competitive
bid,' he said.
Speaking about Trafalgar's results, Mr Simon Keswick, chairman, said: 'Much
progress has been made and the company is well on the way to achieving a
framework of strong central financial discipline combined with delegated
operational authority.' He said that Trafalgar was committed to developing
'a portfolio of investments in infrastructure projects'.
It is thought Trafalgar will argue that a takeover of Northern would provide
it with the cashflow and additional skills to take advantage of the growth
of design, build and operate schemes in Asia.
Observer, Page 19
Lex, Page 20; Trafalgar result, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941216

