FT943-791

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (11): Japan and US
turn away from Europe - Inward investment


   By GILLIAN TETT


When the British goverment heard last week that NEC, the large Japanese chip
maker, would build a Pounds 530m advanced semi-conductor plant in Scotland,
it had reason to feel some autumn cheer.
For after months of fierce lobbying from US and British authorities, the
news that NEC had chosen Scotland as a site provided a powerful boost to
Britain's attempts to maintain its position in the global investment game.
But as the industry digests the implications of NEC's decision, the real
question absorbing the authorities is: how many other Japanese companies can
still be persuaded to choose Europe as an investment location? For, though
recent economic indicators suggest that global investment is now starting to
pick up again, fears are growing among European governments that the wave of
foreign direct investment (FDI) that occured in the European Community
during the late 1980s may now be drying up.
The chief concerns centre on the US and Japan - hitherto the largest outside
participants in the European investment game. Between 1986 and 1991, for
example, US investment represented 25 per cent of FDI into the EU, according
to recent European Commission research. Japan was the next largest outside
investor, accounting for 13 per cent of FDI.
The lion's share of these inflows was directed at the UK - between 1986 and
1991, Britain attracted 45 per cent of total FDI in the EU, or about two
thirds of total US investment and over half of the total Japanese
investment. The resulting 68 'greenfield' US manufacturing plants and 59
Japanese plants established in this period not only created some 18,500 jobs
but turned Japanese companies into household names in parts of the UK.
France was the next biggest player, accounting for 13 per cent of total FDI
and attracting the, second largest slice of US investment. Meanwhile,
Germany, which otherwise attracted only a relatively small share of the
total FDI, was the second most favoured site for Japanese investors,
attracting 24 new manufacturing plants, primarily in the Nordrhein-Westfalen
region.
But after accelerating in the late 1980s, the investment flow appears to
have slowed in recent years. One reason has been the depth of the Japanese
recession - a recent United Nations report, for example, indicated that
outflows from Japan shrank to Dollars 12bn last year, down from Dollars 48bn
in 1990.
But another factor fuelling European fears is that the global priorities of
the Japanese and US may now be shifting. The recent North American Free
Trade agreement has left Mexico increasingly attractive as a production site
for North American firms. New opportunities in China are also encouraging
Japanese companies to switch their investment attentions there and to other
part of Asia - a recent survey by the Export-Import department in the Bank
of Japan, for example, suggested that China was now regarded as the most
favoured investment target by Japanese companies, followed by Indonesia and
the US. Ireland ranked fourth in the survey, while Germany and the UK ranked
seventh and ninth respectively.
The opening up of the eastern European countries has created potential rival
production locations that are close to west European markets at a fraction
of the labour costs.
Optimists point out that the recent drop in Japanese investment is
inevitable, since much of the 1980s boom was generated by a need to 'catch
up' in European markets. And indeed recent evidence suggests that Japanese
and US companies still have little intention of abandoning Europe, not least
because the advantages of retaining a production foothold in the single
market.
Although recent European-wide figures remain elusive, because countries have
been measuring FDI differently, the number of new FDI projects in the UK,
for example, rose to a record level of 400 last year, after falling from 350
in 1990 to around 300 in 1993, according to the department and trade
industry. Within this overall picture, Japanese investment accounted for 30
projects last year, compared with 37 in 1990. But US projects rose to 187,
well up from their levels earlier in the decade.
Nevertheless, Invest in Britain Bureau, the main UK government's main inward
investment promotion agency, suggests that, irrespective of the numbers, the
pattern of investment is likely to change. With most of the big US companies
already established in the UK, the next wave of US investment is likely to
involve smaller projects, while Japanese investors are expected to move
towards supplier and sub-contractor activities - or even joint ventures.
'There has been a change in the nature of projects. More and more projects
are now expansions of existing investment rather than new investment coming
in,' says the IBB.
Meanwhile, new players have also been emerging, particularly from far
eastern countries like Thailand, Malaysia and Korea. Regions like Northern
Ireland have been a particularly favoured target for these flows. Two Korean
companies - Carmen and Daesung - for example, have also recently announced
they are to invest in the province. Texmaco, an Indonesian-based man-made
fabrics specialist, has also announced it is to set up a plant. Meanwhile,
Hualon, a Taiwanese company recently won permission to build a new Pounds
160m textile plant outside Belfast, helped by British government aid.
Elsewhere, Sammi, a wholly owned subsidiary of Korean audio speaker
manufacturer Sammi Sound Technology Corporation, recently announced that it
was setting up a new factory in Cumbria, joining three other Korean firms -
Samsung, Goldstar and Inkel - who have also settled in North-east England.
The DTI itself points out that the overall impact of this new far eastern
investment is still small, in comparison with the big players like the US.
But the signs are that other European governments are already scrabbling for
a piece of the cake. The Netherlands Foreign Investment Agency, for example,
recently indicated that it is stepping up its marketing efforts and
represention in Hong Kong and China in an effort to catch this potential new
wave.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940927

