FT943-12630

FT  23 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: In search of that certain mystique -
The Professionals / Joanna Slaughter continues her series on private client
investment managers. Today: Fleming


   By JOANNA SLAUGHTER


Graham Ball, managing director of Fleming Private Asset Management, the
private client arm of the Fleming Group, believes that its flexibility makes
it different from much of the competition. Clients can choose the way their
money is managed and how they pay for it.
Ball says: 'Clients can be advisory or discretionary, fee-paying or
commission-paying, onshore or offshore, international or sterling-based. And
we take enormous pains to find the fund manager most suited to a new private
client.'
Last year, FPAM's funds under management on behalf of more than 3,600
private clients grew by Pounds 1bn to Pounds 2.7bn. Within its basic
portfolio management service, Pounds 396m is managed for discretionary
clients, and Pounds 596m is run on an advisory basis.
FPAM offers two private client services  - portfolio management for those
with Pounds 100,000-plus, and a highly personalised approach for those with
more than Pounds 1m who want an equity-based fund management service in a
major currency.
Given the house philosophy of choice and flexibility, it is no surprise to
learn that all clients have a bespoke portfolio. Unit trusts may be
recommended for exposure to smaller companies or to exotic markets, but
collective investment vehicles will not be used if the client demurs.
Ball dismisses those who argue that more modest clients should be steered
towards collective schemes. 'There is no doubt that a bespoke portfolio is
far sexier than a unit trust portfolio,' he says. 'And if clients have a
unit trust, they have to pay management fees. At the end of the day, we can
make a good profit with a bespoke portfolio of Pounds 100,000  - and so can
the client.'
The 40 private client investment managers have access to the independent
research and international capabilities of the Fleming group. It has an
in-house research unit of six, although the task of interpreting this
research for clients is left to individual fund managers. Their performance
is monitored regularly.
In the main, UK private clients will be invested in the top 250 shares.
Annual portfolio turnover averages 30 per cent. Ball says: 'What turns me on
in investment terms is good management, a good balance sheet and good
products.'
He adds: 'We are probably not ruthless enough with losses. At the end of the
day, we should put in stop losses. Some managers do, but we don't do enough
of it. I think the reason is the volatility of the markets.'
The house view on asset allocation is reviewed each month; indeed, FPAM has
recently taken 2 per out of the US and put 2 per cent into the Pacific rim.
The The present recommended allocations for a UK client are: cash, 2 per
cent; bonds, 0 per cent; UK equities, 67 per cent; US, 10 per cent; Japan, 6
per cent; Pacific, 6 per cent; Europe, 5 per cent; emerging markets, 2 per
cent; and commodities, 2 per cent. And although clients may have as much as
25 per cent of their portfolio in cash and gilts if prudence dictates,
FPAM's policy is to have portfolios invested fully.
Ball says: 'We think share prices are attractive at these levels. The view
we are taking is that the average p/e for 1995 will be 12 times. That is not
expensive; it is good value.'
Ball established a traded options team two years ago and says: 'With markets
so volatile, there is no doubt that derivatives are going to become more and
more important, and I think it is important to protect our portfolios. But
it is a learning curve. It is very important to hedge, but most private
clients do not do it properly. They will buy and sell options instead of
writing them.'
For the future, Ball would like FPAM to expand on the international side and
to acquire another stockbroker or investment house. But growth will not come
from advertising or promotions. 'Despite our success, Flemings are not known
for their private clients and that suits me,' says Ball. 'What we are
running is a quality operation. I want an air of mystique so people think it
is a privilege to be a client.'
Investment managers: factfile 5
Fleming
(Fleming Private Asset Management)
Established: 1873
Regulator: SFA
Number of offices in UK: One
Number of offices worldwide: 42 in 30 countries
Funds under management: Pounds 2.7bn (private clients);Pounds 50bn (Fleming
Group)
Number of UK private clients: 3,560
Number of expatriate/foreign national private clients: 63
Minimum investment for private clients: Pounds 100,000
Current asset allocationfor private clients: UK equities, 67%; overseas
equities, 29%; commodities, 2%; bonds, 0%; cash, 2%
Average annual portfolio turnover: 30%
Fees: Commission basis, annual fee Pounds 250 (discretionary) or Pounds 350
(advisory), plus commissions; fee basis, 0.75 per cent of portfolio value
(minimum Pounds 1,500 a year), plus transaction commissions.

The Financial Times


Weekend Page 6

940723

