FT941-3599

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (4): A glimpse through the open
door - Alexander Nicoll finds that a new book on the rise of China falls
short of being a definitive work / Tomorrow's economic giant


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


China: the Next Economic Superpower
by William H Overholt
Weidenfeld & Nicolson Pounds 18.99
293 pages
China is indeed shaping up to be the next economic superpower. Its
remarkable success is easily visible to any visitor. Yet even after 15 years
of open-door policies, the country's inner workings remain so well cloaked
that it is a challenge for anybody seeking to chronicle its progress.
Mr Overholt, then, is a brave man. A senior executive in Hong Kong with
Bankers Trust, the US bank, he has observed Asia's development at close
hand. He is not coy about emphasising, in a five-page author's note, his
qualifications. Apparently he was well in the vanguard in seeing the
beneficial effects of the Asian way of promoting economic growth before
political freedom. He also played a 'central but quiet role' in the 1986
Philippine revolution.
Confreres beside whom he stood quietly at the barricades in Manila might be
surprised to find him arguing that democratically-run third world countries
don't have what it takes to forge economic success. Adopting democracy
before economic reform, he writes, has 'virtually always led to economic
strains so severe as to cause economic collapse, more often than not
followed by a reversion to dictatorship.'
Mr Overholt styles himself as a lone western voice against western demands
for all-out and immediate political change in China. This position draws him
into sweeping generalisations in support of the Chinese or 'Asian' way,
often belied by the evidence which he supplies in more sober moments.
Sketching the compelling story of China's growth, he is alert to the
problems which may undermine success, such as poor infrastructure,
bureaucracy, lack of a legal system, burdensome state industries, fractious
provinces and uncertain future leadership. Chinese officials might admit
that the process has been more experimental than the controlled sequence
suggested by Mr Overholt. Reform has moved ahead since this book was
completed.
The author tends to take Chinese statements too much at face value, and
approaches fervour when his twin enthusiasms for China and stock and bond
markets are combined. But he is also alive to the ironies and contradictions
which follow from the grant of economic freedom to a people still ruled by a
totalitarian propaganda machine: for example, that Communist party
secretaries who used to run companies, now by-passed, often find themselves
ensuring capitalist policies of foreign venture partners are followed by the
workers.
Nor can the central element of his thesis be denied. Clearly, Deng
Xiaoping's policy of opening up the economy before the political system has
proved a great deal more successful than Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika.
Not only are Mr Deng and his party still at the helm, but the whole country
is better off - even if the divide between rich and poor provinces has
widened. Meanwhile, Russia sinks deeper into dissension and economic chaos.
However, to observe that the 'Asian' model - economic freedom now, political
liberalisation later - has been successful in countries such as South Korea,
Taiwan and Singapore is safer than to argue that this is the way in which
countries like China should proceed. Each, after all, starts from a
different set of circumstances.
Asians who have for no reason suffered the tap on the door in the middle of
the night, incarceration, torture or worse might ask why their freedom was
incompatible with their country's economic progress. They probably wanted
prosperity, too. The case that political liberalisation is inappropriate for
third world economic success, and therefore that authoritarian regimes are
appropriate, is hardly self-evident.
Mr Overholt argues that the need to win re-election will always undermine
reform policies which involve economic sacrifice, and that reforms need time
to mature without intervention by 'uneducated' voters. Yet a prime
motivation for Mr Deng's reforms was the Communists' recognition of the need
to win a popular mandate to remain in power by reversing ideological
principles which had led them to perpetrate a series of disasters on their
people.
To observe that economic reform eventually produces political change - so
that's all right then - is to admit that pressures for change have been
resisted all along, and finally cannot be denied by politicians and
bureaucrats who have been determined to hang on to power. It is all very
well to assert that Asian countries are different from western ones and
operate by 'consensus'. Economic reforms do take a long time.
Westminster-style democracy may indeed not be the best option. But in the
end, the degree of consensus which a government has built behind its
policies can only really be tested at the ballot box.
The first priority of such governments certainly should be to get their
economic policies right, and China is making a good stab at it. Mr Overholt,
too, should concentrate on the economics and the finance. The politics are
better left to others. The latter parts of his book sadly lose coherence -
especially when he allows the bees in his bonnet to buzz about Hong Kong -
though he ends with a sound discussion of why it is in America's interest to
deal with China rather than seek to isolate it with economic sanctions over
human rights abuses.
There is a definitive book to be written about China's economic rise,
rapidly moving target though it is. This is a long way from being that book.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940315

