FT942-12550

FT  29 APR 94 / Confusion and the miracle of KwaZulu


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   ULUNDI, KWAZULU


At 3pm yesterday Mr Joseph Jiyane was sitting on a bench under a tree,
outside the empty KwaMame polling station over which he presides. Inside,
bored electoral officials sprawled in chairs or slept on benches, waiting
for the ballot papers without which voting could not continue.
This was a common sight yesterday in the KwaZulu black homeland, the support
base of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom party.
KwaMame's story was typical: on Wednesday Mr Jiyane
had ballot papers, but had none of the stickers showing the IFP, virtually
the only party supported by local residents, which had to be affixed to the
ballots because of the party's late entry to the race. Yesterday he had
stickers but no ballot papers.
Though the Independent Electoral Commission said it had airlifted 100,000
ballot papers to Ulundi, capital of the KwaZulu 'homeland', none had reached
KwaMame, only some 20km away down a good tarred road, and no one could
explain why this was so.
As has become common throughout the three days of South Africa's first
all-race poll, explanations from the IEC were less than satisfactory.
Yesterday Mr Dikgang Moseneke, IEC commissioner, visited the Prince
Dabulamanzi polling station near Ulundi, and emerged to tell the press that
the station was using some of the new ballots delivered by airlift. But Mr
Peter Mohapi, presiding officer, insisted that this was not so, and said he
had complained to Mr Moseneke, a lawyer at the Pretoria bar, that new ballot
papers had not arrived.
It seemed, once again, that the IEC was either confused or had failed to
convey the real picture. So it is scarcely surprising that Mr Mohapi said he
thought there was 'something fishy' about the role of the IEC in KwaZulu.
But if the IEC largely failed the voters of KwaZulu, the same cannot be said
of the KwaZulu government, whose facilities were used shamelessly to ensure
IFP voters got to the polls, even if that meant travelling many kilometres
by KwaZulu government bus to find a polling station with ballot papers, IFP
stickers, invisible ink, official stamps and all the paraphernalia required
to make voting possible.
At Nsabekhuluma School, where Mr Henry Buthelezi, presiding officer, had
managed to assemble all the necessary materials, one packed bus was driving
away as we arrived, and another arrived soon afterward.
Voters came from distant rural areas, where ballot papers were scarce, to Mr
Buthelezi's polling station, situated in the Mhlabatini district which is
the seat of the large Buthelezi clan over which Chief Mangosuthu presides.
Passengers filed out of the buses and stood in rigid queues, clutching
KwaZulu government identity cards, waiting to vote.
Their quest for a polling station finally over, they could return home
knowing they had voted for the party of their choice. As Mr Buthelezi
pointed out, it was not too difficult to guess which that might be.
Gesturing over the high hills of rural Zululand, Mr Buthelezi said he
believed all the voters of Mhlabatini district would have voted, with the
help of some politically motivated bussing, by the end of the day.
But he doubted whether those in deep rural areas would have had the same
chance.
The extension of voting to today may permit them to do so. But it will have
been a long and unnecessarily frustrating process, for which the blame must
be shared between Chief Buthelezi for his tardy entry to the election, and
the IEC for its failure to organise in KwaZulu.
Still, matters could have been much worse: KwaZulu has been almost entirely
violence-free for the first time in months. That, in itself, was a miracle.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940429

