FT943-988

FT  27 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Political storm in a Taiwan port -
Tensions with Beijing stand in way of Asian transport hub plan


   By LAURA TYSON


Taiwan has anointed the southern port of Kaohsiung as the centrepiece of a
plan to make the island an Asian transport hub. But its ban on direct trade
with China stands in the way of such regional ambitions.
Dubbed ROC (regional operations centre), the strategy was conceived by
government planners several years ago as one that would position Taiwan for
a new stage of industrial development.
The hope is to attract multinational companies to establish regional
headquarters in Taiwan as a base from which to penetrate China and
South-East Asian markets, especially after Hong Kong reverts to Chinese
sovereignty in 1997.
Kaohsiung was chosen for its harbour facilities and central location in East
Asia, says Mr Shive Chi, vice chairman of the Council for Economic Planning
and Development, the government's top planning agency.
A government-commissioned study prepared by McKinsey & Company, the US
management consultancy, on the development of Taiwan into a regional centre
for business, finance and transportation is to be released soon.
An earlier study on port development by consultancy Frederick R Harris,
Taiwan, concluded that from the perspective of shipping companies, using
Kaohsiung as a hub port for 'greater China' trade made better economic and
logistical sense than using Hong Kong - provided direct cross-strait sea
links were re-established.
The groundwork for such links has been done, according to Mr Hsieh
Ching-chang, the acting director of the Kaohsiung Harbour Bureau. But there
are still political tensions between Beijing and Taipei.
'Technically speaking, there is no problem whatsoever,' Mr Hsieh says. 'If
the government changes its policy tomorrow, we are ready.'
Taiwan's ruling Nationalist party broke off links with mainland China when
it fled to the island in 1949 after losing the civil war with Mao Zedong's
communist forces.
Dr John Ricklefs, senior vice president at Frederick R. Harris, estimates
that 15 per cent of Hong Kong's cargo volume, mainly trans-shipment, would
shift to Kaohsiung were direct links resumed. 'The real market growth in
this region is China, and the port of Kaohsiung has been locked out of
serving that market for purely political reasons,' he says.
Kaohsiung was the world's third-largest container port in 1993 with a total
volume of 4.64m TEU (twenty-foot equivalent units), half that of
first-ranked Hong Kong with 9.2m TEU. Singapore, second in the world at
9.05m TEU last year, does not directly compete with Kaohsiung as it serves
the South-East Asian market.
'Hong Kong is now being used by international shipping companies as the
gateway to the China market,' says Mr Peter Hsu, a manager in the Kaohsiung
offices of Sea-Land Service. With Hong Kong harbour operating at 10 to 20
per cent above capacity, space is at a premium. Sea-Land bases its large
ships in Kaohsiung and uses feeder lines to service mainland ports via Hong
Kong. 'With direct cross-strait trade, we could just skip Hong Kong,' Mr Hsu
says.
At least 75 per cent of Taiwan's rapidly rising exports to China are routed
through the British colony, with a small portion going via other ports such
as Singapore and Korea. Taiwanese businessmen are lobbying for direct trade
as it would reduce travel time and shipping costs.
Mr Chang Chun-hsiung, a legislator and the opposition Democratic Progressive
party's candidate for Kaohsiung mayor in year-end elections, is less
sanguine than ruling party officials about Kaohsiung's prospects.
'Kaohsiung is just not competitive with Hong Kong and Singapore,' he says.
'In the past, the harbour made a lot of money from Taiwan's exports and
cheap labour, but we cannot rely on those any longer. The port has not
sufficiently improved its efficiency, facilities and services.'
However, the main problem lies not in the port itself but in government
policy. 'If you don't have direct links with China, how can you become a
regional operations and transportation centre?' says Mr Chang.
Government officials brush off the thorny issue of direct transport links to
China's vast potential market. 'Already, 39 per cent of the container
traffic at Kaohsiung harbour is trans-shipment,' says Mr J T Chen, a senior
analyst at a think-tank under the ministry of transportation and
communications.
'If we can create favourable conditions to attract shipping companies to
Kaohsiung, then we can become more competitive. If the government can
provide a commercial park and if the management of the port can be improved,
then we should have no problem becoming a regional hub,' says Mr Chen.
Plans to expand port facilities and streamline its administration are being
drawn up, say harbour bureau officials. A fifth container terminal is
scheduled to be completed in 1998 and there are plans for either a sixth
container terminal or back harbour terminal on land bordering the harbour.
Customs clearance and processing will be expedited by a new computerised
system that is being installed, and which will reduce docking charges,
officials say. Authorities will also tackle labour issues, the problem
foreign shipping companies most often complain about. Ways to improve the
port's management structure and partially privatise harbour facilities are
under study.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940927

