FT943-12874

FT  22 JUL 94 / Arts: Kronos goes against grain - Music


   By DAVID MURRAY


Hugely hyped as usual, the Kronos Quartet are playing the Barbican this
week. They are the string quartet who sprang to fame in the early 1970s, by
performing in extravagant designer gear, cultivating 'cross-over' music
(sometimes between classical and pop, more often between classical and
ethnic) and playing rather well.
Or rather, they are almost not that group - their leader David Harrington is
the sole remaining member of the original team. Presumably the Kronos 'idea'
survives transient personnel.
The zeitgeist blows unpredictably, and super-sharp costumes now look naff.
These days, Kronos dresses down while trading as always upon theatrical
lighting - blue for sincere rumination, red for excitement, perpetual
darkness in the auditorium. Most of Tuesday's programme was on that level of
sophistication, and any four competent side-men could have delivered most of
it with minimal rehearsal.
The jazz clarinettist Don Byron's There Goes the Neighbourhood, for example,
set solos over mildly dissonant, rocking accompaniments, laboriously written
out for quartet. Jon Hassell did much the same in Pano da Costa
(African-based, but with Brazilian percussion for the players to manage),
another commission, and Hirokazu Hiraishi too in Prismatic Soundscape
(sub-Takemitsu).
Kronos had also commissioned three arrangements from the late Raymond
Scott's commercial work - sprightly, but too tame on mere strings - and
invited Ingram Marshall to rewrite his 1982 Fog Tropes, which blended live
brass with recorded foghorns, for strings instead: thus wrecking the blend
and also revealing a seriously incompetent composer.
The string-quartet medium is not God-given, but rests upon its base in Haydn
and on what successive composers have made of it - Mozart, Beethoven,
Schubert, Schoenberg, Bartok, Elliott Carter. Dialogue and argument are the
whole point: four individual string voices can be just enough to encompass a
small world of intense expression.
To reduce the players to uniform, faceless accompanists is not to 'extend'
the medium, but to diminish it radically. On Tuesday evening, the only works
that told were Dmitri Yanov-Yanovsky's lugubrious mini-concerto for chang (a
kind of cimbalom) and Peter Sculthorpe's From Ubirr, a respectful,
old-fashioned celebration of the one-note didgeridoo (David Coulter).
It was reassuring on Wednesday to find that the (current) Kronos team can
sound like a quartet. They played all four of Alfred Schnittke's
introspective works for the medium, thoughtfully and searchingly. In the
Third and Fourth Quartets - the one freighted with melancholy recalls old
Russian chorales and folk-stuff, the other with no more than a few
major/minor triads - the Kronos team were a model of grave, delicate
sympathy.
Truth to tell, Harrington's own part sounded underpowered against the rest
of the trio. His fine, taut line was too light and unauthoritative for
Schnittke's purposes; it never grabbed us.
Though electronic enhancement is second nature to the Kronos, one should not
count upon it to do the job. Schnittke still writes for a 'classical'
quartet, and for all their virtues the Kronos Quartet is still something
less than that.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940722

