FT944-14624

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (3): Benefit changes
could encourage return to work - Budget Countdown, The 'Green Budget' / An
independent research group thinks the chancellor may assist the lower paid,
rather than adjust tax


   By PHILIP COGGAN


Help for the lower paid may be one of the main themes of the chancellor's
Budget, according to the influential Institute for Fiscal Studies.
The IFS, an independent tax-policy research group, together with investment
bank Goldman Sachs, produced its 'Green Budget' this month, examining the
options confronting Kenneth Clarke.
In the view of the institute, the chancellor is unlikely to make substantial
cuts or increases in taxation. The main focus will be on public spending,
where cuts of around Pounds 5bn in the planned spending totals for 1995-96
will be welcomed by the gilts market.
However, the chancellor may alter the tax rules in a way that costs him
nothing, ie, which is 'revenue-neutral'. One option would be to freeze the
income tax allowances at their current level. A basic tax principle is that
these allowances should be increased in line with inflation, but in recent
years this has been honoured more in the breach than the observance.
This year, with inflation at only 2.2 per cent, the personal allowance would
only rise by Pounds 75 to Pounds 3,520, saving the standard-rate taxpayer
just 36p a week. As the IFS says, 'the complete absence of such indexation
would barely be noticed'. The chancellor could use the money saved by
freezing allowances to widen the 20 per cent band from the first Pounds
3,000 of taxable income to Pounds 4,000.
However, the IFS feels the chancellor may be more interested in reducing the
disincentives to work among the lower paid.
The fundamental problem is that benefits paid to unemployed people are
withdrawn when they take a job. Family credit is a measure designed to
alleviate this difficulty; it is paid to low-earning families with children
where one parent works at least 16 hours a week.
One possibility would be to extend family credit to childless people aged 25
and over. This measure would not be prohibitively costly.
Another reform would be to integrate income support and family credit, to
eliminate the administrative delay and uncertainty involved in switching
from one benefit to another.' The chancellor should seriously consider
integrating income support and family credit into one benefit with in-work
and out-of-work credits that would not suffer from interim gaps in benefit
receipt and uncertainty about entitlements once in work,' says the IFS.
'This would also improve take-up of family credit, which has been low since
1988.'
On the savings front, the IFS says that action on tax-exempt special savings
accounts is quite pressing, because Tessas will start to finish their
five-year tax-free status from the beginning of 1996.
'The most sensible short-run response would probably be to allow Tessas to
continue into the future, so as to avoid large shifts at the beginning of
1996,' the institute says.
The institute recognises that much of the money invested in Tessas was
simply transferred from other building society accounts - rather than
representing 'new' savings. Nevertheless, it argues that interest-bearing
deposits are the main form of savings for the least wealthy, and that the
taxation of most interest-bearing wealth in the UK is both unfair and
inefficient.
In the longer term, the IFS feels that it would be sensible to integrate
personal equity plans (Peps) with Tessas in a single tax-free savings scheme
with a higher contribution limit.
In Norman Lamont's last Budget, the tax advantages of Peps were reduced
slightly by a reduction in the tax credit on dividends. The IFS says that,
earlier this year, it seemed possible that the government might be
considering the abolition of the tax credit, combined with a reduction in
the rate of corporation tax.
Such a measure would help corporate cash flow and reduce the incentive for
companies to pay out high dividends, thus enabling them to retain more of
their profits for investment. However, abolition of the tax credit would
have an adverse impact on tax-exempt institutions, such as pension funds,
and Pep holders.
The departure of financial secretary Stephen Dorrell from the Treasury has
reduced the likelihood of such a change this year, says the IFS, although it
adds that 'this is an area which could well attract the attention of a
future government committed to supply-side reforms to stimulate investment
spending.'
On the more basic issues of life, the IFS says there might be some good news
for spirit drinkers in the Budget. The tax per unit of alcohol for spirits
is still almost twice that applied to wines and beer.
The chancellor has already committed himself to increase excise duties on
tobacco by 3 percentage points more than the rate of inflation each year,
and on petrol and diesel by 5 percentage points more than inflation.
But the IFS does not agree with those who think the chancellor will cut
excise duties to try to counter the threat of cross-channel shopping. It
points out that alcohol excise revenues have held up well after a year of
the single market. 'Increasing duties, particularly for beer, wine and
tobacco would raise more revenue than would be lost through any concomitant
increase in cross-border shopping.'
Overall, however, the IFS sees little scope for significant reform in tax
policy this year, with the chancellor likely to keep his powder dry for tax
cuts in 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941021

