FT941-4033

FT  12 MAR 94 / Skiing: Tales of grizzly bears and T-bars


   By ARNIE WILSON


At Whitefish, Montana, they still laugh at the events of December, 1947,
when more than a thousand local people from the Flathead Valley made their
way to the slopes of Big Mountain to witness an historic event: the opening
of the first ski-lift.
Ed Schenck and George Prentice, the principal investors in what was
originally known as the Hell Roaring Ski Corporation (named after a nearby
mountain) had spent half the night getting the lift ready.
This is Schenck's account: 'We sat down with the book of instructions and
tried to puzzle out how to adjust the T-bars. The directions said to turn
the retracting spring 11 times. Working by candle and flashlight, we did
this.
'Next morning, the motor coughed, and the first skiers took off. 'Oh no]'
George howled, and turned his reddening face away.
'Instead of riding up the hill with the T-bar supporting them under their
hips, these first riders were dangling 10 feet in the air and spinning round
and round. It was like a Bob Hope movie.
'The retracting spring had evidently been wound up sufficiently at the
factory. But since most of the skiers hadn't seen a T-bar lift before, they
didn't know anything was wrong. So George and I kept straight faces and
finished the day]'
Things have progressed in the ski industry in Montana since then. For those
who find Colorado and even Utah expensive and touristy (as all good places
tend to become) Montana may indeed live up to its reputation as 'The Last
Best Place'. A surprising number of local skiers are refugees from Colorado.
With more than 60 trails served by nine lifts, a vertical drop of 2,300ft
and a longest run of 2.5 miles, plus night-skiing and Snow Cat skiing, The
Big Mountain - Montana's biggest ski area - provides as much good skiing as
most of its better known counterparts. And a lift ticket costs Dollars 32
(Pounds 21) - Dollars 10 cheaper than the norm in Colorado.
The Big Mountain, 19 miles from Glacier Park International Airport in
north-west Montana, is isolated from other ski areas in the north-west. But
in the south west of the state an assortment of resorts enables visiting
skiers with a rental car to try a good cross-section.
If you hanker after steep but manageable terrain, head for Bridger Bowl up
in the Crazy Mountains (named after the sole woman survivor of an Indian
massacre who wandered the area and finally went mad) and the Bangtail
Mountains (named after the wild horses whose tails, knotted with frozen
snow, could be heard in winter banging against their thighs).
Bridger (lift ticket Dollars 24) is a smallish cult resort just to the north
of Yellowstone National Park which attracts skiers in search of off-piste
thrills. There are good nursery slopes (50 trails altogether) but they are
not what the local powder hounds, or 'Ridge Hippies' come for.
The main quest for these hounds is The Ridge, an extreme area with terrain
verying between challenging and suicidal, leading to The Nose, The Apron and
the North and South Bowls, ony reached by a short sharp hike. (There is a
rope tow to the top, but it is exclusively for the use of the Ski Patrol.)
With runs like Must Turn Left, Sometimes A Great Notion and Avalanche Gully
(none of which is shown on the official trail map) to choose from, it is
best to ski The Ridge with someone who knows what they are doing and where
they are going. I was accompanied by Doug Wales, Bridger's marketing
director.
Mercifully, Doug did not take me into the steep and narrow Hidden Gully
entrance into the Apron since I found the Apron itself challenging enough to
make me go wandering in the Crazy Mountains myself.
Yellowstone has another big ski area on its doorstep: Big Sky - reached,
like Bridger, from Bozeman. It too has recently opened up one area just for
advanced skiing - Lone Mountain, at 11,166ft, where the new Challenger lift
serves only single and double black diamond runs.
Contrary to Bridger Bowl, which has to remind skiers that it has ordinary
cruising runs and beginner slopes, Big Sky needed the Challenger lift
because it had a reputation for not enough advanced terrain.
With 65 miles of mainly beginner and intermediate skiing predominantly on
Andesite Mountain, and even some European-style gondolas - a rarity in the
US - Big Sky is still essentially a resort for the average family skier to
cruise all day (lift ticket Dollars 38).
Another resort in the region worth visiting is Red Lodge, rejoicing in
better days now that it has changed its name from Grizzly Peak. Any bear
attack anywhere in the Rockies used to send skiers into a panic, even during
winter when bears - if any - would be hibernating. The mountain itself still
retains the name Grizzly Peak.
Skiers at Red Lodge frequently enjoy a classic temperature inversion that
enables then to ski at almost 10,000ft in relative warmth of temperatures
above freezing, while the nearest big town, Billings might be several
degrees colder.
With a Dollars 24 lift ticket, Red Lodge has 35 trails, a vertical drop of
just over 2,000ft and has plans to build North America's first ski resort
funicular to get skiers on to the slopes from the car park and from the
quaint little town of Red, often used as the setting for western movies.
When Ed Schenck first arrived in Montana he recalls that a 'committee
dressed in coonskin caps and snowshoes took me up to inspect the skiing
country. They were as eager to please as rental agents in a ghost town.
'When we finally struggled to the top, we found breathtaking, vast, open
snowfields where you can ski in any direction, seven-foot deep snow topped
by soft powder, and sunshine - all the things a skier dreams about.'
Those dreams have now become practical possibilities.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940312

