FT941-4042

FT  12 MAR 94 / Travel: Rathlin: an island apart from Ulster - A
bird-watcher's paradise off the north coast of Antrim


   By CHRISTOPHER MCCOOEY


'It must be like the FA Cup for them,' Tony from Manchester mused as we
watched the model yachts tacking across Ushet Lough.
A laconic furniture remover and keen amateur photographer, Tony was busy
with his filters and lenses as contestants in waders and with long poles
cajoled their boats to out-perform the rest. The prize for the winner was
the Rinever Trophy, named after one of the districts on Rathlin Island.
For the 40 island families, the yacht races - held half-a-dozen times a year
 -are keenly contested. The trophies take pride of place on islanders'
mantelpieces. A triangular course is chosen according to the prevailing
wind. The yachts must reach the shore on the other side of the water,
between two flags; contestants then reset the sails and point them in the
next direction. The race can take from 20 minutes to five hours.
The winning yacht was owned by Dominic McCurdy, who runs Rathlin Island's
only guesthouse. Father MacAteer, the local priest (90 per cent of the
islanders are Roman Catholic), used a megaphone to address the assembled
racers (nine), supporters (15) and visitors (Tony and me). He congratulated
the winner and presented the trophy.
Rathlin is six miles off the north Antrim coast and is Ulster's only
inhabited island, having been so since at least the Neolithic period -
4,000BC to 2,500BC.
In its earliest history, Rathlin must have been comparatively prosperous.
Because of a geological accident, the Neolithic islanders had a thriving
export business. A plug of molten lava forced its way to the surface
millions of years ago and the heat changed, or metamorphosed, the rock
immediately surrounding it.
Known as porcellanite, or recrystallised bauxitic lithomarge, by geologists,
the early farmers, who had given up hunting to till the land, found it just
the job for making axes to cut down trees.
At Brockley, towards the west end of the island, was the axe factory, and
the blades have been found throughout Ireland, in Scotland and Wales and as
far away as north Kent. Along with flint arrow-heads and scrapers made from
nodules taken from the limestone cliffs, axe-heads and blanks are still
quite a common find on the island.
Because it is only 16 miles from the Mull of Kintyre, the Scottish lords of
the isles, the McDonnells, ruled Rathlin for many years. The English
naturally disputed this, and bloody clashes often took place.
But one dispute, in the 17th century, was settled by argument rather than by
the sword. It was claimed that Rathlin was 'a parcel of Ireland (because)
the nature of its soil . . . neither breeds nor nourishes any living thing
venomous'.
The snakeless argument is interesting. Several centuries earlier it was used
to settle a similar dispute over ownership of the Isle of Man. The Normans
introduced venomous reptiles on a trial basis: they lived, and as a matter
of course the island was unanimously judged to belong to England, not
Ireland.
What Churchill referred to as 'the most celebrated spider known to history'
is reputed to have been a Rathlin specimen. Robert the Bruce is supposed to
have sought sanctuary in a cave only accessible by boat, and then only when
the tide is right. The 14th century arachnologist must have had very good
eyesight - and/or a very long candle - as the cave is not only long and
narrow but has a very high ceiling.
Ornithologists are attracted to Rathlin especially in the breeding season.
The smell of guano is all-pervasive as thousands of guillemots, razorbills,
cormorants, shags and species of gull stake out their breeding nooks and
jostle on the narrow ledges each summer.
Other visitors go to study or enjoy rare plants such as the pyramidal bugle,
or swathes of orchids that carpet the unimproved grassland. It is also a
popular place for divers - off Rathlin are some of Britain's deepest waters
and underwater cliffs, as well as numerous wrecks, including HMS Drake,
flagship of the British Navy in the first world war, torpedoed and sunk in
Church Bay.
The activity centre on the island has been designed with divers in mind, but
anyone interested in outdoor activities is welcomed. The building is the
tithe barn of the former owners of the island, the Gage family, who also
used to own the adjacent manor house, which is being converted into a 15-bed
hotel.
The money for these developments has come from various government and
European Union grants, and from the Rathlin Trust, set up in 1987 to arrest
the island's slow economic decline. The trust received a windfall in its
first year. Richard Branson landed in the sea near Rathlin on July 3 1987
after crossing the Atlantic by balloon. Islander Tommy Cecil got a line on
the floundering balloon, the traditional way to carry out salvage at sea.
Instead of claiming the value of the balloon, Tommy asked for a donation to
the trust. A month later Branson returned (by helicopter) and presented a
cheque for Pounds 25,000.
In 1992, electricity came to Rathlin - provided by wind turbines on the hill
overlooking Church Bay. The grand switch-on was attended by the Reverend Ian
Paisley, the local MP. When it was his turn to say a few words, he began:
'The Lord said: 'Let there be light' . . . but it sure took a long time to
come to Rathlin.'
Weather permitting, there are daily sailings leaving Ballycastle on the
north Antrim coast at 10.30am and Rathlin at 4pm; passengers only, no cars,
Pounds 3.15 one way. Accommodation: The Manor House (hotel), details from
the Rathlin Island Trust, tel: 02657-63920. The Guest House (B&B): Mr and
Mrs McCurdy, tel: 02657-63917. The Richard Branson Activity Centre (hostel),
tel: 02657-63915. There is a free camping site at Church Bay harbour.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

940312

