FT941-4209

FT  12 MAR 94 / Former minister is arrested in Tokyo: Nakamura to face
bribery charges


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


A former Japanese construction minister yesterday became the first national
politician to be arrested in the country's biggest corruption scandal since
the second world war.
Mr Kishiro Nakamura was denied his wish to be arrested on the steps of
parliament, and instead humbly gave himself up at the Tokyo prosecutors'
office, to face bribery charges.
His arrest was triggered by a national assembly vote, at the public
prosecutor's request, to lift Mr Nakamura's parliamentary immunity, the
first time parliament has been asked to do this for 27 years.
It marks a new level in the legal assault on corruption which has led to the
arrest of more than 30 people, including local politicians, executives from
Japan's seven leading construction groups and the head of a paper company.
It is also a fresh stain on the already tarnished political image of the
opposition Liberal Democratic party, of which Mr Nakamura was a rising star
until he resigned from it on Wednesday.
Speculation has grown recently that the prosecutors would turn to a national
figure, on the grounds that they have ample evidence from their many
detainees and are under pressure to appease public disgust with political
corruption. Mr Nakamura is expected to deny charges that he received Y10m
(Pounds 63,600) from Kajima, a leading construction group, to ensure that a
public inquiry into bid-rigging in the construction industry came to
nothing.
He was construction minister in Mr Kiichi Miyazawa's government from
December 1992 until last August. However, Mr Nakamura is accused of
receiving the bribe in early 1992, as chairman of the LDP's anti-trust
panel. If found guilty, he could face up to five years' imprisonment.
The construction industry has been a generous source of often illicit cash
for leading political parties, exposed with the arrest last March of Mr Shin
Kanemaru, political godfather of the LDP and patron of Mr Nakamura.
Mr Kanemaru's downfall triggered the chain of events that led to the
collapse of the LDP government last July and the adoption of laws to curb
political funding and reform the electoral system. Mr Kanemaru is now facing
trial for evading tax of Y1.8bn of construction industry donations.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940312

