FT942-12643

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: Hutchison stands by its Orange -
The Hong Kong group is bullish about the UK


   By SIMON DAVIES


For a man who less than five months ago killed Hutchison Whampoa's Rabbit
CT-2 phone system at a costs of HKDollars 1.4bn (Dollars 182m), Mr Canning
Fok, chief executive, is surprisingly gung-ho about UK telecommunications.
The 42-year-old Hutchison chief yesterday launched the company's Orange
Personal Communications Network (PCN) in the UK, saying Hutchison has
expanded its budget for the system, due to the increasingly positive
outlook.
'When we did our business plan in September, we didn't envisage the current
level of growth. We are extremely encouraged by the market-place,' said Mr
Fok.
He will have to go some way to silence detractors, who feel Hutchison would
do better to concentrate on its core area: the higher growth economies of
Hong Kong and China.
The detractors have history on their side. The push by Mr Fok's predecessor,
Mr Simon Murray, to diversify Hong Kong's largest trading conglomerate away
from its reliance on the colony, has achieved little more than management
turmoil and losses.
In 1991 and 1992, the company wrote off HKDollars 2.2bn against its
investment in Husky Oil, the Canadian energy company, which had collapsed.
In 1993, as Husky recovered, the UK telecommunications business contributed
an exceptional loss of HKDollars 1.4bn, and operating losses all but wiped
out the sizeable contribution from the successful Hong Kong
telecommunications business.
Analysts say the overseas businesses may have lost HKDollars 5bn between
1989 and 1994. The latest cost is the HKDollars 17.4m redundancy payment to
the strategy's main architect, Mr Murray. Since Mr Fok took over in
September, overseas operations have scarcely rated a mention in company
statements and annual report.
The latter states that Hutchison 'will continue to develop its businesses in
Hong Kong, with increasing emphasis on expansion of those businesses in
China'. Yesterday, however, Mr Fok said he would silence detractors of these
overseas businesses in the most fundamental way: by demonstrating strong
profits.
He has set a precedent. Star Television was dismissed by brokers as a black
hole, but Hutchison achieved a Dollars HK1.6bn exceptional profit last year
from selling a 64 per cent stake to Mr Rupert Murdoch's News Corp.
So far, Hutchison has invested Pounds 500m (Dollars 752m) in the UK
business, according to Mr Fok, and a further Pounds 250m will be ploughed in
over the next few years. The business is not budgeted to contribute a cent
until 1997. Mr James Golub, analyst at Warburg Securities in London, said
the system would be handicapped by the high price of handsets and the lack
of consumer distinction between the analogue and digital services.
Standard Chartered Securities is expecting Orange to make losses of more
than HKDollars 500m per year for the next two years. Mr Fok said the
operating performance remained within budget, and he refuted the assumption
that the Orange system would be sold.
Mr Fok admits that Hutchison is not looking to develop new businesses
outside south-east Asia, but that Orange 'does not stick out like a sore
thumb' in the context of Hutchison's ambitious telecommunications strategy
in Hong Kong.
It is planning to invest Dollars HK3.5bn in building up a fixed line network
as Hongkong Telecommunication's monopoly position gradually fades. It is
bidding for a PCN licence in Hong Kong, where new entrants such as Wharf and
New World Development are making telecommunications a more competitive
business.
In the short-term, Hutchison's Asian property, container terminal and energy
businesses can more than smooth over UK losses. Standard Chartered forecasts
net profit to increase 22 per cent to HKDollars 7.7bn this year, in spite of
Orange.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940428

