FT944-14580

FT  22 OCT 94 / Swedish forestry companies join forces to urge EU membership


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


Sweden's top four forestry companies yesterday joined forces to warn that
investment in Sweden would be threatened if the country voted against
joining the European Union in a referendum on November 13.
In a joint newspaper article, the chief executives of Stora, Europe's
biggest forestry company, SCA, the continent's third biggest, Modo and
Assidoman said EU membership was vital for Sweden's forestry industry, which
has many production facilities as well as its main markets in the Union.
'We want to invest in Sweden, but. . . if Sweden stands outside the EU it
will likely lead to many internationally orientated companies choosing to
invest in production inside the EU's borders,' wrote the four, whose
companies together employ 90,000 people in Sweden and abroad and have
combined annual sales of SKr115bn (Pounds 9.8bn).
The article was similar to a public warning against tax increases issued by
four senior industrialists before last month's general election. But it is
far from clear that such interventions by business leaders in political
campaigns have the desired effect. The election warning was aimed chiefly at
the Social Democratic party, but the party went on to win the election.
Many of the Social Democrat candidates and supporters proclaimed that the
country's large industrial companies, most of which are making big profits
this year, should not only pay more taxes but should also bear directly some
of the costs of Swedish membership of the EU.
However, the latest opinion polls this week suggested that the Yes campaign
now leads in the EU debate. A poll yesterday in Dagens Nyheter, the
newspaper which carried the article by the industrialists, showed support
for Swedish membership running ahead of the opposition by 41 per cent to 34
per cent. The result showed a gain of five percentage points by the Yes
camp, while the No side slipped three points from a previous poll in
September.
Last Sunday, Finland became the first of the three Nordic EU applicants to
vote on membership. Final official results published yesterday showed
approval for joining by 56.9 per cent to 43.1 per cent, a slightly narrower
margin than initially reported by the authorities. Norway, where opinion
remains strongly against membership, is to hold its referendum on November
28.
The Finnish parliament will hold its final vote on EU membership on November
8 or 9, it was announced yesterday. The government is keen to secure
parliamentary approval, which must be by a two-thirds majority, before the
Swedish referendum in case a rejection of membership by the Swedes causes a
last-minute parliamentary revolt.
In Stockholm yesterday, Mr Ingvar Carlsson, the prime minister, named Ms
Anita Gradin, Sweden's ambassador to Austria, as the country's first EU
commissioner if the referendum approves membership.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941022

