FT942-14760

FT  19 APR 94 / Arts: Landscapes of the imagination - William Packer reviews
the work of two very different contemporary artists


   By WILLIAM PACKER


The landscape to a painter is whatever he cares to make of it - indeed,
whatever he cares to call it. A single horizontal line across the surface of
the canvas becomes, well, an horizon, in which sense all nominally abstract
painting becomes a kind of landscape of the imagination. Alexander Cozens
used blots and smudges, and Gainsborough cauliflower and broccoli, to invent
their landscapes in the 18th century. Rothko's cosmic emptiness was long ago
prefigured in l'Immensite of Courbet, or the pools and river-banks of Monet.
Maurice Cockrill, at 57, is one of the more interesting of those painters
who occupy this no-man's-land of inventive representation -
non-representational representation if you like. He thinks of his work,
certainly, as landscape, and indeed it does take on something of the space
and scale of landscape. Yet he has dispensed with any defining sky-line or
horizontal, nor are there any near-vertical emphases to help the eye the
other way. If the suggestion is of landscape, it is that of the closer and
more constricted view, of a pit or quarry-side, with a tangle of roots and
undergrowth down the bank, or of the entrance to a thicket, confusing and
disorienting - even an aeroplane becomes confused without an horizon.
The informing sense is one of organic growth and rich profusion, and so
close does the imagery bear in on us that it becomes almost that of
landscape as still life - we are back again to Gainsborough and his
vegetables. The closer parallel, nearer our own time, is to Graham
Sutherland and his war-time Welsh landscapes, with their lanes and
hill-sides and hot colours, and his thorns and bushes of the later 1940s and
early '50s, romantic, surreal, threatening and intense.
But Sutherland's imagery is always specific to its source, and stated with
nothing of the expressive, expansive freedom and suggestive feeling that we
find here with Cockrill. If the sense in the imagery of his work is of
generalised organic growth, so it is with the actual quality of the paint as
it is handled on the surface. In the way he works, he stands much closer to
Francis Bacon.
These are big names, but not over-bearing influences, and Cockrill, while
tacitly acknowledging them, remains his own man. He begins with a canvas
prepared with an immaculate ground or colour-field which is to be occupied
by the mass of the image. This he lays on more or less across the centre of
the canvas, dense and rich in the paint itself, fresh and direct in the way
the paint is worked and moved about. At last comes a committed, all-or
nothing flurry of activity, a rapid, calligraphic sequence of marks and
gestures that overlays the more considered passages and ties them formally
to the larger, encompassing and still pristine spaces of the canvas.
Zen-like, he either gets them right at once, or they are nothing.
Cockrill is an artist who has long enjoyed the respect of his peers, but
only in the last few years has come into more public a reputation. The Tate,
at least, should buy him now.
Round the corner in Albemarle Street, Roger de Grey is showing for the first
time since giving up the presidency of the Royal Academy. Knowing how active
he was in that onerous duty, we might find it surprising that he has found
time to do any work at all. That he has managed only lately to do so much is
merely astonishing. He, by way of contrast, is a true landscape painter, no
less inventive than Cockrill - for even the most exact of artists must
invent in paint the visual metaphor or symbol for the reality he would
describe - but working directly from his subject as much as possible, which
he rationalises and simplifies back in the studio.
Kent, Cornwall and the Charente-Maritime supply his imagery, with the odd
still-life besides - a view out of the window to the garden gate, a wooded
hill-side, a high, wide succession of fading horizontals to take the eye out
across the fields to the distant estuary. All is quiet, undemonstrative,
well-ordered and structured, seemingly polite. The debt to Cezanne is
manifest, but other, more recent complements and parallels suggest
themselves, the American, Richard Diebenkorn for example, whose Ocean Park
paintings, with their schematic linear perspectives, simplified themselves
quite literally to abstraction.
Roger de Grey may disqualify himself as an abstract artist, saying he has no
facility in the invention of forms, but the fact remains that the
abstraction is implicit in everything he does, and sophisticated
constructivist abstraction at that, with the emphatic architecture of
vertical and horizontal that so often divides his canvases, lying on the
picture-plane and setting the visual space. Though the device may be only a
tree perhaps, a window-frame, or the sharp, sweet rise and curve of the road
across the plain, he is rather more adventurous a painter than he cares to
admit.
Maurice Cockrill: Generation; Bernard Jacobson Gallery, 14a Clifford Street
W1, until April 30. Roger de Grey: recent paintings & drawings; Grosvenor
Gallery, 18 Albemarle Street W1, until April 29.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940419

