FT944-2508

FT  16 DEC 94 / Bulgaria backs ex-communists and king: The political revival
of two rivals


   By THEODOR TROEV and ANTHONY ROBINSON


   SOFIA, LONDON


The Bulgarian Socialist party (BSP), successor to what was once the eastern
European communist party most loyal to Moscow, is expected to return to
power after general elections this weekend. If so, it will join similar
parties in Lithuania, Poland and Hungary which revived like Lazarus from
what was widely assumed to be death after the collapse of the Berlin Wall.
But an equally miraculous revival has been taking place at the opposite end
of the political spectrum - a surge in popular enthusiasm for the idea of
monarchy in general and for the exiled monarch, ex-King Simeon the Second,
in particular.
The popularity of the king has been rising since the downfall of Todor
Zhivkov, the old communist dictator, in 1989. Even President Zhelyu Zhelev,
a former dissident, who used to be the most popular politician in Bulgaria,
recently came behind King Simeon in public opinion polls.
The 57-year-old king, who lives in Madrid, is widely considered to be closer
to restoration as a modern constitutional monarch than any other exiled
royal claimant in the former communist world. Many of the 49 political
organisations contesting the election have sought to capitalise on the
popular longing for 'a good and just king'.
The socialists have not been able to ride the monarchist chariot for
ideological reasons. But political rivals claim the BSP has secretly
inspired monarchist organisations to register for the election to prevent
them joining the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), the main anti-communist
coalition. Every vote diverted from the UDF serves the BSP cause.
In 1991, most royalists voted for the UDF after King Simeon appealed to
Bulgarians to vote for the 'democratic forces'. This was interpreted as
support for the UDF, although the king refused to urge anyone to vote for a
particular party. Dispersion of pro-monarchist votes, meanwhile, meant that
none of the divided monarchist groups managed to clear the 4 per cent hurdle
needed to enter parliament.
This weekend's early elections result from the refusal of both the BSP and
the UDF to replace the outgoing non-party government of technocrats. This
was led by an academic, Mr Lyuben Berov, but supported by the BSP. It
resigned last September after successfully renegotiating Bulgaria's Dollars
9.3bn (Pounds 5.7bn) foreign debt.
This time around the UDF has failed to attract more than a few of the
smaller pro-monarchist clubs to join its election campaign and has found it
hard to attract pro-monarchist and pro-republican voters. The UDF has
pledged to contest the 1946 referendum which abolished the monarchy, but has
not come out in favour of a restoration.
King Simeon has urged the monarchist groups to unite. But political
infighting and personal power struggles have left voters to decide between
seven big monarchist groups and many smaller monarchist clubs.
All that unites the groups is a desire for restoration of the old Turnovo
constitution. The king's supporters say he is still the monarch as there was
no formal abdication. The royal family was forced to leave Bulgaria when
Simeon was just nine years old after a rigged plebiscite under the new
communist rulers.
This abolished the monarchy in 1946, although the Turnovo constitution, with
the monarchy as head of state, was not changed at the time. On reaching his
18th birthday, Simeon of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was proclaimed King of the
Bulgarians under the Turnovo constitution.
Opinion polls suggest that more and more Bulgarians see restoration of the
monarchy as a guarantee of stability. Royalists also argue that monarchy
could help build a barrier against further ethnic tensions in the Balkans.
Politicians, eager to seize more power in elections, are more prone to
manipulating ethnic minorities than a monarch capable of rising above such
calculations, they say.
In an interview, King Simeon said that he could provide the country with
'unity, national reconciliation and a sense of recovered dignity'.
The ex-king does not rule out the possibility of co-existence of
constitutional monarchy with a socialist government. But analysts in Sofia
doubt that the monarch could be brought closer to the throne if the polls
are accurate and the politically disciplined BSP defeats the divided
monarchist and anti-communist forces.
The latter outnumber the socialists by a big majority, but have proved
unable as yet to forge the alliances needed to keep the socialists out of
power or put the king back on his throne.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

