FT942-15770

FT  14 APR 94 / Boost for Lloyd's Names from two key rulings


   By ANDREW JACK


Loss-making Names on the Lloyd's of London insurance market yesterday scored
two separate court victories which could have widespread ramifications in
their search for compensation.
The House of Lords rejected an appeal from 71 members' agents who claimed
that they were not contractually liable for negligent underwriting by
Lloyd's syndicates. Members' agents allocate Names, the individuals whose
assets have traditionally supported the market, to syndicates.
Separately, a High Court judge made an unprecedented ruling that a members'
agent was liable for losses incurred by two Names.
The decision by the House of Lords clears the way for legal cases seeking
more than Pounds 1.2bn being brought by Names on the Gooda Walker and
Feltrim syndicates, which were among the highest loss-making syndicates on
the market. The Gooda Walker case is due to begin in the High Court on April
26.
'This is a key issue that affects all action groups,' said Mr Michael Deeny,
chairman of the Gooda Walker Action Group, representing names on the
syndicates. He said it affected almost all the litigation being brought by
over 30 Names' action groups involving losses of over Pounds 3bn.
Separately, in the High Court yesterday Mr Justice Gatehouse ruled that KMR
Services, a members' agent previously known as H G Poland, was liable for
losses incurred by two of the Names whose affairs it managed.
The Names had claimed they had requested to be placed on a conservative
portfolio of low-risk syndicates and had instead been allocated to high-risk
ones.
The decision in their favour may directly boost the case of other Names
seeking compensation against members' agents.
The ruling also contained a significant precedent because it granted a
highly unusual indemnity against future losses which will be incurred by the
two Names on their syndicates, in addition to compensation for the
liabilities they have already incurred.
Mr Tim Brentnall, a partner with Elborne Mitchell, which acted for KMR, said
his client was 'highly likely' to appeal against the ruling in favour of one
of the Names, and was 'considering' an appeal against the second Name.
Asked whether the finding against the members' agent suggested Lloyd's had
failed to regulate the market adequately, a spokesman said: 'It could be
that some people might interpret it as that.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940414

