FT942-15358

FT  15 APR 94 / Schneider faced with allegations of fraud


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


Deutsche Bank and the Frankfurt prosecutor's office yesterday launched
separate legal actions against Mr Jurgen Schneider, the missing businessman
at the centre of the crisis surrounding the large German property group
which bears his name.
Their allegations of fraud added to speculation about the reasons for the
disappearance on Friday of 59-year-old Mr Schneider.
Deutsche Bank, the biggest creditor to the property group, alleges Mr
Schneider deliberately falsified financial information when seeking a loan
for a property development in the Frankfurt city centre. The bank, which has
financed eight of Mr Schneider's developments, also alleges Mr Schneider
doctored documents when applying to finance the Zeil-Galerie shopping arcade
in the city centre.
The Frankfurt prosecutor's office said Mr Schneider had 'obviously fled
abroad'. Sources suggested he told colleagues working at the castle
headquarters of the group in Konigstein, in the Taunus hills near Frankfurt,
that he was going to Tuscany for Easter.
Creditor banks, owed an estimated DM5bn (Pounds 2bn), said last night after
a four-hour meeting in Frankfurt that there was no future for the Schneider
group. However, they committed themselves to an orderly solution, short of
insolvency.
This would mean the step-by-step sale of some of the group's properties, the
banks said, together with job cuts. Creditor banks would oversee the task.
The bankers said the group's difficulties were not representative of the
situation in the German property market as a whole. They had been caused by
'mistakes and deficits particular to this one company'.
The bankers met following a warning on Wednesday from Chancellor Helmut
Kohl, not to push the group into bankruptcy which could affect jobs
throughout Germany's major cities.
The group's total liabilities are believed to be in the region of DM9bn, of
which DM4bn is owed to trade creditors, mainly small businesses. Reflecting
the government's concern about the crisis, a taskforce headed by Mr Gunther
Rexrodt, economics minister, started to assemble data on the impact of
Schneider's problems on small businesses.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940415

