FT943-12931

FT  22 JUL 94 / Rethink over rail repairs sell-off urged


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


Civil engineering contractors are urging the government to rethink plans to
privatise companies which carry out Pounds 1bn worth of maintenance and
track renewal work for the railways.
The Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, which represents 300 of the
biggest companies in the sector, said yesterday that it wanted the
government to break up British Rail's infrastructure services division into
smaller units.
Mr Maurice Webb, industry director of the federation, said the maintenance
companies that were to be put up for sale had contracts worth between Pounds
80m and Pounds 120m a year so could only be bought by a few of the biggest
contractors.
The federation is pressing for them to be broken up into smaller units
starting at Pounds 50m of contract value to enable smaller contractors to
bid. It fears that the present proposal will lead to the transport
construction sector being dominated by a small number of very big companies.
Mr Webb said: 'At present the number of companies which could bid would be
limited to the top 10 or 12 contractors.' Most of these are federation
members but Mr Webb said the federation was acting for the smaller and
medium-size companies.
The federation held a preliminary meeting with Mr Roger Freeman, then
transport minister, on Wednesday, the day he was moved to the Ministry of
Defence. It hoped for a further meeting with Mr John Watts, his successor.
The Department of Transport said there were no plans to alter the present
arrangements for privatising BR's infrastructure activities.
The federation is also concerned about the government's plan to split
maintenance work from track-renewal contracts when it privatises the
infrastructure companies. It wants bidders to be allowed to buy companies
which carry out both maintenance and track renewal. One reason is that while
maintenance contracts normally provide steady year-round work, track renewal
work is less predictable. Bidders would like a balance of both types of work
to make more efficient use of employees and equipment.
The track renewal companies are smaller than the maintenance companies and
have annual contracts valued at between Pounds 25m and Pounds 40m.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940722

