FT942-15676

FT  14 APR 94 / Lancer draws bid interest: Receivers 'hands tied' without
control of whole lift-truck group


   By ANDREW BAXTER and KEVIN BROWN


Grant Thornton, administrative receivers for the UK operations of Lancer
Boss, said last night that considerable interest had been expressed from
potential bidders, but that its hands were tied by not having control of the
whole lift-truck group.
Meanwhile Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, told MPs at
question time yesterday that ministers and officials had already been in
touch with both the company and the receivers.
'My department will do all it can to assist, but it cannot become involved
in the receiver's administration of the case,' he said. 'However, there does
seem to be a good possibility of an offer being made for the Lancer Boss
group as a whole.'
It is understood that an unidentified UK company has made a bid for Lancer
Boss, and another bid is expected today. Receivers would also not deny the
existence of a bid based on a 'management buy-in' - like a buy-out but
involving outside managers. It is believed former Lancer Boss executives may
be involved in the buy-in.
JC Bamford, the UK's largest construction equipment producer, would not
comment on the receivership.
Some observers have suggested that JCB would welcome the opportunity to
expand its materials-handling business, but it is believed the company is
not interested in bidding.
In Brussels, Komatsu Forklift said it was watching the situation very
closely and had been in contact with the receiver, but had not made a bid.
Lancer Boss makes engined lift-trucks for Komatsu at Leighton Buzzard and
electric trucks for the Japanese group at the struggling Steinbock Boss unit
near Munich.
Grant Thornton pointed out last night that all the serious bids were for the
whole group. However, the administration of Steinbock Boss, from which
German banks withdrew facilities last week, is being handled by a German
lawyer, Mr Werner Fogel, based at Freising near Munich.
The difficulties of the UK receivers were underlined yesterday when
Bayerische Hypo-Bank, which led the group of German banks that funded
Steinbock Boss, said it hoped Mr Fogel could resolve the future of the
German unit by the end of this week.
This would probably be achieved through the takeover of Steinbock Boss by
Jungheinrich, the Hamburg-based lift-truck producer. Last night Jungheinrich
said it would offer to buy Steinbock Boss and that its supervisory board had
endorsed a draft takeover bid. Industry sources said Mr Fogel may decide on
the offer today.
Hypo-Bank also denied the accusation by Sir Neville Bowman-Shaw, chairman of
Lancer Boss before the receivership, that the German banking group acted
precipitately in withdrawing facilities from Steinbock Boss. 'After weeks
and months of negotiations, you can't say it was too hasty,' it said.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940414

