FT944-2367

FT  16 DEC 94 / Curtain rises on the final act: The Italian prime minister's
position is becoming more perilous, as financial and political pressures
grow


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


Like the flow of lava spilling from a volcano, the accumulated errors of
eight months' government are overwhelming Silvio Berlusconi and his
rightwing coalition.
Following Mr Berlusconi's interrogation on Tuesday by Milan anti-corruption
magistrates, the government headed by Europe's first media
magnate-turned-politician could fall before Christmas. The exact timing will
be determined by the final passage of next year's budget through parliament.
But while the government looks certain to resign, no clear alternative has
yet emerged.
'We are in fact one step away from a 'general crisis': that breaking point
where the confused state of Italian democracy could precipitate a collapse
of the entire system,' warned Mr Ezio Mauro, the editor of La Stampa
newspaper, owned by the Agnelli family.
Tempers are running high in parliament, where verbal abuse has become more
aggressive as the world has been divided into friends and foes of the
government. Mr Umberto Bossi, leader of the populist Northern League, has
turned from coalition partner into the prime minister's greatest adversary.
Mr Berlusconi is lashing out ever more desperately at his perceived enemies
 -Mr Bossi, the Milan magistrates, the communist-dominated left and even his
former fellow businessmen. Increasingly, 57-year-old Mr Berlusconi presents
himself as the victim, behaving like a latter-day King Lear cast loose in a
storm; a man 'more sinned against than sinning'.
'We are building up to a storm of unheard-of violence: one of those epic,
homeric storms,' observed Mr Giuliano Ferrara, minister for parliamentary
affairs and the government's spokesman.
The elements of the storm can be divided into the external and internal
pressures.
The principal external pressure comes from the financial markets. With
Italy's debt now more than 125 per cent of gross domestic product, the
country is enormously vulnerable to speculation against the lira.
The lira is already at an historic low, close to L1,050 to the D-Mark. Since
Mr Berlusconi took office in May, it has depreciated more than 8 per cent
against the D-Mark. The Italian risk factor is also reflected in the 4
percentage point differential between Italy's and Germany's interest rates.
The authorities might be forced to raise interest rates to defend the
currency; that would further increase the public sector deficit, which is
already 10 per cent of GDP. As a rule of thumb, each percentage point rise
in interest rates adds an extra L15,000bn in a full year to the Treasury's
budget.
Italy's political uncertainty has added to the doubts in the markets, with
fears that the government's programme for reducing the deficit in the 1995
budget will fail.
The budget was never more than the minimum necessary - it would have held
the deficit to L138,000bn, equivalent to 8 per cent of GDP. Now that aim has
been seriously weakened by the decision to remove pension reform from the
package of measures to head off a general strike planned for December 2.
Pensions are the single largest current spending item in the budget, and the
postponement of reform until next June will create a further six months of
uncertainty.
Even without the removal of the measures to cut the cost of pensions, the
budget targets would have been missed. The deficit reduction has been
undermined by a combination of higher than expected payments on Italy's huge
stock of debt, lower Treasury receipts this year, the cost of paying for
damage caused by November's disastrous floods in the north and the need to
provide funds for pension arrears after an expensive constitutional court
decision on the subject.
Mr Lamberto Dini, the Treasury minister, admitted this week that the budget
is effectively out of date and additional measures would be needed early
next year. Experts believe that a gap of at least L25,000bn will have to be
bridged, almost certainly by raising taxes, which Mr Berlusconi pledged not
to do in his election campaign.
The continued weakness of Italy's public finances at a time of political
turmoil means a rise in interest rates cannot be excluded. The prospect of
the damaging consequences of a fresh rate rise could determine the nature
and length of the impending political show-down.
All parties are agreed the budget must be approved rapidly, no matter how
imperfect its measures. Otherwise the lira, already under pressure in the
financial markets, could come under renewed attack.
'Once the budget is approved, Berlusconi should resign,' observed Mr Massimo
D'Alema, opposition leader and head of the former communist Party of the
Democratic Left. 'I have to accept that the government no longer exists.'
If the external pressures are financial, the internal ones are political.
First there is the increasingly anomalous position of Mr Berlusconi, who is
under investigation for corruption while running Fininvest, his business
group which is Italy's second biggest private company. He is alleged to have
known about the payment of bribes to members of the Guardia di Finanza, the
financial police, to ensure favourable inspections of the group's books.
Mr Berlusconi has rebutted the charges with vigour: 'Everything is based on
the presumption of knowledge of operational arrangements (in Fininvest
companies) which I never dealt with and could never have done, given the
well-known size of the group,' he commented combatively after his
interrogation by the magistrates.
He has also made clear his determination not to resign. 'It is my firm
intention not to back away from the task confided on me by the majority of
Italians in the mandate from the March 27 elections.'
This sense of a popular mandate is deeply imbued in Mr Berlusconi and feeds
his conviction that he can appeal directly to the electorate through
television, over the head of parliament. His ability to drum up support in
this way should not be underestimated since RAI, the state broadcasting
organisation, is now run by his supporters, and his three commercial
channels account for more than 85 per cent of the private television market.
But resorting to the media to survive merely focuses the spotlight on
another of the anomalies surrounding Mr Berlusconi, the conflict of interest
between his role as prime minister and his ownership of Fininvest. He has
been unable - or unwilling - to distance himself from Fininvest since he
took office.
Rather than improving, the situation becomes more entangled the longer he
governs. For instance, it is impossible to see how his government could
reform Italy's broadcasting system, where his dominant position has become a
matter of political controversy, without being considered partisan.
And although he is trying to use his position as prime minister to defend
himself against the scrutiny of the magistrates, their investigation relates
to Mr Berlusconi's time as a businessman, not as premier. He has failed to
explain why, as the founder and chief executive of Fininvest, he did not
interest himself in the visits of the Guardia di Finanza, especially in a
group that is structured in a cascade of tax-efficient companies.
Moreover, the case against him remains open for a full six months, dating
from the first warning on November 21 that he was under investigation. The
cloud of suspicion cannot be dispelled quickly.
Meanwhile there is now open war between Mr Berlusconi and the Milan
magistrates. Since October, inspectors of the justice ministry have been
checking on the behaviour of the Milan magistrates.
Mr Berlusconi and Mr Alfredo Biondi, the justice minister, insist they are
trying to ensure that proper judicial practices are being observed. The
magistrates have clearly abused the rights of citizens in interrogations and
in leaking documents to discredit individuals - not least Mr Berlusconi. But
these events are portrayed by the government's opponents as a determined,
self-interested attempt by the government to undermine anti-corruption
investigations.
In the past 10 days the confrontation has forced the resignations of Mr
Antonio Di Pietro, Italy's best-known anti-corruption magistrate, of an
appeals court judge and all 21 inspectors at the justice ministry. The
wounds are now being felt within the judiciary itself as people take sides.
The situation is such that there can be no peace between the Milan
magistrates and the present government. And it is a battle in which each is
seeking to disable the other.
Another equally damaging institutional conflict has raged between the prime
minister and President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro since Mr Berlusconi took office
in May.
The mutual mistrust is every day more apparent. Mr Berlusconi does not
prevent his ministers from raining insults on the president. Nor does he
dissuade them from making dark threats to raise embarrassing questions about
his Christian Democrat past as interior minister.
By failing to reach a modus vivendi with President Scalfaro, Mr Berlusconi
has alienated the figure whose constitutional position allows him to play
the central role in the next stages of the crisis - the formation of a new
government or the dissolution of parliament. The hostility between the prime
minister's office and the presidential palace has passed a point of no
return.
A similar point has been reached in Mr Berlusconi's relations with Mr Bossi.
The League leader has long been playing the opposition within the rightwing
coalition. This week he voted against the government for the first time and
has effectively changed sides. Mr Bossi has never felt comfortable in the
same alliance as the neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance of Mr Gianfranco
Fini.
But there has been a far greater contradiction at the heart of the
coalition. Mr Bossi has never had an interest in anything but the short-term
success of the Berlusconi government. The League is a lesser partner in the
coalition, and Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia movement was instrumental in
providing backing to elect the bulk of Mr Bossi's deputies. A durable
government could submerge the identity of the League in that of its larger
partner.
By threatening to break the alliance, Mr Bossi has retained the League's
identity. But this tactic cannot be maintained throughout the life of a
legislature, and Mr Bossi's threats to leave the government once the budget
is approved look likely to come to pass.
The present government can be brought down only in parliament, but the
League's defection to the opposition would provide the necessary numbers to
bring this about. Until now the League has hesitated because Mr Bossi fears
early elections and has failed to secure an alternative alliance. But Mr
Bossi has now pushed himself into a position where he cannot draw back.
Mr Berlusconi is the only political leader to favour early elections, with
the reluctant endorsement of his chief ally, Mr Fini. However, President
Scalfaro is likely to explore other options first, if only because the
electoral laws need to be changed to remedy the faults of the reformed
system first used this year.
There is also a strong practical objection to early elections, since this
would entail at least three months of uncertainty during the preparation and
campaign - the most alarming scenario for the financial markets.
One alternative would be a restyled version of the present government. It
would be headed by Mr Berlusconi but be less reliant on the MSI/National
Alliance and would have links to the centre parties that are guardians of
the Christian Democrat heritage. The League might accept this formula; and
significantly Mr Berlusconi's Channel 5 ran a telephone vote on Wednesday
that showed 50 per cent in favour.
But the idea suffers from being linked to the figure of Mr Berlusconi, whose
position is clouded by the judicial investigation into his affairs. No other
leader could easily hold this type of coalition together, not least because
Forza Italia remains little more than a Berlusconi supporters' club.
This leaves various forms of a broad-based government of national unity as
the most stable option. Such a government would have the limited and clearly
defined task of tackling Italy's public finances and preparing a new
electoral law - not unlike the 1993-94 administration of Mr Carlo Azeglio
Ciampi.
As the showdown approaches, the most optimistic tone has been sounded by Mr
Ferrara, the government's spokesman: 'When venom thickens the air forcing
great storms to break, this cleans the atmosphere.'
Instability may lead to political regeneration. But the Italian political
system, caught between the need for change and the instinct for
self-preservation, is unlikely to produce a clear-cut solution.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941216

