FT941-16912

FT  07 JAN 94 / Radio tags may home in on supermarkets


   By ALAN CANE and STEWART DALBY


Scientists have developed an electronic system capable of identifying
individual items of travellers' luggage or scanning an entire basket of
supermarket items.
'Supertag' will be launched formally next week. It has been developed by the
South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in conjunction
with the British Technology Group, employing a technique used originally to
monitor livestock in transit.
BTG executives foresee a broad range of applications for the system but
accept that its early use in supermarkets is unlikely because of cost.
The technology, called radio tagging, is already widely used for security.
Ford, for example, builds radio tags made by Texas Instruments into the
locks of some of its latest cars. Texas Instruments is one of the world's
largest producers of radio tags.
The principle is simple. A silicon chip containing a unique number is
embedded in the product. A radio beam is directed at the chip. This powers
the chip, enabling it to respond by sending back its number. Transmitted,
say, to a an in-store computer, the information could be used to price a
basket of goods and provide information about inventory.
The problem to date has been reading more than one number simultaneously.
Supertag overcomes this using three scanners and a technique derived from
computer networking. Radio tags are expensive, however, costing from 60p to
Pounds 1.80. Mr Peter Hawkes of BTG said Supertag would not be feasible in
supermarkets until the price per tag fell to less than a penny.
Mr Douglas Etheridge of ICL, a leading manufacturer of retailing systems,
said there was intense interest in ways of making supermarket check-outs
more efficient. Radio scanning was a prime contender and he would be
examining the Supertag system carefully.
Texas Instruments said the system would be a huge advance if it was as fast
as the BTG said, but the company was sceptical about the claimed
performance.
Supermarket chains gave a lukewarm reception to the prospect of electronic
scanners being able to reduce queues and allow staff cuts.
Ms Sue Spencer of Tesco said: 'I have heard the report. We are always
interested in technological advances. I am sure our development people are
looking at the latest idea. But there are no immediate plans to introduce
scanners which read the contents of a trolley.'
Ms Spencer doubted that if a new scanning system were brought in tomorrow it
would mean significant reductions in staff. She said: 'Anyone saved from the
check-out could be deployed elsewhere.'
Ms Prue Raper for J. Sainsbury was also sceptical about potential staff
savings, saying: 'We are going back to more labour-intensive operations and
away from self-service.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940107

