FT942-14501

FT  20 APR 94 / Arts: Star turns and preposterous poses - Television


   By MARTIN HOYLE


In times of national decline and international horror it is tempting to
brood on what we still excel at. The performing arts have been Britain's
great success story since the war, and the past week has provided nicely
contrasting reminders of recent glories in the field.
Omnibus (BBC1) celebrated Sir John Gielgud's 90th birthday with fascinating
archive film, professional and personal testimonials, and presentation by
Kenneth Branagh who modestly spoke of 'sharing the stage with a living
legend' in tones that suggested it takes one to know one. A virtual history
of modern British theatre emerged - West End, Coward, Old Vic, Stratford,
modernity at the Royal Court, not to mention increasing film work from the
1960s and TV commercials for Paul Masson wine. No mention of the
preposterous Caligula, though a glimpse of fashionable intellectual kitsch
from Peter Greenaway, with its splashy nudity, oddly resembled what one had
heard of the Playboy dip into high culture. Throughout, Sir John was urbane
and mischievously self-deprecating, charmingly illustrating Irene Worth's
verdict that 'he takes us as we are'. Our good fortune is that he gives as
well.
How different, how very different, from Omnibus's tribute to Joan Littlewood
a week later. Miriam Karlin's 'You love the woman but you can't bloody well
trust her' was a not untypical judgment. Littlewood, a pug-faced gnome in a
peaked cap, was equally affectionate towards old colleagues, 'that bugger'
Richard Harris and 'silly bitch' Barbara Windsor. And that was just the
people she liked.
Littlewood contributed more than mere direction to the triumphs of the East
End-based Theatre Workshop. A Taste of Honey, The Quare Fellow, The Hostage:
'If anyone wrote them, it was Joan,' declared an actor still bemused after
30 years. Her contempt for writers could be fruitful. Lionel Bart cackled
his way through the unexpurgated 'Fings ain't wot they used t' be',
originally the complaint of out-of-work tarts. Nemesis struck when
Littlewood 'tore up the script' in rehearsals of Twang], the sumptuously
financed West End musical on Robin Hood, longing to return to 'a dozen
actors and a few old props'. Disaster resulted.
Devised and produced by John Hough, directed by Alan Lewens, the totally
gripping programme evoked the bumpy exhilaration of working with this
maddening woman, unpredictable even in her non-conformism (decrying Peter
Brook's 'old art stuff', disowning the class struggle: 'I didn't like any
bloody class; just people with talent'). 'You have to be ruthless,' she
claimed; but rehearsed in pink light that caressed her actors. 'I loved
them, the bastards. I never told them so.' Ruthless, my eye. There's a softy
underneath. We were mad to exile her to France.
The Frost Programme (ITV) trotted out Sir Anthony Hopkins, preceded by
dreadful jokes delivered on glazed-eyed autopilot by Frost, sagging and
crumpled like an empty glove puppet. Hopkins was genuinely nice and nicely
genuine, faintly embarrassed at his host's remorseless prompting to
anecdotal luvviness. 'An audition with Olivier?' Frost nudged knowingly as
the thesp took on a hunted look. 'You're on the most - fantastic - roll,'
groped the international wordsmith, even venturing an artistic opinion on
Hopkins' latest film: 'It's doing fantastic business.' Of such aesthetic
values are media moguls made.
The craft was seen in practice in BBC 2's Screen Two 'by the award-winning
writer David Livingstone', according to a more than usually vacuous-sounding
continuity announcer who presumed wrongly. Had Return to Blood River been
written by the sage of Blantyre instead of mere Douglas Livingstone it might
have generated an atmosphere more redolent of Africa than North Peckham. The
timely story of a white liberal Afrikaner returning home after years in
England to take up his murdered father's business ultimately wasted a
promising situation. A case of double-bluff - the honourable black was in
fact guilty - copped out with a melodramatic ending and sketchy
characterisation. Lavishly cast, it also wasted some fine actors, notably
Barbara Jefford, reduced to a baleful presence; Frances Barber, alternately
radiant and blazingly angry; and Warren Clarke's leeringly genial, racist
Boer.
We may be good at acting but in recent years British architecture and
life-style leave something to be desired. Such is the message of the
three-part Heaven, Hell and Suburbia (C4) which kicked off with an ominously
heavy-handed fantasy for the opening credits. Presenter Jonathan Glancey has
the boyish, whimsical look of a young Tom Stoppard, but his loonier flights
are intended seriously.
Suburbia can mean many things: villages swallowed up by the city (Hampstead,
Chelsea), self-contained areas retaining their identity in a metropolitan
context (Kew, Richmond), or such great developments away from the city
centre as Edinburgh's New Town or Bristol's Clifton and Hotwells. The
director Bob Bee should have asked hard questions about definition. But it
transpires that Glancey has it in for Metroland and its descendants.
Stunningly commonplace observations on mock-Tudor alternated with strange
obiter dicta like 'stained glass speaks of cosiness and crumpets for tea' (I
shall look at Chartres Cathedral with new eyes).
Glancey commented on sundry English characteristics like suburban DIY while
forgetting that most English of all characteristics, sneering at things
English. He seemed amazed that people chose to move from the city and
outraged that they should 'want to be with their own kind,' adding 'and
that's what they get' in tones that implied bubonic plague. As one who has
been robbed once at knifepoint and once at gunpoint in front of my South
London front door, I could enlighten him.
The pleasant, aesthetically unremarkable inhabitants of pleasant,
aesthetically unremarkable homes in both England and America spoke of
escaping vandalism, crime, violence and fear, but Glancey steamrolled on
regardless.
A colleague was recently ejected from a press gathering for the South Bank
Show starring Dawn French for representing a magazine that had been less
than positive about Ms French's Murder Most Horrid. Fearful of offending
television's PR boys and girls, I shall consider my words carefully before
pronouncing last Sunday's SBS (ITV) interminably witless, repetitive,
cliche-ridden and self-indulgent. An alleged blow for the bigger woman (Ms
French is generously built), it wheeled out all the old observations on the
disadvantages of being a big girl today when the ideal is anorexic
willowiness, though a woman who, like La French, aligns herself with Marilyn
Monroe and Olympic athletes among others does not seem to have any problems
with self-confidence. Rubens was mentioned, Camille Paglia theorised, Jo
Brand told jokes, a war artist fresh from Bosnia conceded that painting Ms
French was 'a total change', and a fashion photographer waxed historical on
fleshy ladies with 'they wore tents in those days . . . In modern words,
there was a lot of celluloid there.'
There was a lot of celluloid here too; I had to pinch my cellulose to keep
awake. Dawn French posed for photographs in the style of old masters, was
reduced to a flurry of glottal stops at her (imagined) nude portrait while
Britten's Midsummer Night's Dream played in the background, whether
identifying the reclining actress with Titania or Bottom I am unsure.
It is surely time the South Bank Show gave up pretensions to being an arts
programme. These are few enough, and likely to get fewer; their precious
space must not be squandered on woolly-minded superficiality calculated to
show merely that even if opera singers are no longer fat, prima donnas still
are.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940420

