FT943-812

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (1): Financial lures
may not be the answer - Traditional preferences for compartmentalised,
nationally-based businesses are only slowly giving way to a pan-European
approach


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


The recession in Europe may have blunted company profits, but hard times
have sharpened corporate efforts to take full advantage of the single market
completed nearly two years ago.
The hype and high expectations surrounding 1992 and the promised arrival of
a 'level playing-field' for the sale of goods and services may have
evaporated. But as company strategists lay their plans for the future, they
are increasingly and unavoidably being influenced by structural changes in
the political and economic landscape of Europe.
Recession-led pressures to reduce costs and improve all-round efficiency
have been running in tandem with the need for businesses to pursue economies
of scale and to reappraise manufacturing, marketing and distribution
policies within an expanding European customer base.
The pace of consolidation involving manufacturing plant and distribution
centres across Europe has increased over the past year, while the European
headquarters of many multinational groups have been accruing to themselves
more autonomy and responsibility.
But the old preference for compartmentalised, nationally-based businesses is
only slowly giving way to a pan-European approach requiring the EU market to
be treated as a single entity within which the best skills and production
techniques can be located and utilised.
SKF, the Swedish roller bearing producer, has spread its six European
manufacturing operations across the marketplace; Whirlpool, the US domestic
appliance manufacturer, is sharply reducing its network of European
warehouses; and Compaq, the computer group, has invested heavily to create a
centralised Euro-distribution facility in Holland.
Despite plentiful examples, however, the process of reorganisation and
rationalisation appears far from complete, indicating that the European
employment market could take much longer to recover than predicted by the
Commission before the completion of the single market.
According to Dr Wilfried Vossen, Brussels-based managing director of Plant
Location International, the location consultants: 'A game resembling
locational musical chairs is still being played out. There are plenty of
indications that, far from creating new jobs, companies will continue
rationalising their activities across the European Union'.
He cites a recent annual survey by the European Commission, which claims the
jobs outlook remains grim as companies improve productivity and drive down
employment levels.
Nor has the single market yet provided the truly uniform, internal
marketplace pledged by the politicians. Mr Nick Cowley, of Amsterdam-based
Cowley Research and Publications, says: 'There remains a bunch of structural
problems which 1992 was intended to deal with but which by and large still
exist. The reality is considerable political inertia and slowness to change
 -witness the continuing fiasco over telecommunications deregulation.'
He adds: 'For many companies, the European markets are still carved up along
old lines, and distribution is still organised by country, causing higher
than necessary costs to be borne. Things are changing, but perhaps
expectations surrounding 1992 were too high.'
While politicians and companies review progress towards full economic
integration, the return of economic growth has again revived questions about
Europe's continuing ability to attract a significant share of mobile,
international business investment.
It has already experienced a worrying fall in inward activity by some of the
biggest international corporate investors, triggering more intense
competition between EU countries for a slice of the funds. The rivalry,
which extends to within regions of individual countries, has never been more
intense, and is increasingly given a high-profile political priority.
France, not always effectively organised to attract foreign investment, has
appointed an inward investor 'ambassador' who reports to the president. The
Irish republic continues to do well on the back of an aggressive campaign
underpinned by attractive tax concessions for manufacturers; while hopes are
high in Northern Ireland that, after 25 years of civil unrest, peace could
reap big investment dividends. At the other end of the scale, nations like
Greece and Portugal are not regarded as particularly effective in attracting
foreign-owned operations.
Among the big external investors, Japanese interest in Europe has nosedived
since 1992, partially reflecting Japan's domestic problems, but also echoing
a change in attitudes to a European marketplace which has not pursued the
protectionist path once feared.
There is little confidence that Japanese capital investment is set to return
to former levels, given the growing popularity of Asian locations much
closer to home offering low-cost production and increasingly affluent
consumer markets. Targets include Singapore and Malaysia, which in turn form
part of a chain now extending to still lower-cost production centres such as
Vietnam and Cambodia.
The US, which has more usually seen Europe as a market into which it can
sell rather than undertake innovation or even manufacturing, has also reined
back on new investment in EU countries. It remains a big participant, still
seeing Europe as a very rich consumer market with good economic
infrastructure and high workforce skills, but the new projects being
approved have generally been smaller in size.
Both the US and Japan, along with other significant inward investors, share
rising concern about the relative expense of operating in Europe. The debate
about social costs, highlighted by the refusal of the UK to accept elements
of the social chapter regarded as costly barriers to competitiveness, has
become an important issue.
Mr David Rees, head of Ernst & Young's location advisory service, says
German companies continue to seek locations elsewhere in Europe, to escape
the employment costs facing them within their own country. Britain, he says,
is maintaining its good record for inward investment by promoting the
country's flexible regulatory environment and lower unit labour costs, as
well as fewer restrictions on recruitment and dismissal.
The challenge to western Europe of maintaining the inward flow is compounded
by rising competition from other locations, some of them right on the
doorstep, not so evident before 1992.
'The risks traditionally associated with some other, competing locations for
corporate investment have been significantly reduced, leaving lower levels
of capital directed at Europe,' says Mr Cowley.
The former eastern European countries have inevitably attracted a great deal
of attention - primarily from Britain, France, Germany and the US  - given
their proximity to the European market and the continuing, though perhaps
temporary, cost advantages on offer. Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia
remain the most obvious areas of interest, and are now regularly included on
lists of candidate countries to be considered by engineering and electronics
businesses.
According to Mr Rees: 'Some of these markets now have to be taken very
seriously, even though the existing cost advantages may not last for too
long'. Many central European countries now have their own inward investment
authorities, part-funded by the EU. Given the prospect that some may
eventually join the Union and qualify for regional aid, the competition for
available investment will grow even more intense.
Efforts by the EU - notwithstanding national rivalries - to strategically
deploy the flow of inward investment to those declining regions low on
investors' preferences, but most in need of economic stimulation, have
always required a delicate trade-off.
But some location specialists are now beginning to questionwhether the
policy of offering financial rewards to overcome companies' instinctive
reservations is sustainable. 'You can offer massive incentives to get
companies to go to the north of Holland, or you can get them to Rotterdam,
where they really want to be, at far lower cos,' observes Dr Vossen of PLI.
'The issue of where to go in Europe is less and less based on industrial and
economic logic. Is it not time to let investors go where they want?'
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Rank                  Rank     Weighted score
1994     City         1993     1994      1993
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
1        London          1     1.05      0.97
2        Paris           2     0.80      0.82
3        Frankfurt       3     0.64      0.69
4        Brussels        4     0.47      0.45
5        Amsterdam       5     0.35      0.39
6        Zurich          6     0.25      0.29
7        Barcelona      10     0.24      0.24
8        Dusseldorf      7     0.22      0.26
9        Milan          12     0.21      0.22
10       Madrid         16     0.21      0.19
11       Geneva         10     0.18      0.24
         Manchester      9     0.18      0.25
         Munich         16     0.18      0.19
14       Berlin         14     0.17      0.21
         Stockholm      12     0.17      0.22
16       Prague         20     0.16      0.17
17       Glasgow         7     0.15      0.26
         Hamburg        16     0.15      0.19
         Lisbon         15     0.15      0.20
         Lyons          21     0.15      0.16
         Warsaw         23     0.15      0.12
22       Budapest       19     0.13      0.18
23       Vienna         23     0.10      0.12
24       Copenhagen     22     0.09      0.15
25       Athens         26     0.07      0.08
         Oslo            -     0.07         -
27       Turin          25     0.06      0.09
         Rome           26     0.06      0.08
29       Moscow         26     0.04      0.08
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
This table is based on interviews with 500 executives in nine EU
countries. It takes into account 11 indicators, ranging from access to
markets and telecommunications, to cost and availability of staff and
accommodation
Since last year's table, London, Paris, Frankfurt and Brussels have
consolidated their positions as the best cities in which to locate.
The southern cities of Barcelona, Milan and Madrid have all moved up.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: European Real Estate Monitor (Healey & Baker)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page I

940927

