FT942-15281

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Austria (2): Nimble exporters saved the day - Ian
Rodger examines the economy


   By IAN RODGER


It looks as if Austria gave the recent European recession a miss.
The final figures are not in yet, but it is likely that the country did not
even accumulate three successive quarters of declining output last year, and
the net gross domestic product decline for the full year was probably only
0.25 per cent.
This is a much better performance than everyone but Mrs Maria Schaumayer,
the president of the Austrian National Bank, expected. Mrs Schaumayer, it
may be recalled, brushed aside talk of hard landings last year, saying that
any landing would be of the softest velvet.
Even the quasi-official Austrian Institute of Economic Research (Wifo) was
too negative, carrying a 1993 forecast of a full 1 per cent decline until
mid-autumn when it detected an export recovery.
What seems to have happened is that Austria's nimble exporters responded
rapidly to the slump in demand in their main western European markets,
especially Germany and Italy, and aimed their efforts more at eastern
Europe, the US and the Far East. Thus the net fall in exports last year
could be limited to 4.5 per cent in spite of a 9.1 per cent slide in exports
to European Union countries.
Exports to eastern Europe have grown very rapidly in the past three years
and now account for 13 per cent of the total. Hungary is the country's
fifth-largest market after Germany, Italy, Switzerland and France. Exports
to the US were up 24.5 per cent after two years of declines.
Mr Helmut Kramer, Wifo director, suspects that analysts were so impressed
last year by the difficulties of some of the country's big companies - such
as Austrian Industries, OMV and Leykam - that they failed to notice that
smaller and medium sized companies were doing surprisingly well.
Mrs Schaumayer agrees. 'There is a deeply rooted misconception that we are a
country of farmers and civil servants. We have a lot of really successful
industrial entrepreneurs,' she says.
Productivity has also improved, at least with respect to Germany, thanks in
part to the willingness of trade unions to agree moderate settlements last
autumn.
The other factor in last year's resilient performance was a rise of 2 per
cent in domestic demand. This was partly explained by some government pump
priming early in the year, but mainly, it seems, by maintained consumer
confidence. Austrian authorities point out that they were careful to avoid
wallowing in the kind of excessive pessimism that could be observed in
Germany and tended to make things worse.
Perhaps because of the mildness of the downturn, inflation remains the
Austrian economy's biggest problem. Unemployment, the scourge of most other
European countries, shows no sign of raging through Austria. It averaged 4.2
per cent on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
calculation method last year and is forecast to rise to 4.6 per cent this
year as manufacturing industry continues to emphasise productivity
improvement. 'We expect unemployment to continue to rise steadily but
slowly,' says Mr Werner Teufelsbauer, chief economist at the Federal Chamber
of Commerce.
Inflation, on the other hand, is still at 3.1 per cent and Wifo is
forecasting that it will average 2.75 per cent in 1994.
Mr Kramer says that about a third of the pressure on prices comes from
increases in tariffs on public services and another important portion from
the strong demand for housing and the related recent liberalisation of rent
control laws.
However, he is distressed that market forces have been slow to work in the
past year since the effective revaluation of the schilling and, more
recently, the start-up of the European Economic Area (EEA).
Prices of many imported industrial inputs and consumer products remain
unnecessarily high. Perhaps it will take time for both EU sellers and
Austrian buyers to realise that the country's entry into the single market
through the EEA creates opportunities for both.
'Our small and medium sized companies are not accustomed to being in a
buyers' market. It will take them a while to learn to bargain,' says Mrs
Schaumayer.
The other relatively important problem is the public sector deficit. The
government's plan to bring the federal deficit down from 5 per cent of GDP
in 1986 to 2.5 per cent this year has been quietly jettisoned.
Good progress was made until 1992, when it was down to 3.25 per cent, but
last year the deficit grew again because of various recessionary influences,
the introduction of new social security spending and the failure of
privatisation revenues to meet forecasts.
The budgeted Sch60bn deficit was raised to Sch80bn in the autumn, and Mr
Ferdinand Lacina, the finance minister, said last month it would end up at
Sch98bn, some 4 per cent of GDP.
This year's budgeted deficit is Sch80bn, but with federal elections and a
tricky referendum on joining the EU in prospect, the government is unlikely
to be in the business of imposing pain on anyone. Next year, Austria has to
start making net contributions to the EU budget as well as compensation
payments to hard-hit industries, especially agriculture.
Nobody pretends that Austria's fiscal problems are anything like as severe
as those of most other western European countries. If the healthy finances
of the provincial governments are taken into account, the aggregate public
sector deficit is pretty close to the Maastricht requirement that it not
exceed 2.5 per cent of GDP.
But economists would like to see the government pushing hard to cut spending
now that economic recovery is under way.
Initially, the recovery is expected to be fairly modest. Wifo is forecasting
only 1.5 per cent GDP growth this year, and some economists believe it is
being too optimistic.
Mr Kramer says the export performance is better than expected, and he
believes export growth will exceed the forecast 3.8 per cent.
Domestic demand, on the other hand, will remain weak, with the only stimulus
coming from income tax cuts that came into effect at the beginning of the
year. Corporate capital spending, after two years of decline, will probably
rise modestly.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940415

