FT942-14539

FT  20 APR 94 / More ITV mergers urged: Carlton chief wants liberalisation
of media ownership rules


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Mr Michael Green, one of the most powerful men in British television, last
night called for further consolidation in ITV and a liberalisation of
cross-media ownership rules.
Mr Green, who is chairman and chief executive of Carlton Communications
which owns Carlton and Central, the two largest ITV franchises, was making
his first public speech on the industry.
He said recent ITV mergers were a first step towards building a partnership
between business and broadcasting.
'I make no apology for arguing that consolidation in ITV must continue and
that companies must be allowed to grow naturally within the normal
boundaries of competition law,' he said in the Fleming Memorial Lecture at
the Royal Institution in London.
He said he did not know whether there would ever be a one-company ITV system
but there should be a clear division of responsibility between programme
regulation and the rules on media ownership.
Ownership issues should be left to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and
market share should be the yardstick. The development of global media
markets meant the game was up for the government's 'old nursery approach to
media ownership, whereby our Whitehall nanny placed each of us in our neatly
fenced playpen'.
Mr Green said he would not be frightened if the Daily Mail wanted to buy a
slice of Carlton. 'I hope that no newspaper group would be frightened if
Carlton wanted to buy a piece of them.
'If the government is serious about wanting British companies to compete
globally in the media industry, then yesterday is not too soon to liberate
the restrictions upon media ownership,' he argued.
But the same rules should apply to all. Successive UK governments had
'conceded News International (Mr Rupert Murdoch's group) a scale of
influence and reach which they have consistently denied to anyone else'.
It might be unrealistic to suppose that any government was going to compel
News International to divest itself of any of its existing newspaper or
satellite interests, he said, 'but at least allow the rest of us to compete
on that famous level playing field'. He hoped the government would soon
accept that 'all mainstream broadcasters' should honour the quota requiring
51 per cent of programmes to be of European origin.
Mr Green, who is also chairman of Independent Television News, emphasised
that ITV had just a few years to rationalise to face growing competition.
'So television now needs business skills as well as creative skills. There
is no longer any protective cushion.'
He said a healthy ITV was essential to the British production industry and
last year it invested Pounds 670m in UK-produced programmes for the network
and its regional services.
In spite of increased competition there had been no plunge downmarket and
ITV had increased its proportion of ABC1 viewers last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940420

