FT944-5818

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Management Buy-Outs (1): MBOs weave their special
spell again - It has been a good time for buy-out financiers as they raise
new funds.  But there may not be enough deals to go round


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Venture capitalists in the UK will look back on 1994 as a special year.
Financiers will probably provide management buy-outs with Pounds 3.5bn of
equity, making it the best year since 1989 when Pounds 6.5bn was invested,
according to accountants KPMG Peat Marwick.
On the fund-raising side, the big MBO equity providers have successfully
raised large new funds after a burst of flotations early in 1994 that
greatly improved performance figures. Candover, Morgan Grenfell Development
Capital, Baring Capital Investors and Charterhouse have all raised funds in
a year that has seen more than Pounds 1.5bn of new money come into the
industry.
At the same time, banks that had almost entirely withdrawn from lending to
MBOs, after losing their shirts in the late 1980s, are able and willing
lenders again.
Whereas two years ago, a venture capitalist would have been hard pushed to
raise debt from banks other than National Westminster Bank and the Bank of
Scotland, there is now a desire to lend that verges on the incautious.
From the point of view of companies trying to raise money, therefore, there
has rarely been a more propitious time. The trauma managements endure in the
process of structuring and managing an MBO is as great as ever (see our
hypothetical example on page 12 of this survey). But the potential rewards -
both financial and in terms of personal fulfilment  - also remain just as
attractive.
As for companies considering selling subsidiaries to management or a
management buy-in team, the market is also healthy. The reason? The
increased supply of money means competition between financiers is fierce.
Venture capitalists increasingly find themselves bidding against each other
in auctions.
There is therefore no question about the popularity of buy-outs. But hanging
over MBO financiers, as the industry matures in the UK, is concern that
there might be too much capital around for the number of deals available.
'Over the last few years, venture capitalists have been managing flotations
from their portfolios and more latterly raising new funds,' says Chris
Beresford, head of corporate finance at KPMG. 'Now they are keen to invest
but there are not enough deals to go around. Some houses are finding it hard
to do enough deals to justify the number of people they have,' he added.
Put another way - it is only a matter of time before someone finds a way to
pay too much for a business as happened in the late 1980s, notably with the
purchase of the Magnet and Isosceles.
'With this wall of money there is no doubt that the market will be very
aggressive in the next 18 months,' says Jon Moulton, who moved from Schroder
Ventures this year to Apax Partners.
Despite such warnings, the venture capital industry does appear to be
maturing. Last week, a syndicate led by Prudential Ventures pulled out of a
deal to buy National Parking Corporation because they said the vendor was
asking too high a price. In less responsible times, the venture capitalsts
might well have put more debt into the financing, taken a more optimistic
view of growth prospects and put the Pounds 600m deal to bed.
Predictions that over-capacity in the industry would lead to a shake-out
have not, however, been borne out this year.
Grosvenor Ventures was taken over by Mercury Development Capital and at the
higher-tech end of the market, Trinity Partners merged with Advent
International. Europe.
But elsewhere there have been almost no mergers or casualties. The fate
awaiting those venture capital houses whose records would not support a new
fund-raising is probably death by a thousand cuts as management fees slowly
decline to a level that no longer covers overheads.
Competitive pressures have been increasing for other reasons, too. Large
conglomerates have either traded out of problems or sold most of the obvious
subsidiary businesses to management. And the subdued level of mergers and
acquisitions' activity has meant there have been few disposals.
As a result, competitive pressure is increasing. 'When new deals arise,
everyone is trampling over the same patch and it is getting pretty bare of
vegetation,' says Mr Beresford.
It is not an isolated view. 'This has been a great year for venture
capital,' says Charles Peal, managing director of Legal & General Ventures.
'A lot of people's track records have solidified into some pretty impressive
records. But I am slightly worried looking forward.'
Mr Peal says at least a dozen equity providers could lead at least three
Pounds 50m deals a year - meaning there is capacity for at least 36 deals.
On average, however, there have been only 11 such deals a year since 1992.
Shortly to be adding to this capacity is Apax Partners. Mr Moulton is about
to announce a new vehicle - not a fund - that he says will allow Apax to
invest up to Pounds 100m in a business without having to syndicate the deal.
Not surprisingly, the hunt is on among venture capitalists to find ways to
stand out from the crowd.
Some organisations, such as Schroder Ventures, have firmly established
reputations for doing more complicated transactions - turnarounds, or
transnational deals. Mr Moulton aims to do similar deals at Apax. Others
like, CVC Capital Partners and Baring Capital, have successfully pushed in
to Continental Europe. Some can claim to be faster decision-makers or more
knowledgeable about certain markets. But for others, there is little choice
but to slug it out on price.
What is more, there is an increasing incidence of the so-called financial
deal, where the venture capitalist approaches potential vendors directly,
for instance with the suggestion that a division does not fit and should be
sold. In this respect, UK buy-outs are looking more like US-style leveraged
buy-outs - though for the moment they carry less debt than their notorious
transatlantic cousin.
Ernst & Young believes this is the most significant development in the
buy-out market this year. 'It is a function of the weight of money in the
market and the desire of the larger funds to find some homes for that money
as quickly as possible,' says Martin Aguss, a member of the Ernst & Young
buy-out team.
A variant is the purchase of a job lot of divisions, a route taken by
Schroder Ventures when it bought a collection of instrumentation and
transducer businesses, which it called Solartron, from Schlumberger late
last year. The intention was to eliminate losses at one of the four
companies, build the others and sell the restructured business. As it
happened, the entire business was bought by Roxboro, before these plans came
to fruition.
This was a particularly rapid realisation. The more common exit route for
venture capitalists - flotation - has been more troublesome lately, with
1994 being a year of two halves.
According to Tom Attwood, director of marketing, new issues, at stockbrokers
James Capel, small company fund managers were having to evaluate two new
issues a day in the early spring, many of them former buy-outs.
Then the train hit the buffers. New issues like MDIS and Aerostructures
Hamble, issued profit warnings only months after flotation. Institutional
investor confidence in all flotations was seriously damaged.
'Venture capitalists will have to expect a comparatively low or lower
potential exit price because of the recent publicity,' says Mr Attwood. 'And
(institutional) investors will not only be exerting their muscle to get a
lower price they will also be looking for the very highest quality.'
This does not work entirely to venture capitalists' disadvantage. Finding an
exit for smaller companies may be temporarily more difficult. But the low
values that the stock market is attributing to small companies may also be
reflected in the price the venture capitalists pay for businesses.
What is more, research by James Capel and others suggests that former MBO
companies outperform their sector after flotation, notwithstanding the
aforementioned exceptions.
Venture capitalists would say this is the MBO continuing to weave its
beneficial spell on the business.

The Financial Times


London Page I

941201

