FT941-13010

FT  27 JAN 94 / UK Company News: In search of some sweetener - Why a US
union will attend Tate & Lyle's AGM


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


Tate & Lyle faces a public challenge from the US labour movement at the
sugar and sweeteners group's annual meeting in London's Barbican centre
today.
Seven US labour leaders, armed with proxies, plan to attend the AGM to
publicise what they call 'unfair and reckless' labour practices at AE
Staley, the multinational's subsidiary in Decatur, Illinois.
Staley, accusing its employees of sabotage, locked out all 760 workers at
its corn processing plant at 3am on June 27. The workers have been picketing
the plant ever since.
Temporary sub-contract workers have been hired to help management continue
production but union officials claim Tate has lost orders.
'The company's flat earnings report for last year is related to its failed
management policies in the US,' said Mr Dave Watts, local president of the
United Paperworkers union, yesterday. In the year to end-September the
company made pre-tax profits of Pounds 269.6m, against Pounds 237.4m.
Citing global competitive pressures for needing sweeping change, Staley
wants new employment contracts that the union claims will undermine their
members' living standards.
It argues that the imposed package includes a 20 per cent cut in workers'
average annual pay of about Dollars 30,000 (Pounds 20,000) through the
introduction of compulsory 12 hour shifts without any bonuses; an end to
seniority rights in work deployment; and abolition of the plant's grievance
and arbitration procedures.
Earlier this week the union delegation met Mr Neil Shaw, Tate's executive
chairman, and they hope this may help resolve the conflict.
'We will not go away', says Mr Watts, 'If the company is rational it should
talk to us and reach an honourable, negotiated settlement. Our members are
suffering real pain but so is Staley.' Tate said yesterday it would not
comment until today's annual meeting.
Tate has said in the past that it was not an anti-union company and the
Decatur lock-out was a matter for the local management to resolve. But the
company has recently suffered from bad labour relations elsewhere in the US.
Last year it endured a five-month strike at its Domino sugar refinery in New
York that the union claims cost the company Pounds 4m.
'We are confident Tate management could boost profits substantially at
Staley if it would step in to settle the dispute. Failure to resolve the
lock-out means lost earnings for shareholders,' said Mr Mark Brooks, UPIU's
special projects director, yesterday.
The Decatur plant has been unionised for half a century. 'The old management
was hard-nosed but at least we had agreements with them,' said Mr Watts. The
union leaders argue management-labour relations have deteriorated since Tate
acquired the company in May 1988.
When the last collective agreement expired in September 1992 the company
proposed its sweeping cost-cutting package which was rejected overwhelmingly
by the workforce in a ballot.
The union stepped up pressure by boycotting local banks which had Staley
executives on their boards. They were compelled to resign from them.
The company went ahead and imposed the changes it wanted. In retaliation,
the employees started a work to rule.
The conflict escalated rapidly. Three union activists were dismissed and the
workforce held a safety meeting that shut down production.
On June 26 Staley production workers joined hands in solidarity with workers
from the nearby Caterpillar assembly plant who are also in dispute. Early
the next morning Staley locked them out.
Talks through the US Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service have proved
fruitless and the company has made it clear it intends to reduce its labour
force by 284.
Since last autumn the union has widened its counter-offensive against the
company at local and international level, seeking to create what it calls
coalitions of interest. 'We want the UK unions to pressurise the company',
Mr Brooks said. 'What is happening in Decatur is going to affect them. They
are next on the hit list.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940127

