FT941-3585

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (19): Much ado about not a lot -
Jonathan Sale asks whether a new book of quotations is really relevant to
corporate life / Wisdom


   By JONATHAN SALE


Bartlett's Book of Business Quotations
Compiled by Barbara Ann Kipfer Little,
Brown, Pounds 9.99
266 pages
I have been poor and I have been rich,' says Sophie Tucker. 'Rich is
better.' Very sharp. Are there any more where that come from? Not many,
alas.
If it is true that 'Genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains' (Jane
Ellice Hopkins, 1870), this book is certainly not a work of genius. The
pains taken with Bartlett's Book of Business Quotations were strictly
finite.
It claims to give the date, when possible, of its quotes - but never
provides the year of the Shakespeare plays from which extracts are taken. It
tells us that the New Testament comes from the Bible - a fact with which we
may be familiar; but it does not hazard a guess as to the century when
Lao-tzu lived - even though it insists on passing on his highly dubious
remark that 'People are difficult to govern because they have too much
knowledge.'
'I cried all the way to the bank' is here credited to Liberace's 1973
autobiography, but was current well before that. Goethe may have added to
the quote which begins,'Art is long, life short'; but it was Hippocrates, of
Hippocratic-oath fame, who conceived it two millenia before. Disraeli may
have used 'Something would turn up' a little sooner, but surely it was
Dickens who bestowed it upon his Mr Micawber for all time.
'It is better to know some of the questions than all of the answers,'
appears here as an undated 'James Thurber Saying'. Why? In fact, he wrote
that, or something like it, in Fables for our Time. As for the publication
date, Bartlett's editor can look it up for herself. After all, 'Genius is
one per cent inspiration and ninety-nine per cent perspiration' (Thomas
Edison, 1932). And when she has finished perspiring over that, she can ask
herself why the two almost identical quotes about genius are dumped in
different sections of the book, the first under 'Entrepreneurship', the
second under 'Motivation'.
One quote, by Freud as it happens, consists only of the words 'To love and
to work'. As my children would ask, what's that got to do with the price of
fish?
We may well ask how the one thousand extracts came to be selected. The
answer seems to be that they were hived off from the 20,000 lying around in
a previous selection, Bartlett's Familiar Quotations. But they might as well
have called it 'Bartlett's Religious Quotations' or 'Sporting Quotes', so
irrelevant are they to industry, commerce, finance and, in most cases, to
anything.
Of course, they can be applied to business, but then so can 'Three Blind
Mice' if you push it. But do they pass the supreme literary test? Could a PR
department slip them into a speech written for a company chairman?
A few of the mots are genuinely bon. 'Beware of all enterprises that require
new clothes' (Thoreau) is a delight. So is Woody Allen's advice on getting
ahead: '80 per cent of success is showing up.' Mark Twain ('Cauliflower is
nothing but cabbage with a college education') shines out of a dull page.
Parkinson's Law about work expanding to fill the time available, which oddly
enough is related to business, remains true. There is also a wry truth in
John Ray's thought of 1670 that 'in a calm sea every man is a pilot' (just
wait for it to reappear in 'Bartlett's Book of Sailing') And a big hand to
Everett M. Dirksen for: 'A billion here, and billion there, and pretty soon
you're talking about real money.'
But that's about it. Henry James had some fine passages; the two extracts
here are not among them. As for Aristotle, some of whose unhelpful
pontifications are included, to my mind he passed his sell-by date in about
1494. You can quote me on that.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940315

