FT942-15927

FT  13 APR 94 / BBC sales opened to competition


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


The BBC has decided that international sales of its programmes will be
opened to market testing.
Independent programme distributors will be able to pitch for the job of
selling BBC programmes abroad, a role currently carried out by BBC
Enterprises, the corporation's commercial arm.
Mr John Thomas, managing director of BBC Enterprises, said the amount of
market testing would be limited but would occur across a representative
range of programmes.
Details are still being worked out but it is likely that BBC Enterprises
will continue to distribute programmes in which it has invested.
In the 1992-93 financial year, BBC Enterprises ploughed Pounds 60m back into
programme making from its activities, which include publishing and video
sales as well as programme distribution. Mr Thomas believes that, in spite
of facing competition, BBC Enterprises will turn out be 'the distributor and
exploiter of first choice'.
The market-testing policy emerged as the BBC published a document setting
out its commitment to 'fair and open competition in commercial markets'. The
corporation has been criticised by ITV and other rivals for using programmes
paid for by the BBC licence fee or the government grants that fund BBC World
Service to launch commercial services abroad.
The new BBC code drawn up by Mr Robin Foster, the corporation's chief
adviser on commercial policy, has three main features:
Clear criteria for all BBC commercial activities.
Fair competition in all markets.
No risk to the licence payer.
Under the fair competition policy, the BBC says all its commercial
activities will compete fairly and not have privileged access to public
funds.
Transactions between the BBC and commercial ventures will be conducted
through contracts or service agreements.
The policy means BBC World Service Television will face progressively higher
charges for items received from the main BBC.
At the moment WSTV, which is extending its service globally, pays a marginal
extra cost for material obtained from the BBC.
'We will see what the service can afford to pay,' said Mr Thomas who added
that he did not want to force WSTV out of business.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

