FT943-12715

FT  23 JUL 94 / Entertainment role to be urged for telecoms


   By DAVID OWEN


British Telecommunications would be free to carry entertainment services in
some parts of Britain by the late 1990s under proposals to be unveiled by
MPs next week.
The Commons trade and industry committee is expected to recommend sweeping
changes to the licensing, franchising and exclusivity arrangements that
govern the industry.
The Tory-controlled body is expected to urge ministers to remove uncertainty
which MPs feel has been dogging the sector. It is likely to say the
regulatory system is too rigid.
The report comes amid mounting calls for the government to rethink its
policy banning BT and Mercury Communications from offering entertainment
services over their existing networks until at least 2001. BT is most hard
hit because, unlike Mercury, it has a local network.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, said last month that
the ban could create local telecommunications monopolies in the shape of
cable-television companies if continued for too long.
His remarks came three weeks after Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, flatly rejected a Labour proposal to lift the ban in return for
BT agreeing to invest heavily in extending fibre-optic cables into its local
network.
He said it would be 'the gravest possible breach of integrity' for the
government to go back on its word to the cable companies.
When imposed in 1991, the ban's aim was to encourage cable companies to
invest in local cable networks, providing telecoms services in competition
with BT.
Next week's report is expected to recommend that the government starts
reviewing the exclusive rights given to cable companies to carry
entertainment on a franchise-by-franchise basis as they mature.
This could have the effect of allowing public telecoms operators into the
entertainment market well before the end of this decade.
Many observers believe the strongest case for an early lifting of the ban is
in parts of the country not covered by cable franchises.
Oftel, the telecommunications regulator, is empowered to report on the
desirability of lifting the ban from 1998. But Mr Don Cruickshank, Oftel's
head, has played down the prospect of even a review of the BT ban before
2001.
The cable companies say the ban is essential to ensure the viability of
their planned Pounds 6bn investment in the next five years.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940723

