FT943-866

FT  27 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Hammerson rises to Pounds 24.5m - New team
signals intention to expand in continental Europe


   By SIMON LONDON, Property Correspondent


Hammerson, the property company which came under new management last year,
yesterday reported interim pre-tax profits of Pounds 24.5m, against Pounds
15.2m, and signalled its intention to expand in continental Europe.
Mr Ron Spinney, chief executive, said that the company was considering a
number of opportunities to buy retail property in France. He added that any
deal would not depend on the outcome of negotiations which might lead to the
sale of Hammerson's Pounds 176m Australian portfolio.
'If we can sell (the Australian assets) at a price which adequately reflects
likely increase in values over the next couple of years we will do so,' said
Mr Spinney.
During the first half, Hammerson spent Pounds 25m acquiring 99 Bishopsgate -
the City of London office block bombed by the IRA last year - and Pounds
143m buying a portfolio of retail and office properties from Postel. In
July, after the half-year end, it spent Pounds 75m on three Canadian
shopping centres.
Bishopsgate is being refurbished and may be expanded to more than 300,000 sq
ft, an operation which the company expects to complete by the end of 1995.
Including the Canadian deal, Hammerson's gearing is about 64 per cent,
little changed from the end of the last full year.
Mr Spinney said that he would be happy to see gearing rise modestly, given
the likely improvement in overseas property markets.
Net rental income was Pounds 57.9m in the first six months of the year,
compared with Pounds 59.8m. Acquisitions partially compensated for lost
rental income following the disposal of Woolgate House in the City a year
ago.
Interest costs fell to Pounds 27m, from Pounds 38.3m, reflecting the impact
of last year's Pounds 199m rights issue and lower interest rates on foreign
currency borrowings. Administration expenses were Pounds 6.9m (Pounds 7.8m).
Adjusted earnings per share were 6.5p (5.5p) and the int-erim dividend is
unchanged at 3.5p.
COMMENT
Mr Ron Spinney has made good progress reshaping Hammerson's empire since he
took over as chief executive last year. If he can achieve a decent price for
the company's Australian assets and deliver an attractive deal in France his
reputation will be further enhanced. The overall strategy of increasing
Hammerson's exposure to stable retail property and concentrating on markets
where it has critical mass makes perfect sense. The snag is that much of the
good news is already in the share price. At yesterday's close of 323p, the
shares are on a discount of 14 per cent to analysts' forecasts for year-end
net assets. The average discount for the sector is closer to 18 per cent.
Moreover, likely earnings per share of about 12p for the full year would
leave little room to increase the 10.5p dividend.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940927

