FT943-13045

FT  21 JUL 94 / CMN seeks guarantees on Swans


   By CHRIS TIGHE


The French-based company which is the only prospective bidder for Swan
Hunter, the Tyneside shipbuilder facing closure, said yesterday it would
only go ahead with a deal if the British government guaranteed the yard two
years' base workload.
Soffia, the parent company of Constructions Mecaniques de Normandie (CMN),
said it may still buy Swan Hunter from the receiver in spite of the
shipbuilder's failure to win the contract to refit Sir Bedivere, the landing
ship, on which the original proposal was conditional.
Mr Fred Henderson, leader of CMN's bid team for Swans, said it needed an
indication from the government that it wished to see Swan Hunter survive.
He added: 'We are saying we need one meaningful contract to get the thing
started, or a series of minor ones to the same value. If Swan Hunter is to
survive, the MoD must guarantee a base workload for two years.'
Devonport and Rosyth naval dockyards had both, he said, been allocated much
more substantial workloads by the Ministry of Defence. CMN was looking for
work worth about Pounds 50m.
The government on Tuesday offered Swans the refit of the Royal Fleet
Auxiliary tanker Olwen, a three-month, Pounds 6m contract. The company's
only other work - fitting out the Type 23 frigate Richmond - will finish in
November.
The ministry said yesterday that its policy was to place orders in terms of
best value for money. 'It's been continually the policy that work is not
directed to specific shipyards.'
Devonport, it said, had been guaranteed nuclear-submarine refits because of
the large investment required, while Rosyth's allocation of surface-vessel
refits over 12 years was to give it an opportunity to restructure as a
non-nuclear surface yard.
Yesterday Swan Hunter union leaders met Mr Iskandar Safa, Soffia's senior
director, to assure him of the workforce's commitment to saving Swans.
Mr Safa later called for a 'partnership' involving Soffia/CMN, the unions,
the ministry, receiver Price Waterhouse, and Swans' major creditor, Lloyds
Bank, to find a solution. CMN hopes to meet ministers urgently - the offer
of the Olwen refit must be finalised by August 1.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940721

