FT944-2356

FT  16 DEC 94 / Asda claims victory in superstore price wars


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Asda yesterday claimed success for its strategy of returning to its roots as
a low-priced superstore, as it outstripped profit forecasts and reported
underlying sales increases well ahead of its rivals.
However, Mr Archie Norman, chief executive, warned that the 'watershed era'
of intense competition and falling margins in grocery retailing was likely
to continue for another two years.
The UK's fourth largest grocery retailer announced a 47 per cent increase in
pre-tax profits for the 28 weeks to November 12 from Pounds 74m to Pounds
108.7m - against City forecasts of Pounds 97m-Pounds 106m.
Profits last year were depressed by Pounds 14.4m losses at Allied Maples,
the furniture and carpet subsidiary sold to Carpetland last December,
flattering the latest results. Core Asda chain's operating profits, however,
increased 17 per cent from Pounds 95.1m to Pounds 111.5m.
Asda also announced plans to open its first 24-hour superstore increasing
the stakes in the battle for Christmas trade. The store in Clapham, London,
will be open all hours on December 22 and 23.
Mr Norman, who was the first industry figure to warn that the 'halcyon days'
of food retailing were over, disputed claims by rivals J. Sainsbury, Tesco
and Argyll that the fall in industry gross margins in the past year was a
one-off 'step change'.
'I don't know how they can say that with a straight face,' he said. 'This
(step change) was supposed to have happened a year ago, but gross margins
have continued to decline in the last four months.'
He said pressure on margins would persist as long as growth in industry
selling space outstripped demand growth.
Tougher government planning restrictions, were likely to reduce the number
of new superstores opened in 1996-97, so the level of excess capacity would
fall.
'The tightening of planning is the best thing that has happened to the
industry,' Mr Norman said.
Yesterday's figures demonstrated a further strong recovery in the fortunes
of Asda, whose future looked in doubt in 1991 when it had debts of Pounds
1bn. The group has paid off borrowings which stood at Pounds 82.7m last
April, and has net cash of Pounds 19.8m.
Asda is nearing the end of a three-year recovery programme designed to
transform it from a clone of Sainsbury or Safeway into a store catering for
'ordinary working people and their families, who demand value'.
But Mr Norman countered analysts' fears that growth would now slow, saying
there was still scope for raising the performance of Asda's stores.
The store refurbishment programme would continue and new information
technology would be introduced. Asda planned to increase the turnover of its
clothing range and develop its leisure range.
Total sales increased 8.4 per cent to Pounds 2.66bn. Like-for-like sales,
which exclude new stores, increased 7.1 per cent - well ahead of Asda's
bigger rivals.
Asda attributed the sales increase to improved customer service product
quality, and lower prices - resulting in a fall in gross margins of half a
percentage point. The operating margin increased from 3.9 per cent to 4.2
per cent.
The interim dividend increased from 0.55p to 0.61p, with earnings per share
up from 1.79p to 2.62p.
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941216

