FT943-12985

FT  22 JUL 94 / European Diary: EU debate simmers through summer - The issue
which is disturbing Sweden's near sacred holiday season


   By HUGH CARNEGY


It is July and it has been unexpectedly and gloriously hot. There has been a
flurry of anxiety over the alarming state of the public finances, but not
much else to disturb a nation that customarily takes to the water and the
woods to make the best of an all-too-short summer.
Yet, even during the near-sacred July holiday, the Great Debate under way in
Sweden over whether to vote in a referendum in November to join the European
Union is never far away.
It is to be found high up in the Arctic circle, where the sun shines
brightly at midnight, but where temperatures are not so hot. (The last day
of the skiiing season at Riksgransen on the Norwegian border was June 26.)
And it is to be found as far south as you can get, in Skane, where the rich,
rolling farmland lies less than 20km across the Oresund from Denmark.
For Sweden, neutral throughout the century's great conflicts and once the
proud pursuer of a middle way between Soviet socialism and flat-out
capitalism, the decision whether to join the EU is a real watershed and is
widely perceived as such.
At the risk of evoking stereotypes, Swedes are engaging in a national debate
over the issue that is impressively earnest and far-reaching.
The referendum campaign has been somewhat confused by the campaign for the
general election, which comes first, in September. But if anything, this has
encouraged the two sides in the EU confrontation to get in extra campaigning
during the summer, before the election campaign takes centre-stage.
The Swedish Federation of Industries and the Swedish Employers' Federation
have, for example, joined forces to send out no fewer than 10 campaign buses
across the country from May to July to get their pro-EU message across. Not
to be outdone, the No to the EU campaign has chartered a boat to cruise
among the harbours, islands and lakes where so many Swedes retreat for the
holiday.
Early this month in the mining town of Kiruna, the country's most northerly
city, one of the industry buses (actually a custom-built 40ft lorry trailer)
pulled up for a couple of days in the main square. Equipped with a dizzying
array of at least 50 different books, leaflets and information sheets,
volunteers fanned out into the streets to look for converts in an area where
the No camp is firmly in the ascendant.
Even among those who declare they have made up their minds, the willingness
to come on to the trailer to discuss the issue is remarkable. On a sleepy
Sunday in Kiruna 167 people stopped to take up the debate.
Their concerns range from the mainstream worry that Sweden will lose its
independence by joining, through worries about the cost of membership to the
fear - apparently widespread - that thousands of German hunters and tourists
will trample the treasured Swedish countryside into mud.
'People are very open here, even though most of them are negative. They are
prepared to discuss the issues,' says Anne Flonneau, a Frenchwoman now
living in Sweden who is in charge of the Kiruna truck. As if to prove her
point, she launches into a lengthy argument with a local trade union leader
who is strongly anti-EU.
She does not change his mind, but says: 'What we don't want is people saying
'I don't know, so I'll vote No'. We want them to have the information.' The
cry 'I need more information' is heard everywhere. Yet Swedes probably now
have more information available to them explaining the issues than any Union
citizen. Every public library is packed with EU material, there are
government telephone hotlines and both sides in the debate are churning out
enough propaganda to strip Sweden of its forests.
Still, there is little sign of Euro-indigestion. In Skanor, a seaside resort
on the southern tip of Sweden, volunteers from another pro-EU industry bus
set up at a funfare. They canvassed holidaymakers rushing to the alcohol
monopoly to stock up on booze before it closed for the weekend. Nobody
seemed to mind being interrupted.
Mr Roger Gustafsson, a self-employed businessman on holiday in the town, is
inclined to vote No. But he eagerly took away a fistful of leaflets after a
chat with one of the canvassers. 'I am basically against the EU. We - you
and I - will have nothing to say, the politicians will decide everything,'
he declares.
But he adds: 'I could be persuaded to vote Yes - if I am sure Sweden will
still be able to decide the things that are important for Sweden. I need
more information. I've only just started to get the information.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940722

