FT942-14895

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (15): More powerful than
money - Lessors rely on the lure of the company car


   By MARTIN DERRICK


Like everything else involved in the business car market, contract hire and
leasing specialists can only wait and see how the company car will be
affected by the tax changes which took effect this month.
Scare stories have been circulating in recent months suggesting that
thousands - if not tens of thousands - of company car drivers would turn in
their keys and demand a cash alternative when they found how much extra tax
they would be paying from April 6.
But it appears that the cash versus car debate was a bogus one, fuelled by
accountants keen to sell reports and services at inflated prices. While some
companies may consider offering employees an alternative to the company car,
the vast majority have not been unmoved. They reason that if they increase
salaries to a level which allows the employee to buy and run the same car as
he previously enjoyed as a company driver, the cost to the business will be
prohibitive.
Despite tax changes - including increases in certain instances - the company
car remains a tax-efficient means of remuneration for all except the small
percentage of perk drivers doing fewer than 2,500 miles a year and enjoying
the benefit of an expensive company car.
Mr. Gary Spellins, sales and marketing director at Lex Vehicle Leasing, the
UK's contract hire market leader, with a fleet of 56,000 vehicles, says that
the new tax regime will encourage more employees to concentrate on the
capital cost of the car in future, but the effects, if any, 'will not be
seen for another couple of years. Companies cannot change or take back all
their business cars overnight, so if there are to be changes in the sort of
cars that employees choose, we'll see this when the normal time comes to
replace current vehicles.'
The changes he expects are that a proportion of drivers will turn to smaller
and cheaper cars in order to reduce their own tax burden. He does not expect
the contract hire and leasing market to contract. 'The market is broadly
very stable,' he says. 'All we have seen in the last couple of years is a
slow down in the frequency of changes of cars - but the number of vehicles
on lease or contract hire has remained a very steady 30 per cent of the
total company car market.'
That market last year was 740,000 new cars delivered to fleets and this year
he expects a modest increase to possibly 760,000.
But although the market size seems to be constant, the range and kind of
services demanded of contract hire and leasing companies is changing.
According to Geoff Cobley, managing director of Fleet Marketing Services,
while most enquiries in the first quarter of this year were for contract
hire, there is also strong interest in personal lease schemes, fleet
management/maintenance, and insurance claims management.
Contract hire is back at the top of the inquiry tree, he says, because
companies which held on to cars through the recession are now more confident
and are ordering new cars.
As far as personal leasing goes, in the last six months FMS executives say
they have spoken to 160 big fleet operators about this scheme in face to
face interviews. Geoff Cobley sees it as potentially a big force in future
contract hire business, but others are less certain that the market is truly
ready for private leasing.
'We have developed a private leasing product but we won't launch it until
there is primary demand in the market and it's not there yet,' says Mr
Spellins.
'At the moment, considerable interest is being expressed in outsourcing, a
system whereby the contract hire company takes over virtually all the
running of the fleet on behalf of the company. Not all our customers,
however, want this. Our job is to deliver what the customers want in the way
in which they want it delivered.'
Contract hire and leasing companies are finding they need to provide ever
higher levels of service while at the same time keeping costs to a minimum -
because price competition is rife.
The consequences of over-ambitious price competition - usually achieved by
gambling on re-sale values three years down the line - can be seen from time
to time in the collapse or take-over of a contract hire company - including
a number of well-publicised examples.
But, says Mr Terry Nunn, chairman of the British Vehicle Rental and Leasing
Association (BVRLA), there is no sign of any dramatic changes in the market.
'Though there must be one or two companies in difficulties acquisitions and
mergers are running at normal levels. This is a very mature market and for
the most part its players are mature businesses. And they are currently
enjoying a definite pick-up in the market,' he says.
Lex's view is similar. As the biggest player, it enjoys economies of scale
and it can also afford to invest in the most sophisticated systems and
technology - for example, 60 per cent of all the vehicles it acquires are
bought on-line and the company also has on-line links with all its big fleet
customers.
But, says Mr Spellins, despite these many advantages over smaller companies
there is little prospect of Lex or Cowie Interleasing - the only other
contract hire company of Lex's size - enjoying anything like a monopoly.
'Well-managed companies will continue to increase their market share but not
by much, because our customers seem to believe contract hire is a commodity
product and so often individual contract decisions come down simply to
price. Some companies are finding that sourcing their whole fleet through
one contract hire company has significant cost savings in terms of the
internal economies that can be made through dealing with a single source,
but with over 500 contract hire companies in the market - and the fact that
it is very easy to start up a new business in this sector - price
competition is here to stay.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940418

