FT944-14535

FT  22 OCT 94 / Concern over pension mis-selling to widen


   By ALISON SMITH


A new area of concern about pension mis-selling will be opened up next week
when a report from the City's chief regulator highlights the position of
people who bought personal pensions and did not join their employers'
schemes.
Pension sales agents and advisers could face significant compensation claims
for selling personal pensions when a better option for customers would have
been to go into an occupational scheme.
The Securities and Investments Board, the financial watchdog, is expected to
publish on Tuesday its guidelines for how life companies and advisers should
compensate customers who have suffered from poor advice to take a personal
pension.
The original focus of its work was the possible mis-selling among the
500,000-plus pensions sold to people transferring a lump sum out of a scheme
run by a former employer. Concern about this aspect of pensions had been
sparked by a study suggesting that nine out of 10 cases examined did not
meet regulators' standards.
But the work expanded to include people who were in their employers' pension
schemes and were advised to opt out and start a personal pension instead.
Results of a study commissioned by the watchdog from consulting actuaries
Bacon & Woodrow on 'opt outs', are expected to identify personal pensions
sold to 'non-joiners' as a problem in its own right.
Life insurance companies and advisers say that the number of cases where
people were advised to leave an occupational scheme to which they already
belonged is likely to be relatively low, because they would clearly have
been giving up contributions to their pension from their employer.
But they acknowledge that it would have been easier to sell personal
pensions wrongly to people who could have joined an employer's scheme but
had not done so because they did not check properly whether they would
qualify for membership.
A critical factor in determining the number of cases which have to be
reviewed and where compensation must be paid will be what SIB says about how
far sales agents and advisers should have checked whether a customer could
join an employer's scheme and whether, if the customer was eligible, the
advice was to remain outside the occupational scheme.
These cases of 'non-joiners' are likely to be hard for life companies and
advisers to identify from their files, which could make it expensive to find
all those who should qualify for compensation.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941022

