FT941-12933

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (7): Elastic but not enough - The French agency
wins a mixed verdict / Customer feedback / Coface of France


   By JOHN RIDDING


THESE are risky times for French exporters. 'The only certainty now is that
markets are more competitive and less predictable,' says the managing
director of one electronics group. For him and for his counterparts across
French industry, such trials raise their reliance on Coface, the French
export credit agency. They also raise the question of how the organisation
has responded to the challenge.
For most exporters, the answer is largely positive. A series of reforms and
the introduction of new policies has increased the flexibility of the
organisation. An international expansion has increased the range of its
services and its expertise. But there remain areas where users believe
improvements can be made.
In the field of exchange rate risk cover, for example, clients see
improvements and the scope for further progress. 'For most of our overseas
contracts, Coface provides an attractive means of covering exchange rates,'
says Mr Jean-Paul Marangone, attache in the financial department of Merlin
Gerin, the electrical engineering group.
Like many other French companies, Merlin Gerin has found a greater need for
protection against the vagaries of international currency movements. Before
the departure of sterling and the lira from the EMS and last summer's
reforms to the exchange rate mechanism which brought a widening of
fluctuation bands for all of the member currencies, the US dollar accounted
for between 80 and 90 per cent of the group's exchange rate cover. 'That
proportion has now decreased,' says Mr Marangone.
The flexibility of Coface's exchange rate products has increased in line
with demand. In 1992, the organisation introduced its CIME policy which
allows clients to benefit from favourable movements in exchange rates during
the term of their contracts. The response has been positive. 'It is more
flexible and obviously we are anxious to gain from currency movements,' says
one customer.
But some companies feel there is room for further improvement. 'At the
moment we can receive a maximum of about 70 per cent of any currency gains,'
says Mr Marangone. He believes it should be possible to receive a higher
proportion of the profits.
Coface has also become more flexible and responsive in its core credit
guarantee operations. A series of marketing efforts, which have included
greater contact with clients, has made the organisation more responsive.
Similarly, rationalisation measures have simplified and accelerated the
process of applying for policies. 'They have made a lot of progress, and
become much more dynamic,' says Mr Herve Bazire, head of international
affairs at the French operations of Otis, the elevator manufacturer.
He believes, however, that more can be done to smooth dealings between
Coface and its clients, particularly where the contracts are relatively
small. 'Coface is still a very big organisation and is very competitive on
big contracts,' he says. 'But we don't do very big contracts, perhaps
between FFr200,000 and FFr300,000 each, and there is still a lot of
bureaucracy which adds to the cost.'
The nature of Mr Bazire's business means that he is interested principally
in Coface's short term credit guarantees. For periods above three years,
medium term guarantees, the clients and the contracts tend to be larger.
For such customers, Coface is regarded as a strong competitor in the
international credit guarantee market. An executive of one French-based
multinational company says that Coface is often preferred to rivals such as
Hermes of Germany or Britain's ECGD.
With respect to credit risk analysis, Coface's operations have been
strengthened by its process of international expansion over the past few
years. The French organisation now has operations - either through minority
or majority stakes - in countries ranging from Ireland to Argentina. This
process is welcomed by many clients. 'With competition in our traditional
markets so tough at the moment, we are being forced to diversify, to look
for new customers,' says the export manager of one manufacturing company.
'We are often strangers in these markets so we have to use Coface to give us
information about our potential partners.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940127

