FT943-12867

FT  22 JUL 94 / Starter guns 'n' roses


   By JOE ROGALY


When Mr John Smith died, it seemed plain that if the Labour party elected Mr
Tony Blair as his successor we would have to consider voting centre-left. It
has, and we are. Considering, that is. The electorate will do a great deal
of considering over the coming two to three years. It is likely to be
presented with an agonising choice, between a reformed Labour party that it
can probably trust, and a stabilised Conservative government that may be
stale and untrustworthy, but is at least a known quantity. The Liberal
Democrats will be squeezed.
If the election was held next Thursday many of us would take a chance on Mr
Blair. The temptation would be overwhelming. Turfing the present government
out would be like removing tight shoes. As to 1996-97, who knows? The
campaign, which we shall have to endure for 24 or maybe 30 months, starts
now. It is going to be one hell of a game of poker. In one of the key pots
the hole card will be covered by the flat paw of Mr Eddie George, governor
of the Bank of England.
The quasi-independence of the bank is something new in post-1945 politics.
Management of the economy is no longer solely a matter between the prime
minister and/or the chancellor, as it was in the Thatcher-Lawson years. The
publication of the minutes of discussions on monetary policy between Mr
Kenneth Clarke and Mr George gives the latter huge influence. This is not a
consequence of Mr Clarke's far-sighted statesmanship. It happened because
when the elected politicians ran affairs policy crumbled in their hands, as
in 1988 and again on Black Wednesday. If, as he surely will, Mr George
argues strongly for an increase in interest rates during the next few months
he will be almost impossible to resist, particularly if he carries Mr Clarke
with him. Mr John Major may protest that raising the cost of mortgages could
damage his government's health. Tough.
The prime minister does show some strong-ish cards. On Wednesday he tidied
his cabinet, and made extensive changes lower down. Let us just say, 'fine'.
We do not need to spend time on the merits of one set of nonentities as
against another. Nonentities? I exclude Mrs Gillian Shephard, the new
education secretary. She is sensible, a real person. I have great
expectations there. The rest of the list is too dull to rehearse at the
beginning of the political holidays. There will be plenty of time to debate
the merits of shooting this or that grey squirrel when the season resumes in
the autumn. Here is the executive summary: the purpose of the reshuffle was
to win the favour of the Tory party, and keep order among backbenchers by
feeding their dreams of preferment. It has apparently achieved that.
Partly for this reason, Mr Major seems likely to stay in office. His party
is still divided, but he has constructed a European policy that minimises
those divisions. It may not last. The European sticking-plaster, like his
premiership, is a product of the continued support of the foreign secretary
and the chancellor. The former will probably retire next year; the latter is
a recognised rival for the top job. For the moment, however, both are in
place. The run of political misfortune has not quite come to an end, but, in
spite of the apparent willingness of a couple of Tory backbenchers to sell
parliamentary questions at a grand a time, it seems to be dribbling out.
There are other not-so-bad cards in Mr Major's hand. The recession is over,
although the voters stubbornly refuse to recognise this. Perhaps too many
personal bank balances are still receding. The Treasury is aware that it
will be called upon to forecast a sufficient recovery in the public finances
to allow for tax cuts in the Budgets of 1995 or 1996. Against that, the
Conservative party lied copiously about its instincts on taxation in 1992.
Some voters may remember this next time.
Mr Blair is ostensibly better placed. He shows aces up and presumably has
more in the hole. His victory yesterday demonstrated that the Labour party
is now the property of the modernisers, and he their master. He won the
votes of 60 per cent of the members of the Westminster and European
parliaments, almost as high a share of constituency party members' support,
and more than half the trade union ballot. We can, however, discard the
latter. It is history. With less than a fifth of those eligible bothering to
take part, the vote of union members was an anachronistic appendage to what
was otherwise a remarkable democratic primary.
The new leader's acceptance speech was suitably inspiring. It could have
been drafted in Little Rock. Mr Blair's campaign is reminiscent of President
Clinton's. The new, telegenic, young leaders offer hope and renewal after
the bumbling years of Bush/Major and the earlier, fearsome, reigns of
Thatcher/Reagan. Mr Clinton as president is not an encouraging role model,
but the way he ran for office has one overwhelming advantage. He won.
It is customary to demand of Mr Blair that he produce some specific, costed
policies. It may be that just as it is the job of commentators and his
political opponents to ask this of him, so it is in his and Labour's
interests to resist, to withhold hostages to fortune. His speech yesterday
was his, not ours. It was addressed to his party, reasonably enough, and to
the wider anxieties of middle England. 'The task of national renewal is to
provide opportunity and security in this world of change,' he said. There
were crunchier nuggets: 'we do not want people living in dependency on state
handouts' and 'we will not run the quango state of the Tories with different
managers, we will get rid of it and return power to local people'.
This first big set-piece speech pleased his audience of Labour and union
dignitries. Their applause expressed a degree of unity of purpose
traditionally reserved for Tory leader-worship gatherings. There was no
old-style, horse-and-buggy, nationalising, taxing, high-spending socialist
blather in it. Mr Blair talked, as the best Conservatives do, of 'one
nation'. He referred, as business leaders do, to Labour's 'mission'. He
rejected 'the student gospel of Marxism'. It was an impressive start. In due
course, someone must call, so that we can see the rest of his cards, face
up.
Joe Rogaly will resume his column in September

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940722

