FT944-11080

FT  08 NOV 94 / Arts: Odessa and Jansons


   By ANTONY BYE


Despite the world-class stature of the showcase orchestras of Moscow and
Leningrad, musical life in the former USSR was more-or-less a closed book to
western eyes and ears. Following the emancipation of the ex-Soviet
republics, the first visit to the UK of the Ukraine's Odessa Philharmonic
Orchestra, which reached the Barbican Centre in London on Friday, gave us a
taste of just how musical life was faring in one of the more far-flung
regions of the former Soviet empire.
If the recent history of the Odessa Philharmonic is typical, then provincial
orchestras face a difficult but by no means insurmountable challenge. Four
years ago its future appeared far from rosy, with regular defections of
members of the west, an acute shortage of musical instruments and dwindling
audiences. But since the appointment of the extrovert young American
conductor, Hobart Earle, as its music director four years ago, its fortunes
have changed rapidly and, whilst still beset with financial worries, morale
is increasing and its repertoire expanding (though not always in the right
direction, it seems, if the hollow rhetoric of Miroslav Skoryk's Carpathian
Concerto - a folksy-realist throwback to pre-glasnost days - is typical),
and the prospect of a new Dollars 30m concert hall is a not unrealisable
possibility.
Inevitably the orchestra's sound is less polished than that of its more
illustrious western counterparts. Ensemble is less than precisely
coordinated, balance between the various sections is often sacrificed to
sheer high spirits, and Earle's conducting is efficient rather than
illuminating. Rachmaninov's Third Piano Concerto (with Arnoldo Cohen a
solid, unimaginative soloist) was a mundane affair, lacking in poetry and
glitter and starved of the opulent string sound it needs. Ironically, it was
the standard Austro-German repertoire that found the orchestra at its best;
a Brahms Second Symphony of white-hot intensity, tensile strength and
unflagging sense of purpose.
The history of the Odessa Philharmonic shows just how easily we take our own
orchestras' expertise for granted, but there was nothing routine about the
London Philharmonic's concert at the Royal Festival Hall on Sunday evening:
what seemed on paper standard early-20th-century fare - Debussy's Nocturnes,
Ravel's G major Piano Concerto and Stravinsky's Rite of Spring - became an
absorbing journey of renewal as its principal guest conductor Mariss Jansons
galvanised his players into a sense of occasion and rediscovery.
Jansons is an out-and-out romantic, but only occasionally, as in his rather
Tchaikovskian way with climaxes, did this jar with the cooler aesthetic of
the three works on offer. The Debussy was no vacuous, impressionistic haze
and the Rite became once again a frighteningly purgative experience,
celebratory and cathartic. The Ravel Concerto, too, often such a slight
work, took on real substance, not least because Pascal Roge (replacing
Krystian Zimerman) never allowed his wide experience of the work to lead him
into complacency: though a touch restricted in colour in the first movement
perhaps, he mesmerised in the slow movement, spinning out its extended
cantilena with a sense of wonder, both surprising and inevitable.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941108

