FT943-832

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Bonds: Belgium sets scene for World Bank DM
global


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


The Kingdom of Belgium launched its long-awaited D-Mark eurobond issue
yesterday, with a DM1bn offering of five-year fixed-rate bonds.
The bonds, priced to yield 25 basis points over government bonds, were sold
mainly to European investors, joint lead manager Dresdner Bank said. But
demand from retail investors is expected to increase over the next few days.
This sets the scene for the World Bank's global D-Mark offering which it
expects to launch next week, the Bank said yesterday. The deal is likely to
be a DM2bn issue of five-year fixed-rate bonds.
The offering, the World Bank's second ever global D-Mark issue, is likely to
be priced at a spread 'in the low to mid-teens' over government bonds,
officials at Morgan Stanley said yesterday.
Morgan Stanley is joint lead manager of the deal with Deutsche Bank.
The World Bank has a funding requirement of DM7bn to DM8bn for the current
fiscal year in D-Mark group currencies, which include other currencies such
as Swiss francs, Bank officials said. The fiscal year ends in July 1995.
So far this fiscal year, the World Bank has launched one issue in D-Mark
group currencies with an offering in Swiss francs worth SFr200m.
An official revealed yesterday that the Bank is now considering a second
global D-Mark offering in the first half of 1995. 'There is room now for a
second global deal in the first half of 1995,' he said. 'We came now with
this offering in order not to crowd out that next issue.'
The official said that there had been significant interest in the current
planned offering in a number of European markets, in North America and in
Asia.
At the short-end of the French franc sector, the Abbey National launched a
FFr2bn issue of two-year bonds, offering a yield of 7.25 per cent.
This follows its decision last week to postpone its proposed global dollar
offering due to volatile market conditions.
Mr Gareth Jones, Abbey National's treasurer, said: 'There is now some
appetite for bonds after the sell-off over the last couple of weeks, enough
to support a relatively small deal such as this, but hardly enough to
support a global offering.'
'Abbey National is becoming an increasingly well-known name in this sector,
and we have a positive outlook for French franc rates since we believe there
is going to be another cut in German interest rates,' said an official at
lead manager Banque Paribas.
The current deal is the Abbey National's third offering in French francs so
far this year.
San Miguel, the Philippines brewing and food company and the country's
largest manufacturing enterprise, launched its debut eurobond offering with
a Dollars 115m issue of bonds due April 2000.
The bonds, which were priced to yield 190 basis points over US Treasuries,
were sold 40 per cent into the US, 35 per cent into Europe and 25 per cent
into Asia, lead manager JP Morgan said.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940927

