FT944-6160

FT  30 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Attwoods to sell UK side to Cleanaway


   By PAUL TAYLOR


Attwoods, the mineral extraction and waste management company fighting a
hostile Pounds 391m takeover bid from Browning-Ferris Industries of the US,
yesterday said it had agreed to sell its UK business to Cleanaway for Pounds
125m if the BFI bid failed.
Meanwhile BFI announced it had received acceptances in respect of 120.6m
ordinaries or 42.6 per cent, including the 29.8 per cent holding of Laidlaw,
which agreed to the original offer. Of the preference shares it had
acceptances for 48m or 73.1 per cent, including Laidlaw's 72.9 per cent.
The offer is due to close at 1pm on Friday.
As part of its last-ditch defence, Attwoods has urged shareholders to reject
the revised BFI bid - worth 116.75p per ordinary and 92p per preference
share - and opt instead for its own break-up proposals.
Under these proposals shareholders would receive a cash sum upon the sale of
the UK and European businesses. Attwoods, which claims its proposals would
deliver substantially more value than the BFI bid, would then seek a
potential purchaser or merger partner for its US activities.
Attwoods said yesterday that it had signed an agreement with Cleanaway, a
waste management joint venture between Brambles, the Australian transport
group, and GKN. The offer is conditional on the disposal of the UK quarrying
and mineral assets.
The agreement appears to preclude other bids for the UK business. Earlier
this month Waste Management International, the London-quoted arm of WMX of
the US, confirmed it hoped to buy Attwoods' UK businesses if shareholders
rejected the BFI bid.
WMI had indicated that it would probably offer more than Pounds 100m for the
UK operations. An independent surveyors' report published recently as part
of Attwoods' defence revalued the UK business from Pounds 97m to Pounds
130.6m.
Mr Ken Foreman, Attwoods' chief executive, said: 'The offer price,
representing 1.9 times sales, further underlines our confidence that our
break-up plan will realise greater value than the BFI offer and is
achievable within the timescale we have set for ourselves.
'We continue to urge shareholders to let the BFI offer lapse so that we can
implement our plan for the benefit of shareholders.'
BFI, whose offer values Attwoods at 1.5 times revenue, had earlier
criticised the break-up plan for failing to produce the names of potential
buyers or offers for the businesses.
Mr Philip Angell of BFI has described it as 'a very iffy proposal' and
suggested shareholders could get as little as 56p or 88p a share.

The Financial Times


London Page 50

941130

