FT944-11044

FT  08 NOV 94 / IBM agrees hardware standard


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


International Business Machines, Apple Computer and Motorola yesterday
confirmed details of an agreement to develop a common standard specification
for personal computers.
Based on PowerPC microprocessor chips, their goal is to establish a new PC
standard, challenging the domination of Microsoft's Windows and Intel's
microprocessors which are used in about 85 per cent of PCs sold.
Industry analysts said, however, that the move may be 'too little, too late'
because while the PowerPC partners have established a hardware standard,
they have failed to agree on an operating system software standard.
Instead, the companies said they would build computers that adhere to a new
'hardware reference platform' specification that will run a broad range of
software.
The standard PowerPC design will support several operating systems including
Apple's Macintosh software, IBM's OS/2 and AIX (a variety of UNIX) and
Microsoft's Windows NT, the companies said. Novell and Sun Microsystems will
also develop versions of their operating systems for the new PowerPC
standard.
The PowerPC alliance, formed three years ago, has so far been thwarted in
its efforts to unseat Intel and Microsoft by a lack of support from software
companies, which have put most of their resources into developing
application programs for Intel-Microsoft standard PCs.
By establishing a PowerPC hardware standard, the companies hope to broaden
the market, drawing software support and encouraging other computer
companies to build compliant products.
However, the market for software for PowerPC computers will remain
fragmented among the various operating systems, analysts pointed out.
Computers based on the new PowerPC hardware standard will not reach the
market until 1996. In the meantime, Apple, IBM, Motorola and other computer
companies that have been developing PowerPC-based PCs will have to redesign
their products.
Mr Michael Spindler, Apple president and chief executive, said that the new
hardware standard will enable Apple to broaden its sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941108

