FT941-3422

FT  16 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Of relationships and bottom lines - The
personal conflicts at the top of Saatchi


   By DIANE SUMMERS


Mr Charlie Scott, group chief executive of Saatchi & Saatchi, yesterday
described the past 18 months as the worst in his life. However, he considers
his struggle to reduce debts, restructure operations and install effective
management is now largely over.
As his statement accompanying the group's results yesterday said: 'All the
businesses remaining in the group are now profitable, and as trading
conditions in our core markets start to improve during 1994, I am confident
Saatchi will demonstrate the performance that our shareholders have the
right to expect.'
Whether or not his confidence is justified will depend, to a large extent,
on two factors. First, the Saatchi board will need to tackle the
embarrassing leaks about tension between Mr Maurice Saatchi, its chairman,
and Mr Scott.
Second, the revamped management, particularly in the US, will need to start
showing new business gains and evidence that it can reverse the decline in
market share which has been eroding revenues.
The relationship between Mr Scott and Mr Saatchi appeared to decline sharply
from the point when, in December, it was announced that Maurice's brother,
Charles, would step down as a director.
It was also decided that Saatchi's offices in Berkeley Square, in the West
End of London, would be vacated.
There followed rumours that the brothers were planning a buy-out and that
Maurice wanted to take over more of the running of the group. Now, a
compensation committee, headed by Sir Peter Walters, will examine Maurice's
five-year rolling contract, described by Mr Scott as 'not within the spirit
of the Cadbury guidelines'.
Says one Maurice supporter: 'He admits he has withdrawn a lot over the past
year, he had let things drift. He's left executive functions with the board
and he now believes that was a mistake.'
Maurice is said to feel that the 'beancounters' have failed to deliver their
promises on the financial side. Mr Scott will not be drawn on the subject,
but his supporters say that Maurice has yet to deliver on his part of the
bargain - bringing in new clients.
To blame Mr Scott for what continues to be a depressing picture is unjust,
according to the heads of other agencies.
Said the chief executive of one large group yesterday: 'One has to remember
it was Maurice Saatchi who talked of bidding for the Midland Bank. He was
also one of the architects of the huge, sprawling, shambling empire. To
begin to blame Charlie Scott, who seems to have done a fair job of
stabilising the business, seems to me to be desperately unfair. Indeed,
there wouldn't be a business without Charlie Scott.'
The head of another large agency pointed to the 'nervousness and confusion'
resulting from the conflict, which is being felt by staff at the Saatchi &
Saatchi agency network, which shares the holding company's name. There is
concern that some of the bad press will have an effect on relationships with
clients.
And it is the relationship with clients - particularly potential clients -
that will have most influence on the bottom line. According to Mr Scott, the
group has lost about 1.4 percentage points of market share over the past
three years - worth about Pounds 50m a year in revenue - from the 20 per
cent of the global market it holds.
The problem is largely in the US, where big contracts to have been lost
recently include the Chrysler and Helene Curtis accounts, worth Pounds 30m
in revenue this year.
Fixed costs are high. The staff of about 11,000 account for more than 60 per
cent of revenue. By growing revenue, Mr Scott is aiming to get this down to
the 55 per cent or so enjoyed by competitors Interpublic and Omnicom - he
calculates that at least half of any extra revenue will flow straight to the
bottom line.
Mr Scott calculates that over the past four years, and in particular over
the past two, about 70 per cent of the managers he describes as the 'key
drivers' towards these ends have been replaced or transferred.
'For the first time since I joined the company, we now have quality CEOs in
all our operating companies. These people have been selected for their
ability to grow the business,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940316

