FT944-2368

FT  16 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Bonn's balance


Last spring France and Germany announced with some fanfare plans to
co-ordinate their consecutive presidencies of the European Union - joined, a
few months later, by Spain. Their ideas included turning the main pillars of
the Maastricht treaty into reality - including fleshing out a common foreign
and defence policy and founding Europol, a police force to co-ordinate the
cross-border fight against crime.
They wanted to lay the foundations for enlargement of the EU to the east,
balanced by a Mediterranean policy to stabilise the union's southern flank,
a vital French concern. And they wanted to provide a launch-pad for a big
new step towards integration at the inter-governmental conference in 1996.
In the event, progress during the first six months, the German presidency,
has been painfully slow on all fronts. No fewer than 28 meetings held on
Europol - a plan which would be popular with a European electorate worried
about drug-trafficking and organised crime - have produced no decisions at
all.
Common foreign policy is bedevilled by Bosnia. As for eastern enlargement,
the summit in Essen produced a few sign-posts, but little substance.
In the first place, Germany was hopelessly distracted by its own general
election. And once that was over, the looming date of the French
presidential election next spring seems to have paralysed progress. Given
those circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that Germany's handling of
its presidency came in for stiff criticism from the European parliament on
Wednesday.
Bonn was taken to task for a range of problems from vacillation over EU
enlargement to its failure to stem refugee flows from ex-Yugoslavia.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl responded robustly, telling MEPs to do more to
persuade their governments to support German-backed projects like Europol.
Clearly, some hopes for the EU presidency were pitched too high. This may
partly have reflected Mr Kohl's own optimistic forecasts in advance of
Germany's October election. Differences of opinion with France and the EU's
southern members about the pace of eastern enlargement have become
increasingly evident in recent months.
Mr Kohl may have sound domestic reasons for caution about setting firm
timetables for accession by the countries of central and eastern Europe  -
not least the financial sacrifices that early eastern membership would
demand from German taxpayers and farmers.
The EU, too, needs to take seriously the fears of southern states of
negative repercussions from the tilt to the east.
But all 12 current members have explicitly committed themselves to accepting
a further enlargement after Austria, Finland and Sweden join next month. It
is high time that the Union started to focus on the measures it needs to
adopt before such an enlargement can take place, and not simply on the
adjustments required of would-be new members.
Given Germany's concern with eastern Europe, the German presidency should
have been a high point for enlargement hopes to the east. The next three EU
presidencies - of France, Spain and Italy - will inevitably be more
preoccupied with the south, and none has much incentive to press the case of
the easterners. France will also be totally absorbed in its own presidential
elections. The 1996 IGC looks less likely to produce a grand, concerted push
for deeper integration than a continuing muddle.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941216

