FT944-2705

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (1): Worst is over for
the global truck makers - After four years of recession, demand for
commercial vehicles is beginning to rise in Europe and Japan. Kevin Done
examines prospects for the industry


   By KEVIN DONE


The world truck industry is no place for the faint-hearted, as markets
plunge through exaggerated cycles of feast and famine.
Four years of recession in western Europe had pushed most of the region's
truck makers into loss by last year with one leading producer collapsing
into receivership. Now the European industry's fortunes are again on the
mend, but already truck makers at the forefront of the recovery are
straining against the limits of their production capacity, as demand rises
more steeply than expected in markets such as the UK and Scandinavia.
In North America, heavy truck makers lost more than a third of their market
between 1988 and 1991. In the past three years sales have surged back,
however, with demand almost doubling from 108,000 in 1991 to a forecast
level of more than 206,000 this year. Leading US producers such as Paccar
are achieving record profits.
In Japan, truck registrations fell for five years in succession from 1989 to
1993, but here, too, the worst of the recession appears to have passed.
Japanese domestic truck sales, exports and production have all begun to
recover in recent months.
Surviving such sharp fluctuations in demand exerts heavy pressures on the
truck makers, and their ranks have been thinned as each recession takes its
toll. In western Europe there were still 52 truck makers in operation in
1975. By 1984, the total had been reduced to 14 and by this year the number
had fallen to 11.
The outcome of the latest bout of restructuring in Europe remains unclear,
however. Daf, the Dutch commercial vehicle maker which took over Leyland,
the loss-making UK truck producer, in the second half of the 1980s, became
the most notable victim of the latest recession, when it collapsed into
receivership in early 1993.
The former Daf group's Dutch and Belgian heavy truck operations have been
re-established, however, thanks to a state-backed rescue package, and other
parts of the group in the UK have also emerged from receivership as
independent companies, albeit after severe restructuring.
The biggest change to the industry - in Europe and in the US - was heralded
by the planned merger of Volvo, already the world's second largest heavy
truck maker, with Renault, the French state-controlled automotive group.
Together they would have controlled around 26 per cent of the European heavy
truck market and 23 per cent of the US market through their respective
subsidiaries Volvo GM Heavy Truck and Mack.
The merger foundered, however, in the face of a revolt by Volvo shareholders
and senior management, which had fundamental concerns about the valuation of
the Swedish group and the holding of a 'golden share' by the French state.
The two companies have dissolved the 3 1/2 -year-old alliance and last month
completed the break-up of the 45 per cent cross shareholdings in their
respective truck and bus operations.
Both groups have been forced to develop alternative strategies to replace
the alliance, although Karl-Erling Trogen, president of Volvo Truck, insists
that 'the industrial idea behind the merger is still valid. I foresee the
need for different kinds of partnerships in the future to get economies of
scale in industrial production,' he says. 'The business approach has not
changed.'
The leading European truck makers dominate the world heavy truck market.
Mercedes-Benz of Germany, the world's largest truck and bus maker, and Volvo
both have substantial operations and market shares in Europe and in north
and south America, while Scania of Sweden is the market leader in Brazil as
well as the most profitable of the truck makers in Europe.
The European producers are now seeking to broaden their operations by
establishing a stronger presence in Asia, where the industry is still
dominated by the leading Japanese truck makers, Hino, Isuzu, Nissan Diesel
and Mitsubishi Motor.
Volvo is seeking to establish a joint venture in China with the aim of
adding a production centre in Asia to its three existing regional truck
manufacturing operations in Europe and north and south America. It has also
launched a feasibility study into establishing production in India.
According to Mr Trogen, Asia is Volvo's 'number one priority' for the
geographic expansion of its truck operations. It has entered a feasibility
study with China National Heavy Truck and Shandong Automotive for the
establishment of joint ventures for the production of both trucks and
components in Shandong province south-east of Beijing and is now awaiting
official approval for the project from the Chinese authorities.
Mercedes-Benz is negotiating two ambitious joint ventures in China for the
production of heavy trucks, and buses and coaches. It is conducting a
feasibility study with Yangzhou Motor Coach Manufacturing (YMC), the biggest
Chinese bus and coach producer, for the formation of a joint venture with
the target of producing up to 12,000 bus chassis and 6,000 large coaches a
year.
Global expansion is also causing other changes in strategic approach.
This year Mercedes-Benz started production in Indonesia of a new range of
light-duty trucks and buses. The project marks a drastic change in the
German group's approach to developing new vehicles for the global commercial
vehicle market, as it seeks to overcome the disadvantage of its high
domestic cost base.
The MB 700 range of light-duty trucks (7.5 tonnes gross vehicle weight) has
been developed to meet Asian cost levels using a system of global sourcing
of components.
Engines for the vehicles will be assembled in Indonesia from components
produced by Mercedes-Benz's commercial vehicle subsidiary in Brazil.
Transmissions and front axles are to be supplied by Tata Engineering and
Locomotive (Telco) in India, while the rear axles will also come from India
from AAL, a licensee of Rockwell, the US automotive components supplier.
Brakes and shock absorbers will be supplied from India, propeller shafts
will be made by Spicer in the US, Mercedes-Benz Argentina will supply the
mechanical steering system, optional power steering will come from Koyo in
Japan, while cab parts will be supplied by Mercedes-Benz's Spanish
subsidiary.
'The supply of major components from a country with high wage levels like
Germany could not satisfy the cost target. New ways had to be found,' says
Klaus-Dieter Vohringer, Mercedes-Benz components production director.
'Commercial vehicle concepts in the Far East and Europe differ considerably,
not only in dimensions but more so in the cost structure. The market
requirements in Europe cause a cost situation that is unacceptable to
customers in south-east Asia.'
Such global initiatives promise gradually to remove the existing marked
regional distinctions in the world truck industry, which have tended
hitherto to limit the amount of global competition between regional product
concepts.
European and Japanese truck makers generally develop and produce their own
principal driveline components - engines, gearboxes and axles. In North
America, by contrast, the truck makers concentrate chiefly on assembly,
while engines, gearboxes and axles are bought in from component makers.
At the same time Japanese and Asian truck development has been influenced by
the geography and infrastructure of Japan. Shorter distances, lower average
speeds and lower gross vehicle weights mean that trucks are generally
smaller in Japan.
Such regional differences have so far prevented Japanese producers from
competing significantly in the European and North American heavy truck and
bus markets, and the US overseas presence is also limited.
The leading European producers have made the strongest efforts at overcoming
such regional hurdles, and Asia is the new target for global expansion.

The Financial Times


London Page I

941216

