FT944-14412

FT  22 OCT 94 / Property: Match-maker selling - How vendors can bypass
estate agents


   By GEORGINA OVERELL


When Brian Laister put his Welsh holiday cottage on the market, he wanted to
attract as many potential buyers as possible. He decided against using an
estate agent and registered with a computer matching agency.
'My wife heard about computer matching and suggested the idea to me,' he
explains. 'Because the details go on to a database which contains a national
network of people who might be interested, I thought it would be a good
thing to try.' Within a few weeks the Laisters had a buyer, and the sale
looks likely to go ahead.
Computer matching agencies operate in a similar way to the Dateline lonely
hearts operation by putting vendors and potential buyers in touch. Once
clients have each other's details, it is up to them to arrange the sale
although, like Dateline, the agencies cannot guarantee a perfect match.
One of the main attractions of computer matching is that the fees are
considerably cheaper than estate agents', who charge, on average, about 2
per cent for sole agency. On a house sold for Pounds 250,000, this works out
at Pounds 5,875 (including value added tax), whereas the maximum charge by a
computer matching agency for the same sale would be only Pounds 575.
There are now three companies operating nationwide in the UK, all
established during the depressed housing market of the past few years.
Laister's cottage is registered with Link-Up Properties Nationwide based in
Haywards Heath, West Sussex. It charges vendors a Pounds 75 registration fee
for a six-month period. This includes the cost of advertising the property
in a national newspaper and vetting the responses. Buyers register free.
If a sale is agreed within the first eight weeks, Link-Up charges commission
of Pounds 250 (inc VAT) for properties worth less than Pounds 100,000 and
Pounds 500 (inc VAT) for those worth more. As its profit is made when people
sell inside the eight-week period, there is a strong incentive to match
suitable buyers and sellers as quickly and accurately as possible. At
present, it has around 20,000 people on its database.
Even Julian King, its director, is a little surprised by how quickly the
idea has caught on. 'The whole concept of Link-Up Properties arrived around
the depressed market place and our aim was to inject a little bit more
activity into it. When it was established, I didn't imagine it growing at
the rate it has. Certainly, over the past two years we have gone from
strength to strength and we are achieving a very high level of success.'
National Selections, based in Ealing, west London, is the smallest of the
three agencies. It charges a registration payment of Pounds 88.13 for six
months. The fee covers a computer matching service but individual properties
are not advertised in the press.
Director Paul Brooks believes matching services act as a useful adjunct to
estate agencies by catering particularly to people who want to move long
distances.
Until recently, the Property Sales Register in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire,
relied solely on computer matching for results but, like Link-Up, it is now
advertising properties in the national press as well. Its registration fees
range from Pounds 65 for properties worth up to Pounds 60,000 to Pounds 100
for those over Pounds 120,000, but it does not charge any commission. People
and properties are matched every two weeks on the database and computer
print-outs are sent to clients.
Director Anthony Muir-Clark says: 'During the course of a year, we have many
many thousands of people going through our hands. We don't guarantee a sale,
but we are able to match people up very successfully.
'We give a refund if we don't match vendors with a prospective buyer. And we
reckon that we refund something less than 2 per cent.'
Each agency has a broad client bank, including people looking for holiday
properties, employees who must re-locate, people looking for retirement
homes or moving to the UK from abroad, and investors and developers.
They try to weed out time-wasters by getting clients to complete fairly
detailed questionnaires and discussing their requirements on the telephone.
Laister believes this is a particularly useful function.
He advertised his Welsh cottage privately as well as registering with the
agency. The response from advertising equalled the number of people sent to
him by Link-Up - but many were not serious buyers.
'I must say that I had as much response from my own private advertising, so
I was a bit disappointed with Link-Up. But the people Link-Up sent me were
all definitely looking for the type of property I was selling, so there
wasn't a question of anybody wasting anybody's time,' he adds.
Muir-Clark believes the system is an attractive option in a market where
profit margins are tight. 'People are beginning to recognise that computer
matching has a value in this situation,' he says.
'For a relatively modest sum, one can add more strings to one's bow, get
buyers nationally - and stand a chance of saving money as well.'
Link-Up Properties Nationwide, 9 Franklynn Suite, The Priory, Haywards
Heath, West Sussex RH16 3LB, tel: 0144-457999; National Selections, 54-58
Uxbridge Road, Ealing, London W5 2TL; Property Sales Register, Marlborough
House, Winchcombe Street, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire GL52 2NL. Tel:
0800-626056.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941022

