FT942-15497

FT  15 APR 94 / Angry Leipzig counts the cost of Schneider failure


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   LEIPZIG


'Damn him and his greed]' said Horst, who has been working on reconstruction
of Leipzig's once elegant Hotel Furstenhof for the Jurgen Schneider property
group.
'This bloke comes with all the money from the west, thinks he can do what he
wants and then dumps us. He had better not come back here. Because if he
does, well, I'd rather not say what I would do with him.'
Horst and his colleagues were told yesterday morning to pack their tools and
leave the building site - a vast hole flanked by a fragile 19th-century
facade. 'We won't be coming back here for a while unless the banks do
something. Huh]'
They are not alone in Leipzig in reacting with anger, underpinned by
Schadenfreude, to the collapse of the Schneider group precipitated by the
disappearance on Friday last week of its 59-year-old founder and chief
executive.
Yesterday Deutsche Bank and the Frankfurt prosecutor's office launched
actions alleging fraud against Mr Schneider, while a meeting of bankers
decided not to push the group, whose liabilities are thought to total DM9bn
(Pounds 3.6bn), into bankruptcy.
Leipzig is asking local banks to help support more than 3,000 contractors
and subcontractors after the collapse.
Mr Hinrich Lehmann-Grube, the mayor, has set up a working group comprising
the city, the association of enterprises in Saxony, and the local trade and
industry chambers.
'We have to limit the damage as much as possible,' said Mr Christoph Sorge,
a spokesman for the city. 'The Schneider case has created a serious
psychological problem with respect to the market and property prices.'
'That guy pushed up the rents too much in Leipzig,' said one retailer. 'He
tried to control the most prestigious parts of the town centre. He has got
what he deserves. But a lot of people will suffer.'
He had rented from CIP, Mr Schneider's property agent, whose offices are
located on the second floor of the beautiful Madler-Passage, a sought-after
site in the heart of Leipzig.
The retailer, who asked not to be named, initially said he had rented the
property for DM80 a square metre. But when pressed further he said: 'OK. OK.
We have to pay DM200 per square metre. I have to pay monthly. I don't know
if I can cope. It really is high. I am running up debts.'
By mid morning, there were only four people in the dozen or so small,
elegant shops, whose prices - targeted at tourists and professionals - are
too high for most Leipzigers. Mr Ulrich Thevas, an employee at CIP, tried to
play down the affair. 'We have no problems with our clients. Everything will
be fine. We have rented out every square metre.'
The retailers themselves are beginning to question their rents. 'The going
rate in the centre of the city for office space is about DM50,' said Mr
Matthias Happ from Jones Lang Wootton, the international property
consultants.
But the going rate for retail property in the city centre was now between
DM120 and DM150, according to another consultant. He said Schneider had been
able to raise retail rental rates beyond that level because of the shortage
of prime renovated property in the centre of Leipzig.
Mr Schneider arrived in Leipzig soon after the collapse of the Berlin Wall
in November 1989. 'He took one look at some buildings and went for them,'
one official from the city council said.
As Mr Schneider raised rents, prices in the property market, which went
through a boom in 1991 and 1992, started to fall.
One property consultant said: 'What amazes me is that it took him ages to
start developing property. Doing nothing like that costs lots of money. I
wonder - is the Schneider case the tip of the iceberg?'
Allegations of fraud, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940415

