FT941-16950

FT  07 JAN 94 / Terror main weapon in Yemen war of political wills: The Arab
nation's new-found democracy and unity are under threat


   By ERIC WATKINS


   SANAA


The Yemeni government appears to be foundering in the wake of alleged links
with international terrorist groups, increased attacks on foreign workers
and riots over the rapidly-deteriorating economy.
According to Sheikh Abdullah bin Hussein al-Ahmar, speaker of the Yemeni
parliament, the political crisis in Yemen is passing through its worst
stages and may 'end Yemen's achievements in unity, democracy, and
parliamentary elections'.
The crisis began last August when vice president Ali Salem al Beidh head of
the Yemen Socialist Party, stalked out of Sanaa and returned to his
political base in Aden. Said to be angered by the marginalisation of his
party by a growing alliance between President Ali Abdullah Saleh's General
People's Congress and Sheikh Ahmar's Fundamentalist Islah Party, Mr Biedh
has remained in Aden, declining to participate in government until Gen Saleh
implements an 18-point programme of national reform mainly aimed at
improving internal security, integrating the two former armies and curbing
corruption, proposed by the socialists in late September. Gen Saleh has so
far not given in to Mr Biedh's demand and the resulting stand-off has left
Yemen in a state of economic and political disarray.
Economic problems were underscored on Tuesday when riots broke out in Taiz,
250km south of Sanaa. Spawned by an inflation rate which has jumped 50 per
cent since August, the riot was soon contained by government forces with no
deaths reported. But the riots, reminiscent of others in December 1992 which
left more than 100 dead, raised fears of widespread unrest as the Yemeni
riyal plunged from 70 to 100 to the dollar in unofficial trading on
Wednesday and yesterday
The government is also unable to control the growing number of attacks on
expatriates workers. Sent by helicopter to investigate the bombing of an oil
pipeline, two employees of the Yemen-Hunt oil company were kidnapped by
tribesmen on Tuesday and have yet to be released. Other tribesmen are
reported to have shot at employees of the Canadian Occidental oil company,
and at others working for Schlumberger, an oil-support group.
Yemen's political and economic headaches were compounded last week when Gen
Saleh had to fend off allegations that the US and Egyptian governments had
implicated his country in international terrorism. Although neither
Washington nor Cairo made the charges openly, the US State Department
nonetheless confirmed that there had been 'discussions' with Yemen about its
links with groups suspected of terrorism in Egypt.
Terrorism and assassination are hardly unknown in Yemen. Indeed, they have
almost become a way of life in the battle of political wits between Gen
Saleh and Mr Biedh who joined the formerly Marxist south Yemen into an
uneasy union with the tribalist north three years ago.  Since then the
country has been wracked by repeated violence, most of it directed against
the YSP. Victims, they say, of 150 political killings, members of the YSP
claim that General Saleh has turned a blind eye to terrorists and, in fact,
has shielded them for his own political purposes.
Yemen also had a direct brush with international terrorism in December 1992
with the bombing of two hotels in Aden, which left three dead and narrowly
missed about 100 US troops billeted there as part of Operation Restore Hope
in Somalia.
One group of suspects has been tried and convicted while another group is on
trial, charged with the formation of terrorist cells aimed at assassinating
prominent southern officials, blowing up key political and economic
installations, and establishing camps to train other terrorists. Prosecutors
say that the conspirators, many of them exiles from the former south,
confessed to being veterans of the war in Afghanistan and to having links
with backers in Sudan and Egypt. Apart from personal revenge against leaders
of the former south, the aim of the group, prosecutors say, was to undermine
Yemen's democratic government and replace it with a fundamentalist regime.
Ignored by the Saleh regime, with its close ties to fundamentalist groups
such as Islah, Aden security forces and the YSP sent details of the
terrorist organisation to Egyptian authorities in early December. Prompted
by the November 26 assassination attempt on the Egyptian prime minister, Mr
Atef Sidqi, Cairo placed Yemeni expatriates under surveillance, cut direct
telephone links between the two countries, and sent investigators to Yemen.
Since then, the Egyptians have discovered a further plot which, they say,
involves four other countries. Although the Egyptian prosecutor this week
declined to name them, speculation has since focussed on Iran, Afghanistan,
Sudan, and Yemen.
'The crisis has played a part in disfiguring Yemen's international
reputation in the sense that it is now threatened with blacklisting as an
international terrorist country,' Sheikh Ahmar says, tying the allegations
to the contest between General Saleh and Mr Biedh. But Yemen's reputation
may yet have more to suffer. French diplomatic sources this week in Sanaa
stated that France's counter-intelligence service, DST, has already warned
Yemen against possible connections with terrorist groups in Morocco,
Algeria, and Tunisia - connections which North African diplomats in Sanaa
have long quietly confirmed.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940107

