FT944-14602

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (25): First decide,
then diversify - Building a Portfolio


   By PHILIP COGGAN


In building a portfolio of unit trusts, the first priority for investors is
to know what they are aiming for. Are they building for capital growth, or
for income? Are they prepared to take risks, or are they highly cautious?
Are they investing over a 25-year period, or for just four or five years?
The second question relates to diversification. Buying a unit trust, which
may own hundreds of stocks, is itself an act of diversification, but the
investor still has to be aware of the dangers of too concentrated a
portfolio, either in terms of a sector or of a management group.
Some groups offer ready-made unit-trust portfolios. Mostly, these pool the
funds of individual management groups. The snag with such funds is that few
managers have top-performing funds right across their range of products. So
the investor may end up with a portion of the group's top-ranking south-east
Asia fund, but a larger portion of its poor-performing UK smaller companies
fund.
One exception is the Portfolio Fund of Funds, which uses the analytical
expertise of the Fund Research group to select unit trusts from a wide range
of management groups. The idea is to pick only those that are likely to
outperform.
Even this is not a perfect solution, however. While the Fund Research team
may be expert at selecting the best-managed trusts in each sector, they may
not necessarily be as good at asset allocation - in other words, deciding
whether to keep 40 or 50 per cent of the fund in the UK. (That said, the
fund was top of its sector in the three years to September 1.)
An alternative approach is to buy one of the unit trusts offered by
private-client fund management groups specifically for the smaller investor.
One example is Mercury's portfolio unit trust, designed to replicate the
type of portfolio of stocks and shares offered to private clients.
But if you prefer to build up your own selection of unit trusts, how do you
go about it? Capital-growth investors are unlikely to want more than a tiny
proportion of their portfolio in bond funds. They should not exclude equity
income funds, however, which often have a good record of capital growth.
While they may want a fair chunk of their portfolio in the UK, they should
also look overseas. Here, it is probably wise to follow the lead of large
institutions, which always have some sort of holding in each of the US,
Japan and Europe. But unless you are likely to emigrate to one of those
areas, it is unwise to concentrate too much of your portfolio in one region.
The longer the investment is likely to be held, and the greater the
willingness to accept risk, the larger the proportion that can be devoted to
emerging markets (perhaps with an upper limit of 20-25 per cent). Only the
wealthy, or the risk-inclined, should dabble in single-country emerging
market funds.
Investors looking for immediate income will probably want to include a
proportion (up to 30-40 per cent) of bond funds. However, they may also want
to consider buying gilts direct, since this may be cheaper.
In general, income investors should be cautious about buying those funds
with the highest running-yield, for this may indicate that they are
following a high-risk strategy or are converting capital into income. It may
be better to look for trusts with a long-term record of increasing pay-outs.
Income should also be an important factor when choosing which unit trust to
put into a personal equity plan (Pep). It may be best to put the
higher-yielding trusts in your portfolio into the Pep, to maximise the
income tax advantage (capital gains tax is paid by far fewer people).
Higher dividend yields mean that UK funds are likely to form the main
proportion of an income portfolio.
When it comes to the number of funds and managers to be chosen, there is one
big constraint. Small investments of Pounds 1,000 or so tend to attract the
full 5-6 per cent initial charge. Someone who can put Pounds 20,000 into an
individual trust can probably negotiate a discount with the manager. Too
much diversification may be costly.
However, a portfolio of at least four or five unit-trust holdings is
probably needed to get some decent sectoral and managerial diversification.
The really sophisticated may want to choose different management styles: for
example, picking the fund of a manager who likes to buy undervalued stocks
on a low rating, as well as one who likes to buy growth stocks with high
price-earnings multiples.
Having established the guidelines, choosing the individual unit trusts to
make up your portfolio is an art, as much as a science. There is no
foolproof formula for selecting a top performer, although articles elsewhere
in this survey may help.
Two standard mistakes can easily be avoided. Top-performing trusts do not
necessarily stay that way. They may have reached that position by taking
high risks, by concentrating on a narrow area, or through the services of a
top manager who has since been lured away to another group. And
bottom-fishing, picking the worst-performing trusts, does not necessarily
work either. Some trusts recover; many more just stay bad.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

941021

