FT942-14615

FT  19 APR 94 / Swiss drugs groups feel price squeeze: Ciba and Sandoz
forecast profits growth despite 3% fall in pharmaceuticals sales


   By IAN RODGER


   BASLE


Ciba and Sandoz, two of the three big Basle-based pharmaceutical and
chemical groups, provided new evidence yesterday of the squeeze on drugs
prices in industrialised countries. Both groups said pharmaceuticals sales
fell 3 per cent in the first quarter: Ciba's to SFr1.4bn and Sandoz's to
SFr1.8bn.
Roche, the other big Basle group, has shown a greater immunity to drug price
cuts by reporting last week a 10 per cent rise in first quarter
pharmaceuticals sales to SFr2.09bn.
Mr Marc Moret, Sandoz chairman, devoted his statement in the group's 1993
annual report, published yesterday, to the drugs price issue. He argued that
many drugs played an important role in cutting healthcare costs and
denounced moves by governments to cut prices. 'The pharmaceutical industry
is fighting disease, not exploiting it.'
In spite of the squeeze, Sandoz and Ciba both forecast further profits
growth this year. 'I would be surprised if we were not able, as in the past
three years, to raise our profits steadily,' Mr Moret said. Another Sandoz
director emphasised that double-digit profit increases had been achieved in
each of the past three years. Sandoz also forecast a 5 to 8 per cent rise in
overall sales this year after last year's 5 per cent advance to SFr15.1bn.
Ciba expected an increase in operating profit this year.
Both groups said their weak overall sales performance in the first quarter
was due partly to the strength of the Swiss franc. In the quarter Sandoz's
overall sales rose 1 per cent to SFr4.27bn while those of Ciba fell 2 per
cent to SFr5.58bn.
Ciba's self-medication, diagnostics and Ciba Vision divisions showed modest
growth while sales in Sandoz's nutrition sector, led by Ovaltine and
Isostar, jumped 25 per cent to SFr558m.
Ciba's industrial chemicals sales fell 3 per cent to SFr2.1bn. The group
said demand remained weak, except in the US, but an upturn in orders from
the UK, France, Spain and Italy had become apparent.
Sales in Sandoz's chemical and environment businesses, which include
agricultural chemicals, rose 1 per cent to SFr1.4bn.
Last month Sandoz reported consolidated net income up 14 per cent in 1993 to
SFr1.7bn, while at Ciba post-tax profits rose 11.2 per cent to SFr1.78bn.
Roche publishes its 1993 results today.

The Financial Times


International Page 17

940419

