FT943-712

FT  28 SEP 94 / Recruitment: Cultural restraints on missionary zeal


   By RICHARD DONKIN


The Swedes are not known for their revolutionary zeal. The last time they
felt it was time for a change, in 1809, it was a bloodless, painless affair.
King Gustav IV was deposed and the throne given to Jean Baptiste Bernadotte,
a French general. When Bernadotte addressed the parliament in halting
Swedish he was greeted with roars of laughter and was so upset that he never
spoke Swedish again.
Geert Hofstede, professor of Organisational Anthropology and International
Management at the University of Limburg and Maastricht in the Netherlands,
attributes Bernadotte's reaction to the cultural differences between France
and Sweden. In particular he notes the differences in what he calls power
distance - the emotional distance that separates subordinates from their
bosses.
This power distance in France is much greater than in Sweden. Hofstede
created a power distance table, drawn from a survey of IBM employees in
different countries.
The high scorers are those societies in which subordinates depend to a large
extent on their bosses. The same goes for families. Those that have low
scores tend to have a more consultative relationship between managers and
subordinates. There is more interdependence between the two.
Malaysia scores the most highly, with Austria the lowest. Latin American
countries tend to have the highest scores and Western European countries,
with the exception of Belgium and France, are among the lowest scores.
Hofstede's work, following on from original research on power distance by a
Dutch social psychologist, Mauk Mulder, helps explain why some companies
have difficulty transplanting their business cultures across borders.
It may also explain why the proposed Volvo-Renault merger ended in tears
last year when Volvo managers revolted against Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo's
then chairman, whose resignation followed, partly in frustration at his
managers' inability to meld with French management.
While, as in Volvo's case, corporate cultures still have the power to
disorientate managements, most managers now appear to be aware that culture
is something that must be addressed when considering organisational change.
Angela Baron and Mike Walters, of the Institute of Personnel and
Development, note in a new study of corporate cultures that 'Managers are
becoming adept at recognising the strategic importance of culture and even
at mapping existing culture within their organisation'.
The difficult part is doing anything about it. 'Success at bringing about
sustainable, positive changes in culture has been limited,' they write.
Their research covering 15 case studies in five economic sectors - retail,
financial services, information technology, consumer goods and public
utilities - includes some surprising findings.
Perhaps the most fashionable business concept to be seriously questioned in
the study is the mission statement. 'I thought that would be the first thing
to come out of the drawer when I visited these organisations but it just
didn't happen. A lot of people said mission statements were all well and
good but it was action not words that they were looking for,' said Baron.
Even in a company such as Johnson & Johnson with its celebrated Credo, the
researchers found its words carried less emphasis away from the US
headquarters. Constant attention to the credo, however, ensures that it
continues to enshrine Johnson & Johnson's business values, and that staff
are aware of its importance, suggesting that a mission may work best if it
is hammered in to people and frequently reviewed.
In contrast, many of the managers in the case studies were unable to quote
their mission statements and typically attached no great significance to
them.
In some cases, said the report 'it was clear that, although a great deal of
thought had gone into their mission statement, it had, as yet, failed to
engender a 'sense of mission''.
The research will disappoint managements which have laboured over precise
wordings to arrive at a statement which encapsulates what the company is
about and identifies where it is going. Some 50 per cent of companies in the
UK and the US have some form of mission statement, notes the IPD report.
Many of the companies encountered by Baron and Walters explained that they
did not feel any need to agonise over 'pretty' words, leading the authors to
concluded that 'a sense of mission could exist in organisations where no
mission, vision or value statement existed'.
The Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, for example, eschewed mission or value
statements but acknowledged that it maintained a strong unwritten value
system that emphasised integrity, organisational loyalty and long service.
This was mirrored in paternalism evident in the bank's policy of maintaining
the graves of expatriate employees buried overseas.
Rubbing salt into the mission guru's wounds, Baron and Walters write:
'Mission statements would appear to many organisations to have more
relevance in the outside world as a PR exercise than they do as internal
tools for the management of culture.'
The Culture Factor, Corporate and International Perspectives by Angela Baron
and Mike Walters, Institute of Personnel and Development, IPD House, Camp
Road, Wimbledon, London SW19 4UX, tel: 081 946 9100, price Pounds 35.
Cultures and Organizations by Geert Hofstede is now available in paperback,
Harper Collins, Pounds 8.99.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940928

