FT942-14394

FT  20 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: NZ farmers find life after
subsidies surprisingly rewarding


   By ALISON MAITLAND


Farming without subsidies can be good for farmers and the environment, as
well as the taxpayer and the consumer.
That is the message that New Zealand farmers, who have operated without
subsidies for 10 years, will take to the World Farmers' Congress in Istanbul
next month.
It is timely for agriculture worldwide, given the requirement under the
Uruguay Round agreement that trade-distorting domestic support for farmers
be cut by up to 20 per cent over six years.
Mr Graham Robertson, president of Federated Farmers of New Zealand, the
national farmers' organisation, explained the sea-change in agricultural
policy and farmers' attitudes during a visit to London yesterday.
He said government support had become anathema to rural New Zealand. 'The
real challenge in the long run is for farmers to get government right out of
the job. . . Markets are more reliable than politicians and governments.'
New Zealand is an agricultural powerhouse, and Mr Robertson stressed that
reform in other countries would be different. It exports 50 per cent of the
world's trade in sheep meat. Agricultural produce accounts for 60 per cent
of exports, and farming and agribusiness employ 11 per cent of the
workforce.
Subsidies, which accounted for nearly 40 per cent of farmers' gross income,
were withdrawn in 1984. The consequences, exacerbated by deep recession,
were painful, though less so than expected.
About 800 farms, or 1 per cent of the total, failed, against predictions
that 8,000 would go under. Farmers leaving the land were given a one-off
'exit grant' equivalent to about two-thirds of their annual income.
The number of full-time farm workers fell from about 22,800 in 1984 to
19,600 in 1987, but then recovered to 23,300 in 1991.
The withdrawal of subsidies, coupled with labour deregulation, pushed down
farm costs. Stripping out interest rate cuts, net costs to sheep farmers had
risen by only 1.2 to 1.5 per cent a year in the past three years, said Mr
Robertson.
Meanwhile, prices for produce rose. Last season farmers earned NZDollars
35-NZDollars 45 for a 13.5kg lamb carcass, compared with NZDollars
18-NZDollars 20 in the mid-1980s. The improvement had come mainly from more
efficient processing and better marketing.
Mr Robertson said the reforms had also been good for the environment, ending
wasteful use of fertilisers.
Subsidies had encouraged production on unstable hill country. 'One of the
consequences of the withdrawal of support is that agriculture has
intensified on the better land and the higher hills have now been planted
with trees,' he said.
Public derision of farmers had changed to 'respect and even admiration'.
Some sectors, such as dairying, had fared better than others. Agricultural
supply industries had had 'a blowtorch put on them'.
Meat processing, once heavily regulated and licensed, had found adaptation
hard. But it had moved from being the least efficient national meat industry
in the world to second most efficient, Mr Robertson said.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940420

