FT942-12304

FT  30 APR 94 / Fed steps in to check dollar's fall: Yen's strength reflects
Japan's trade surplus with US - Move helps bonds and equities


   By PHILIP GAWITH, WILLIAM DAWKINS and FRANK MCGURTY


   LONDON, TOKYO, NEW YORK


The US Federal Reserve took the rare step yesterday of intervening in
foreign exchange markets to support the dollar as it fell towards its lowest
level against the yen since last summer.
The central bank's intervention helped arrest the US currency's decline, and
at the close in New York yesterday it was trading at Y101.60 and DM1.6535,
slightly above the lows of the day. The last time the Fed intervened openly
in the market was in August last year when the dollar fell to Y100.30.
The stronger yen reflects market perceptions that Mr Tsutomu Hata, the new
Japanese prime minister, will make only limited progress in curbing the
country's large trade surplus with the US. The US is pressing Japan to open
its markets to US imports, and to stimulate the economy, as means of curbing
the surplus.
However, the dollar looks likely to have earned only temporary respite. Mr
Neil MacKinnon, chief currency strategist at Citibank in London, commented:
'It is round one to the Fed, but unless (intervention) is sustained and a
lot heavier, I think the markets will again test the previous low of the
dollar.'
Economists fear that if the dollar sinks below Y100, it could fall as low as
Y80-Y90. Sustained yen strength would hit Japanese exports, with serious
implications for the country's economy. Japan's Economic Planning Agency
recently released a figure suggesting that, on average, Japanese exporters
needed an exchange rate of Y117 to the dollar in order to break even.
Poor economic data over the past week, including falls in car production and
retail sales for March and a rise in unemployment, emphasise that any
recovery in Japan's economy is likely to be tentative. Mr Hirohisa Fujii,
finance minister, warned on Thursday that a strong currency could damp
recovery hopes.
Although the dollar has underperformed market expectations all year, its
renewed weakness appears to stem from Japan's political instability. The
country experienced a political hiatus after the resignation of Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa as prime minister, while there are doubts about the authority of
his successor.
Perversely, Japanese political uncertainty strengthens the yen. Traders fear
Mr Hata's minority cabinet will fail to produce a long-term income tax cut
to prime domestic demand and pull in imports. There is also gloom over
prospects for a persuasive package of market opening measures, which made
little progress under the previous government.
The foreign exchange markets believe that if progress is not made in these
two areas, the US administration will seek to force a stronger yen as a
means of curbing the US's Dollars 50bn (Pounds 33bn) trade deficit with
Japan.
Yesterday Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, said the Fed
intervention was intended to counter 'disorderly conditions' in the markets.
'This is in line with our previously articulated policy which recognises
that excessive volatility is counterproductive to growth.'
The intervention helped prop up bond and equity markets. European bond
prices ended the day unchanged or firmer, recovering earlier losses after
prices had fallen sharply due to concern about the weakening dollar. In New
York, US Treasury bonds stablised after a hectic morning to close moderately
down. The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 3,681.69, up 13.38 points.
UK equities reacted closely to developments in currencies yesterday
afternoon, plunging sharply as the dollar weakened but rallying after the
Fed intervention. The FT-SE Index closed 4.6 off at 3,125.3, but had fallen
to 3,105.6 earlier. British government bonds also rallied late to close
firmer on the day.
The Fed intervened in the market at least four times, repeatedly buying
dollars for both yen and D-Marks above the Y101.45-50 and DM1.6590 levels.
Fed takes action, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 6
Currencies, Page 11;
London stocks, Page 13;
World stocks, Page 19;
Lex, Page 22;
Markets, Weekend FT II

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940430

