FT941-3577

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (27): Withering away, but not as
Lenin expected - David Lubin on essays which highlight the fate of the state
over the past decade, and question the market's value for developing
countries / Economics


   By DAVID LUBIN


Market Forces and World Development
edited by Rene Prendergast and Frances Stewart
St Martin's Press (distributed by Macmillan), Pounds 45
217 pages
Angel Gurria, the Mexican finance official who steered his country through
the debt crisis of the 1980s, is fond of making a neat rhyme by describing
Mexico's economic reforms as a series of shuns: privatisashun, trade
liberalisashun, deregulashun and fiscal consolidashun.
For most developing countries, these policies - and the underlying belief
that the market provides the most reliable way of allocating resources in an
economy - have acquired the status of an unimpeachable conventional wisdom.
In the third world's more or less open-armed embrace of market forces, the
biggest loser of all has been the state, whose former prominence in economic
decision-making has been pretty thoroughly undermined.
Ironically, Lenin's catchy prediction - that the state would wither away -
is apparently being proved right, albeit not quite in the way envisaged.
Here is a book that draws attention to the state's miserable fate over the
past decade or so. Most of its 11 essays try to poke holes in the argument
that the market necessarily delivers the best possible results for
developing countries. Some of the authors do this by relying on economic
theory; others do it by looking at some of the bad side-effects of the
'adjustment' process, hoping to show that something must be wrong with
economic policies that frequently leave the most disadvantaged groups in a
society worse off than before.
The best of the theory-laden essays is a provocative but jargon-filled
effort by Peter Smith, who challenges the idea that any step towards a
market-based solution must be better than nothing. One of the biggest
problems he sees is that the arguments in favour of the market are usually
couched in terms of the theoretical ideal of perfect competition, which is
supposed to lead to an 'optimal' situation where no one person can be made
better off without making somebody else worse off.
Unfortunately, as Smith points out, the real world is rarely if ever
perfectly competitive, and policymakers can make big mistakes by assuming
that it is. Indeed, 'the presence of an obstacle to free competition and
exchange may require the introduction of taxes, regulations and so on
elsewhere, to restore optimality'. Paradoxically, there are times when
markets work better with more state intervention, not less.
By far the more successful essays in this book are the ones that pay more
attention to the real world than to theory. Dharam Ghai's essay on
structural adjustment shows how one of the legacies of the 1980s has been a
worsening of income distribution profiles, both internationally and within
developing countries themselves.
Between 1970 and 1989, the countries with the richest 20 per cent of the
world's population increased their share of the world's income from 74 per
cent to 83 per cent, while the countries with the poorest 20 per cent of the
world's population saw their share of global income dwindle to just under
1.5 per cent. Meanwhile, income inequalities and the level of absolute
poverty have increased throughout most of Latin America and Africa, and Ghai
worries about the effect these developments will have on social cohesion in
developing countries.
A similar picture emerges from Frances Stewart's essay on the effects that
adjustment policies have had on education. Adjustment puts pressure on
public finances, and in most cases leads to falls in real wages. Stewart
argues that this combination has reduced not only the supply of education by
the state, but also the demand for education - poor households with falling
incomes find it more difficult to send their children to school, since they
become more dependent on the wages that children can earn if they work
rather than spend time getting educated.
In turn, this can lead into a vicious circle, as countries lose all the
benefits of having an educated people. These benefits extend well beyond the
obvious one - better labour productivity - since they affect a nation's
overall welfare, too: babies are more likely to die prematurely if they are
born to uneducated mothers, who will overcompensate for their loss by having
even more babies.
Stewart's plea - with which it is difficult not to sympathise - is for
governments to try to combine adjustment with growth, or at least to protect
education from the effects of deflationary adjustment, either by spending a
little less on defence, say, or by concentrating harder on revenue-raising
than on expenditure-cutting.
The book provides some good evidence that we live in a world that cries out
not so much for less government, but for better government. Recently, it
seems, a number of countries are latching on to this. In Mexico, Chile and
Argentina, political debate has become much more focused on the need for
governments to be more effective providers of welfare, particularly to
eliminate poverty. Still, the question remains: could governments in these
countries ever have raised the resources needed to eliminate social
injustice had they not shunned their way through economic reform?

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940315

