FT944-11099

FT  08 NOV 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Call for higher VAT
thresholds in Europe


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


The British government should lead a campaign within Europe to raise
substantially the threshold at which companies must register for and
administer VAT, says David Kern, chief economist of the National Westminster
Bank.
Raising the threshold would release many small businesses from the excessive
burden of administering the tax, he says.
'What we need is a legalised black market,' Kern says. 'At the moment we are
asking potential entrepreneurs to start worrying about form filling at a
point where they are too small to do it.'
Raising the VAT threshold would liberate businessmen and women to focus on
building and nourishing businesses.
The case for raising the threshold is valid throughout Europe, Kern says.
'Europe is a low growth and high unemployment area,' Kern says. 'The
employment rules are already very rigid in Europe. By reducing the obstacles
to people starting their own businesses, Europe would generate a more
enterprising economy.'
In the UK, Kern says NatWest Bank is asking the chancellor to use the Budget
later this month to raise the threshold from its current level of Pounds
45,000 to Pounds 60,000. But, he says, a Pounds 100,000 threshold should be
the target. The cost to the Treasury, even at the higher level, 'is not
negligible, but small given the state of public spending', he says.
Based on VAT statistics, Kern estimates the following benefits.
Raising the threshold to Pounds 60,000 would cost the Treasury Pounds 120m.
It would remove 125,000 companies from the VAT net.
Raising it to Pounds 75,000 would cost Pounds 245m and liberate 230,000
companies.
More than doubling the threshold to Pounds 100,000 would cost Pounds 425m
but would remove 400,000 companies from the burden of administering VAT. A
20 per cent rise from Pounds 37,600 last November took 75,000 businesses out
of the net.
Any move to raise the threshold could run into severe difficulties in the
European Commission. When the government last raised the threshold, UK
Customs & Excise had 'informal chats' to make sure there were no objections.
Previous increases show the UK government is pushing the thresholds above
the rate of inflation because it is good for business. The last four
increases in the thresholds, starting in March 1991, were respectively 38
per cent, 4.5 per cent, 2.7 per cent and last November's 20 per cent rise to
Pounds 45,000.
But the UK knows it cannot push Brussels too far. Any radical departure from
this ad hoc system of back door derogations would be resisted in Brussels
unless there was a political will to change the system throughout Europe.
This is unlikely, given the battle over new VAT rules already taking place
in Europe. The EU is moving towards collection of VAT at rates applicable in
the country of origin rather than at rates prevailing at the destination - a
system that is likely to need harmonisation of thresholds rather than more
divergence.
Some say that Kern's call for higher thresholds is not sufficiently radical.
Graham Bannock, a small companies consultant, says administering VAT is a
very real problem for small companies.
'For many people the cost of administering VAT is greater than the tax they
actually pay,' he says. But rather than tinker with the existing system,
Bannock believes the government should simplify an unnecessarily complex law
 -removing zero-rated categories and lowering the overall rate, for example.
This is the only way to ensure businesses and the Customs & Excise have a
workable tax to administer, he believes.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941108

