FT941-4061

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Goodbye to all that . . . - Antony Thorncroft talks to
Lord Palumbo as he leaves his Arts Council post


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


At the end of this month Lord Palumbo will remove the paintings from the
walls of his Great Peter Street penthouse, take one last look over the roof
tops at his unrivalled view of Westminster Abbey, and depart into the
obscurity from which Lady Thatcher plucked him just over five years ago to
be chairman of the Arts Council.
Peter Palumbo is modest, shy, reticent: not perhaps the obvious qualities
required to be the mouthpiece for the arts, the pressure point on the
government to secure the highest possible levels of subsidy. But Palumbo is
typically dogged in his assessment of his achievements. 'When I was selected
I was not even on the original list. No one wanted the job. But there were
plenty of candidates to be my successor.'
The succession was actually quite predictable. Former Arts Minister (and
Sotheby's chairman) Lord Gowrie takes on the role on April 1. 'He should
sail in calm waters', says Palumbo, well aware of the storms that have
lashed over him, especially in the time consuming, bureaucratic,
re-organisation of the council.
But if the operational hassles are in the past, with a compromise reached
between the strategic role of the council and grass roots devolution to the
Regional Arts Boards, Gowrie will still confront the key problem which made
Palumbo's last year so frustrating: a lack of government cash for the arts.
Unless he did a deal before taking on the job, Gowrie must soon tackle some
life and death crises at leading arts companies, in particular among the
nation's orchestras.
'I feel bitterly disappointed that we were not given a stand-still grant for
this year', says Palumbo. For four years he suffered the upheaval of
institutional change, with five successive ministers responsible for the
arts (including David Mellor twice) having a different view on structures;
from the out-and-out devolution of Tim Renton to the 'all power to me'
approach of Mellor.
But while this was exhausting, and kept Palumbo at the council five days a
week as against the odd afternoon put in by his predecessor Lord Rees-Mogg,
it was unimportant when compared with the increases in grant that Palumbo,
and his ministers, achieved. In real terms the council got a 12 per cent
uplift in subsidy in the four years until March 1994: this is Palumbo's
tangible contribution to the arts.
But from April, the council must make do with a 1.6 per cent cut, the first
in its history. Taken with the furore over his rationalisation plan for the
London orchestras, the reduction in grant has blighted Palumbo's last
months, and given an unfairly melancholic tinge to his stewardship. 'I am
not a resigner but I did think about it. The record of the arts in terms of
their cost effectiveness is such that they did not deserve to be cut.'
For months after last November's announcement Palumbo did not speak to Peter
Brooke, the secretary for National Heritage. They have now made up, but the
breach probably put paid to Palumbo's chance of taking a leading role in
seeing through his brightest idea, the Millennium Fund. He does not blame
Brooke for the reduction in grant. There were powerful forces in the
Treasury, like Michael Portillo, anxious to settle scores with David Mellor,
who had used his friendship with John Major to favour the arts. Whatever the
cause, Palumbo is genuinely distressed.
He is less upset about the mess over the orchestras, when his plan to form a
super-orchestra by merging the LPO and the Philharmonia floundered on press
criticism, the opposition of the musicians, and lack of confidence inside
the Council. He thinks that the future lies in backing fewer companies with
more cash, and that the orchestral issue will come back to haunt Gowrie.
The rows over money and the orchestras did not provoke his decision to
resign after just one term. He says he made that decision three months into
the job, when its time consuming nature became apparent.
As the inheritor of his father's property empire, Palumbo had never been
unduly stretched. He collected the rents and, as a devoted admirer of modern
architecture, dreamed of building a skyscraper designed by Mies van der Rohe
in the heart of the City of London. Prince Charles scotched that one.
So, when the unexpected call came from Margaret Thatcher, Palumbo threw
himself whole heartedly into the Arts Council. 'I've been out every night
for five years', he says. 'I've only seen my wife at the theatre, or a
concert, and not been able to talk to her until one in the morning. I have
three young children. I want to spend more time with them.' He also wants to
complete the development of his site at 1, The Poultry, although this time
with a building designed by Sir James Stirling - also roundly condemned by
Prince Charles.
Until the rows of the last year, Palumbo had built up some modest successes
at the council. 'I was told by a senior civil servant when I took on the job
that it was best to concentrate on three or four things, to do a little well
rather than a lot badly'. So he (naturally) started an architectural unit;
he launched Arts 2000, which encourages each year a different part of the
country to sponsor an arts form in the run up to the millennium; he backed
the Lottery when it became apparent that this was the only possible source
of funding for his millennium projects.
He had his disappointments, notably a pet project, the Arts Foundation,
which got off to a shaky start, and a much touted national strategy document
which was dismissed as trite. But in the main it was solid, unsensational,
progress. Palumbo acknowledged that ministers 'have the right to decide how
the arts are delivered to the consumer' - hence all the organisational
changes - 'but they do not have the right to tell us how to spend the
money.' By quiet diplomacy, supporting the government in public, Palumbo
kept the council independent and afloat. He feels the more let down by
ministers because he played their game.
Palumbo is not sanguine about the immediate future, but he is diplomatic.
'If Grey Gowrie can't get more money for the arts then nobody can'. He
thinks the Philistines are at the gates, and that the performing arts will
be the first to suffer. Peter Brooke may be a believer but there are forces
in the government with no appreciation of the arts or the urban landscape.
It will not be his problem. At 59 he leaves with very little baggage. His
best memories are the opening concert at the Birmingham Symphony Hall with
Rattle, the CBSO and Mahler - 'I was in tears the whole time' - and the
grass roots projects he so assiduously attended: a travelling actor and
electrician in Dorset, encouraging villagers to act out plays; a visual arts
bus visiting the Scottish islands. His main energies will now be devoted to
his first major property development, when he will quickly discover that,
despite five years as the cultural protector of the nation, he has done
little in persuading the public, at least in the City, to share his
enthusiasm for the new, the experimental, the challenging.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940312

