FT942-12515

FT  29 APR 94 / Top four fund managers boost market share


   By NORMA COHEN


The four-largest fund managers tightened their grip on the pensions market
last year and are now responsible for investing just over half of all
externally managed pension-scheme assets in the UK.
A survey from actuarial consultants Hymans Robertson found that the 'big
four' fund managers - Mercury Asset Management, PDFM, Schroder Investment
Management and Gartmore - invested 51 per cent of funds where an outside
manager is used. Five years ago they managed 43 per cent.
The top five fund managers accounted for 56 per cent of all funds externally
managed, up from 48 per cent five years ago, and the top 10 fund managers
invested 73 per cent of all funds, up from 66 per cent five years ago.
Hymans Robertson said the increasing concentration of funds in the hands of
the four managers reflected the fact that their performance had been
distinctly better than that of their peers. Also, the study found that
in-house managers tended to perform worse than the industry average of
external fund managers.
The consultants warned that performance-measurement statistics, which
trustees often rely on to help select a fund manager, may not mean what
trustees believe.
Performance-measurement statistics for each manager include some 'balanced
discretionary' funds for which the manager makes all the investment
decisions and some funds where the scheme trustees set the investment
strategy.
Hymans Robertson said: 'The performance measurers may have to create
sub-sets of their universes consisting only of funds which are unconstrained
and can properly be described as 'balanced'. This would allow those trustees
who wish to follow the perceived wisdom of the average manager to compare
themselves against a universe of similar funds.'
Also, when submitting the performance of their various pools for
measurement, managers do not include all their pools. By eliminating pools
with poor performance, managers could distort their overall figures.
The consultants found that for the top 25 managers in its 'universe' of
pension-fund managers, the proportion of their total balanced funds included
in the measurement statistics ranged from 25 per cent to 100 per cent of all
such funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940429

