FT942-16118

FT  12 APR 94 / Burmah gains from scrip payout policy


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Shares in Burmah Castrol rose 11p to to 826p after the UK lubricants,
chemicals and fuel group announced its second successive enhanced scrip
dividend.
The group also said it would be interested in using the foreign income
dividend (FID) scheme introduced in last year's budgets.
Burmah's 1993 pre-tax profits increased 18 per cent to Pounds 193.8m, while
profit after tax and minorities rose 39 per cent to Pounds 102.7m. The group
said the results were pleasing given the difficult trading conditions in
Europe and Japan.
Mr Jonathan Fry, chief executive, said volumes and market shares improved in
most businesses. 'We significantly increased our spend on marketing and
technology, particularly in Castrol, while focusing on reducing
manufacturing and administrative overheads in chemicals.'
Burmah is recommending a final dividend of 11p, giving a total cash dividend
of 27.5p (25.25p). The board intends to offer a second enhanced share
alternative, again at a 50 per cent premium, in order to alleviate further
the company's advance corporation tax (ACT) problem. Companies which earn
most of their profits overseas suffer when their corporation tax liability
is insufficient to offset their ACT liability on dividends.
Assuming an uptake for the second ehanced scrip scheme similar to the 92 per
cent achieved for the interim dividend, Burmah said its ACT payable this
year would be reduced by about Pounds 4.5m and earnings per share improved
by some 2p.
The FID scheme was introduced to help companies with an ACT problem. It
allows them to pay a dividend out of foreign income, which they must remit
to the UK, and in effect avoid paying ACT on the dividend. BAT Industries,
the UK tobacco and insurance group, has already opted to use the scheme.
Burmah's lubricants business increased operating profits by 22 per cent to
Pounds 155.4m, helped by a favourable exchange rate and record marketing
expenditure, as well as a strong performance in North America and newly
deregulated India.
Chemicals increased operating profits by 8 per cent to Pounds 36.7m, but the
metallurgical businesses acquired with Foseco in 1990 continued to suffer
from depressed foundry markets. Burmah has closed nine former Foseco plants
and shed nearly 400 jobs. It expected this rationalisation to benefit
profits from now on.
Mr Fry said that before Burmah looked to make any further chemicals
acquisitions, it would want to ensure that all doubts about the Foseco
purchase were laid to rest.
Mr Lawrence Urquhart, chairman, said: 'So far this year, trading has been
encouraging, but it would be rash at this juncture to count on a swift
economic recovery in Europe and Japan.'
Earnings per share rose 35 per cent to 53.9p (33.9p).
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940412

