FT941-3348

FT  16 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: 'Green' papermakers find
themselves out of pocket - Buyers are reluctant to pay adequate premiums for
the chlorine-free product


   By BERNARD SIMON


The environmental movement has for years pressed pulp and paper mills to cut
their use of chlorine, which they claim is necessary to produce strong,
bright paper.
A growing number of producers, especially in Europe, have gone all the way.
Sensing a strong resistance among their customers to environmentally harmful
processes, some mills have spent heavily on processes that completely
eliminate chlorine as a bleaching agent in pulp and paper production.
Questions are now being raised, however, whether the producers have gone too
far. Evidence is mounting that customers are reluctant - at least for the
time being - to put their money where their mouths are.
Chlorine-free papers are not commanding the premium prices producers
expected, and which are required to recoup their sizeable investments in a
pioneering technology.
Doubts about the market's willingness to pay for the ultimate in
environmentally friendly paper are especially evident in North America,
where the vast majority of producers is strongly resisting pressures to move
towards the elimination of chlorine from pulp-making processes.
Mr Matthew van Hook, vice-president of the American Forest and Paper
Association's pulp group, told the AFPA's annual meeting last week that 'the
jury is still out on the environmental impacts of totally chlorine-free
(TCF) processes themselves, not to mention their technological and economic
feasibility'.
Chlorine owes its popularity as a bleaching agent to its ability to remove
unwanted resins and fatty acids from wood pulp while leaving intact the
cellulose fibres required for paper-making.
But chlorine is also a heavy polluter, adding toxic by-products such as
dioxins and chlorinated organic compounds, known as AOXs, to pulp mill
effluent.
It has increasingly been supplanted as a bleaching agent by hydrogen
peroxide, supplemented in some cases by an ozone-bleaching process and by
enzymes.
Chlorine-free pulp is especially popular in Germany, where the environmental
crusade against the forestry industry is strongest.
Germany, Switzerland and Austria consumed almost 1.9m tonnes of totally
chlorine-free (TCF) pulp last year out of total European demand of about
3.1m tonnes. Jaakko Poyry, the Finnish forest-products consultancy, predicts
that European demand will jump to between 5m and 6m tonnes by the end of the
decade.
For the present however, supply exceeds demand. Prices for northern bleached
softwood kraft pulp, the industry staple, are currently around Dollars 450 a
tonne.
Mr Martin Granholm, president of Kymmene, the Finnish forest-products group,
says that the present premium for TCF pulp is only about 10 to 15 per cent,
which is well below the figure of some Dollars 130 a tonne that forestry
companies say they require to reimburse the extra expense of installing
non-chlorine bleaching equipment.
In a speech at last week's AFPA meeting, Mr Granholm said it was 'quite
probable that some over-capacity will be created in Europe for TCF pulps.
This is predicted to lower the price premium that TCF pulps have had'.
Only one mill in North America, a 700-tonnes-a-day facility in California
operated by Louisiana-Pacific, at present produces totally chlorine-free
pulp. One-fifth of its 1993 output was chlorine-free, and it is scheduled to
be in continuous TCF production by September 1995.
The mill's environmental benefits are undeniable. Its effluent has a hazy,
pale yellow tint, compared to the coffee-coloured waste spewed out by mills
using chlorine. The levels of toxic AOX and dioxins are so small as to be
virtually unmeasurable.
But Louisiana-Pacific is far from recouping its investment of about Dollars
100m. Weak demand forced the mill to close during the last few months of
1993. It reopened in January and produced TCF pulp for just over a month
before being shut down again on March 2. The company has yet to decide when
it will restart.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940316

