FT942-16068

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Bear Stearns suffers in
unpredictable markets


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


Bear Stearns, the Wall Street securities house, yesterday revealed that it
has incurred trading losses in recent weeks because of extreme volatility in
financial markets.
The announcement of the losses, which were described as 'moderate,' did not
surprise industry analysts. Heavy declines in bond prices over the past few
weeks were expected to have had a negative impact on the earnings of Wall
Street firms such as Bear Stearns, which own and trade large portfolios of
government securities.
Mr James Cayne, Bear Stearns' chief executive, said: 'This is not the first
time we have suffered losses, and it will not be the last.' Big trading
houses are always vulnerable to losses if securities prices change rapidly,
but those losses can just as quickly be recouped if market conditions turn
back in their favour.
The recent unpredictability of global financial markets, however, coupled
with the rise in US interest rates and declines in domestic stock and bond
prices since February, should mark a turning point in Wall Street's earnings
cycle. After three years of steadily escalating profitability, income growth
is expected to slow in 1994.
Bear Stearns' third quarter earnings, which were released yesterday,
indicated that the peak in the securities industry's cycle has probably
passed. The firm reported third-quarter profits of Dollars 115.5m, slightly
higher than a year earlier but well down from the previous quarter, when
profits reached a record Dollars 134.8m.
Separately, Bear Stearns announced that Mr Wayne Angell, who recently
stepped down after eight years as a member of the Federal Reserve Board,
will be joining the firm as chief economist and senior managing director.
The hiring of Mr Angell is a coup for Bear Stearns. His experience and
knowledge of the Fed will prove beneficial to Bear Stearns, which is one of
the most active traders in the US market for fixed-income securities.
During his high-profile tenure at the Fed, Mr Angell developed a reputation
as an inflation 'hawk', who believed the central bank's overriding priority
as the guardians of US monetary policy was to defeat inflation.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940412

