FT941-3458

FT  16 MAR 94 / Essential, or just extra baggage: Is bigger better in the
global business travel industry?


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER and DAVID BUCHAN


If employees of Foseco, the Birmingham-based metallurgical company, try to
book business class tickets when they should be flying economy, Wagonlit
Travel will let Mr John Lamb know.
Mr Lamb, Foseco's chief accountant, says the company's contract with
Wagonlit gives it far greater control over business travel costs than it
could ever achieve alone.
Wagonlit's technology enables Mr Lamb to obtain, at 24 hours' notice, a
computerised record of where employees have travelled recently and whether
they got the best deal available. If they have not, he asks them why.
Wagonlit, which is part of Accor, the French hotel and catering group,
yesterday announced details of its plan to combine its business travel
interests with those of Carlson of the US to create a worldwide network with
combined revenues of Dollars 10.8bn, operating from 4,000 locations in 125
countries.
Two main competitors, American Express and Thomas Cook, each operate from
about 2,000 locations - either their own offices or those of client
companies.
The two sides in the partnership said the new company, Carlson Wagonlit
Travel, aimed to 'service the growing needs of the global business
traveller, to market the new brand worldwide, develop new global business
travel technology and pursue immediate expansion into new business markets
throughout the world, in particular the Asian and Pacific regions'.
Mr Curt Carlson, the founder of the Carlson empire, says the combined travel
company will be able to improve services to clients such as General
Electric, which places its Dollars 350m-a-year travel business with Carlson
in Phoenix, Arizona.
Mr Carlson, whose company's other interests include Radisson Hotels and TGI
Friday's restaurants, which are not part of the merged venture, says: 'Big
companies often have difficulty with their travel, operating in new
countries where agencies often just speak the local language and airlines
use different (ticket) codes.'
Carlson will contribute its strengths in the US to Wagonlit's strong
position in Europe. The newly-merged company will invest an initial Dollars
40m in setting up or buying agencies in Asia, the Pacific region, Latin
America and Africa, where it is under-represented.
Why did they choose each other? Mr Herve Gourio, president of Wagonlit
Travel, says: 'Carlson is the best partner for us because we are about the
same size in the travel business and at the group level. Neither is
predominant, European or American.'
Mr Travis Tanner, president of Carlson Travel, promises 'a real working
union to create the number one in business travel. Not a paper partnership,
nor a smoke and mirrors arrangement.' He said Carlson 'needed a prominent
position in Europe - to have done it ourselves would have taken a great deal
of time and money'.
Rivals in the industry, however, were quick to cast doubt on the prospects
of merging two organisations with such different cultures. 'This is not a
marriage made in heaven,' said one rival business travel executive. 'I can't
see the Americans being run by the French, or vice-versa.'
The new company will have two chairmen, one from Carlson and one from
Wagonlit, and two chief executives, also one from each side. Although the
company headquarters will be in London, the two sides said 'daily operations
will be co-ordinated from Minneapolis and Paris respectively'.
Carlson, one of the largest privately-owned groups in the US, is seen in the
travel industry as run with a firm hand from its Minneapolis headquarters.
Wagonlit, which has gone through a series of changes and acquisitions, is
regarded as still formulating its culture.
Accor acquired Wagonlit, which had taken over the UK business travel
interests of Pickfords, in 1992. The company was then called Wagons-Lits,
but changed its name to Wagonlit last year to distinguish itself from
Accor's railway services division, which still uses the old name.
The planned new company brings together some of the oldest names in the
travel business. Carlson's travel business began as the Ask Mr Foster travel
agency in St Augustine, Florida, in 1888, making it the oldest travel agency
in the US. Its name came from a local resident, Mr Foster, who was the
unofficial keeper of train timetables. Carlson acquired Ask Mr Foster in
1979.
Wagonlit was founded in 1872 to provide sleeping cars for overnight
travellers on European trains. In 1928 it set up travel agencies in rail
ticket offices throughout Europe.
For over 60 years, Wagonlit had an alliance with Thomas Cook. The thinking
behind the tie was that Thomas Cook's strength in the old British Empire
would complement Wagonlit's power in continental Europe. The link was
dissolved in 1989.
In a pointed statement yesterday, Mr Christopher Rodrigues, Thomas Cook's
chief executive, said: 'Since we decided to sever our relationship with
Wagonlit, we have been building the Thomas Cook network by working with
like-minded partners who put customer service first. Forming alliances is
only the beginning of the relationship and major industry players such as
ourselves will be watching the progress of this alliance with interest.
However, it will be customers who will judge its real value.'
Not all Wagonlit's customers see merit in the merger or in the idea that
companies need a single business to handle their travel requirements
worldwide.
Mr Lamb says Foseco does not even have the same travel agents as Burmah
Castrol, its parent company, which uses Thomas Cook. Foseco was already
using Wagonlit when it was acquired by Burmah Castrol in 1990. Although the
company asks different agencies to bid for its travel account every two or
three years, it has seen no need to abandon Wagonlit, which has two staff
members based at Foseco's premises.
Mr Lamb says that Foseco and Burmah Castrol did decide jointly to seek
discounts from airlines as their larger combined purchasing power enabled
them to get a better deal. They have investigated using a single travel
agency throughout the group, but decided there were no similar savings to be
made. The larger combined purchasing power would not have yielded bigger
discounts.
Mr Lamb believes there are advantages to having two travel agencies working
for different parts of his group. He says: 'We believe it keeps both of them
on their toes.'
Mr Lamb is sceptical of the claim that combining Wagonlit with Carlson will
enable the combined group to deliver a more competitive service. He says:
'My answer to that is: if getting much bigger means you can purchase so much
more efficiently, kindly tell us how much that's going to benefit us in
discounts.'
The proposed merger does have its champions, however. Mr Andrew Solum,
travel manager of Inmarsat, the international satellite organisation, which
is also a Wagonlit customer, says it should bring significant benefits.
After taking on Wagonlit last year to handle travel arrangements from its
London headquarters, Mr Solum was sufficiently impressed to ask them to do
the same for Inmarsat's offices in Princeton, New Jersey. Six weeks ago, the
organisation opened an office in Beijing, where Wagonlit is not represented.
Mr Solum hopes the planned merger will enable Carlson Wagonlit Travel to
open an office there.
He says the idea of a global travel agency network is more than mere hype.
If his organisation's employees are bumped off flights in different parts of
the world, he says a call from Wagonlit to the airline often gets them back
on the aircraft. The wider a travel agency network's reach, the more places
there are where it can perform such services.
He says: 'Wherever you are in the world, if you've got a Wagonlit ticket,
you can go into a local office if you've got a problem. You've got somewhere
to go if you've been robbed.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940316

