FT941-5527

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Offshore explorations


   By ADAM COURTENAY


OFFSHORE INVESTMENT SIMPLIFIED by Robert HV Cooke Robert Hale Pounds 14.99
Sometimes, it is difficult to distinguish between clarifying subject matter
and simplifying it. Robert Cooke's Offshore Investment Simplified is a case
in point, sometimes assuming enormous knowledge from the layman, at other
times treating him with kid gloves. It is, in total, an informative and
readable look at an industry's attractions and pitfalls. Cooke is a
well-qualified financial adviser and is not frightened of imparting
heartfelt convictions on disparate sectors and the methods of the
professionals working within them.
Where it falls down is in the positioning. Is Cooke advising the
knowledgeable and critical reader on how to extend his portfolio to
investments in lower tax jurisdictions? Or is he speaking to the beginner
who is likely to consider 'offshore' a dirty word?
Cooke is capable of alternately exciting and stupefying. For instance, how
would the discerning reader respond to his remarks on economic liquidity:
'The supply of money is important. Even if you are firmly convinced that a
certain company has outstanding prospects and you wish to buy its shares, if
you do not have the money to do so, then you are not creating demand for its
shares by merely wishing.'
Cooke is happy to comment widely, often in anecdotal form. Readers are told
of his personal portfolio diversification, his currency hedging techniques,
and his ability to sort risk and proof assets from the depredations of
inflation.
He enjoys playing the detective, with mixed results. He has, for instance, a
sneaking suspicion that 'one or two' managers may be using their
international managed funds as a 'dustbin' for redemptions from other funds
to avoid dealing charges.
Later, he comes up with a questionable statement on offshore fund
performance, based on simplistic bull and bear market theories: '. . .
instead of it being regarded as a strange phenomenon that such a very high
proportion of funds which are top of the ratings in one year end the
following year near the bottom, it should rather be expected as a normal
occurrence.' Both comments may have some credence, but are improperly and
thinly argued.
Chapters are also disconnected, with no thematic thread. In chapter four,
Cooke tabulates the structural differences between unit and investment
trusts.
He then informs us that the table shows 'that investment trusts on average
have the edge by quite a wide margin over unit trusts when it comes to
performance.' If this is true, then why does he not furnish statistics to
support it?
But where Cooke takes the time to present his theories with evidence, he is
a credible sleuth - his thoughts on offshore banking, separate taxation and
inflation are original and refreshing. For instance, his personal experience
with the punitive charges of an offshore bank lending on an overdraft
facility is a real eye-opener.
Cooke would be the first to agree that one moment's good advice is another's
financial ruin. He is at pains to explain the importance of timing, and
devotes a chapter to it.
No one can blame the writer for chronological problems between writing
(early 1993) and publication. But Cooke mistakenly enters into market
predictions, which should be left to the newspapers. Entrenched firmly in
the trends of a year or two ago, his predictions for some markets,
especially the emerging ones, have become redundant. This is hardly edifying
for the critical investor and hardly informative for the uninformed.
Adam Courtenay is editor of Offshore Financial Review.

The Financial Times


London Page X

940305

