FT943-12935

FT  22 JUL 94 / Ministers face curbs at Lloyd's


   By ROLAND RUDD


Ministers will have to divest themselves of direct investment in Lloyd's
insurance market under new rules announced yesterday.
From next year ministers who are underwriting members of Lloyd's will have
to arrange their syndicate participation through a member's agent pooling
arrangement (MAPA) - equivalent to a unit trust.
The revised government procedures - disclosed by Mr John Major in a written
answer to Mr Jacques Arnold, Conservative MP for Gravesham - follows
criticism of Tory MPs' involvement in Lloyd's.
The cross-party committee on MPs' interests recently issued a strong rebuke
to 11 Conservative MPs, including former prime minister Sir Edward Heath,
for failing to declare full details of their Lloyd's involvement.
Government officials believe the new procedures will have the effect of
reducing ministers' exposure to over or under-performance by any one
syndicate. An MAPA must consist of at least 30 syndicates and have no more
than 7.5 per cent of its total capacity in any one. Although MAPA members
will still be subject to unlimited liability, officials say ministers are
less likely to face huge losses and will no longer be directly involved in
Lloyd's investment. Under the old rules ministers could suspend their
underwriting selectively.
The prime minister, chancellor and secretary for trade and industry are not
allowed to be underwriting members.
Mr Peter Hain, Labour MP for Neath, yesterday criticised the new rules for
failing to address the question of whether MPs who were Lloyd's members, and
senior insiders at the insurance organisation, were given preferential
treatment. He has written to the prime minister explaining his allegations
and renewing his call for a public inquiry.
He said it was 'extraordinary' that none of the 51 Tory MPs with combined
losses of more than Pounds 22m had faced bankruptcy. 'This suggests that at
least some MPs, including members of the government, have had special
protection not accorded to other Lloyd's Names,' he said.
The total losses suffered by Lloyd's 30,000 Names, or individual backers,
have totalled Pounds 7.5bn in the four years to 1991, the last year for
which accounts are available.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940722

