FT942-12631

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: China introduced to new
foreigner-friendly exchanges - The SEC has eased regulations to encourage
more overseas companies to list shares in the US


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


Mr Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, is
expected to sign a memorandum of understanding with his Chinese counterparts
today in what should be the first step towards allowing more companies from
that country to list their shares on US stock exchanges.
The agreement, which commits the SEC to provide technical assistance to
Chinese regulators, can be seen in the context of a long-running campaign by
the SEC to attract more foreign companies to sell their shares in the US. It
follows a series of measures adopted by the SEC last week designed to make
it easier and cheaper for foreign companies to tap the US capital markets.
In lightening the regulatory load on prospective foreign issuers, the SEC
wants to ensure the US remains competitive with other important world
markets as a source of capital for foreign issuers. It also wants to ensure
that demand from US investors for foreign securities is not stifled by the
SEC's strict reporting requirements, which many foreign companies find
costly and time-consuming.
Last week's measures include:
allowing foreign companies to present cashflow statements prepared in
accordance with international accounting standards, rather than US
accounting principles as currently required;
allowing more companies to use a shorter form of the SEC's standard
documentation, which will reduce the cost of filing the forms;
and simplifying the process of registering share issues with the SEC.
Other, earlier, changes in a similar vein have involved broadening the
category of US institutions allowed to buy and resell privately-placed
securities issued by foreign companies; accommodating foreign reporting
practices, which do not include the release of US-style quarterly reports;
and granting individual companies exemption from SEC rules governing the
trading of securities immediately after their distribution.
Ms Linda Quinn, director of the SEC's division of corporation finance, says
of the recent changes: 'This is all part of a concerted effort by the SEC to
make clear to foreign issuers that they are welcome in the US. While
information is the key to accessing the US market, we recognise the issue of
cost and try to be responsive to that without compromising the quality of
the information being provided.'
The SEC has been looking to accommodate foreign issuers' needs - it knows
that in the past, its strict standards of financial disclosure have deterred
many foreign companies from selling their shares in the US. With US investor
demand for foreign stocks growing rapidly, the SEC did not want to obstruct
the market's growth.
'There is tremendous appetite from US investors' for foreign securities,
says Mr David Boyle, head of Citibank's ADR and corporate trust business. He
points out that in 1982, US investors owned Dollars 19bn of non-US equity
securities. 'By 1992, that figure had grown to Dollars 190bn and, by the end
of the decade, it is forecast to approach nearly Dollars 1,000bn.'
The growing hunger for foreign investments in the US has caught the eye of
overseas issuers, many of whom - particularly the newly-privatised companies
of central Europe and Latin America - find that their domestic markets are
incapable of supplying enough demand to meet their capital needs.
Consequently, foreign stock issuance in the US is running at record levels.
According to the financial information group Securities Data, Dollars 2.7bn
of common stock was sold by non-US companies in the first quarter of this
year, well up on the the Dollars 1.3bn in the same quarter of 1993. At the
current rate, 1993's record total of Dollars 9.05bn in non-US stock issuance
should be broken this year.
The one area where the US capital markets do not lead the world is in
foreign equity listings on stock exchanges. The New York Stock Exchange, for
example, lags some way behind the London Stock Exchange - its main rival in
the global securities markets - in foreign listings.
London lists 635 foreign stocks. Excluding the shares of Canadian companies
 -which have long been listed on US markets and which trade much like US
companies - the NYSE lists only 138 foreign company stocks. Among other US
markets, the Nasdaq market lists 100, and the American Stock Exchange just
25. (In most cases, these are not listings of common stock, but of ADRs, or
American depositary receipts, which bundle individual shares into baskets
sold to investors).
US exchanges have blamed the SEC's strict reporting requirements for the
fact they lag behind London. The most commonly-cited result of the SEC's
restrictions is the absence of German or Swiss company share listings in the
US.
German and Swiss accounting principles differ greatly from those in the US,
especially in that they allow companies to disguise the true nature of their
earnings performance. For years, the SEC insisted that German and Swiss
companies meet US accounting standards; for years, German and Swiss
companies refused.
A year ago, however, the SEC and Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest industrial
group, reached a compromise that allowed Daimler to list its shares on the
New York Stock Exchange.
Although most of the compromising was done by Daimler, the company's arrival
on the NYSE was hailed as a breakthrough. The NYSE hoped it would persuade
other German and Swiss companies to seek a US listing.
Yet, since Daimler, no other German or Swiss companies have come to the
NYSE. Mr Richard Breeden, SEC chairman when Daimler decided to come to the
US markets, is not surprised by this lack of follow-up.
'Typically, there is often a period of longer than a year after the first
company from a country comes in. Other companies tend to sit back and watch
(the first company's) experience for about a year, to see how the trading in
the securities looks like, and what the benefits seem to be.'
These days Mr Breeden helps foreign companies sell their shares in the US in
his capacity as head of the financial services group at Coopers & Lybrand.
NYSE chairman Mr William Donaldson, while applauding the SEC's efforts to
make it easier for foreign issuers to tap the US markets, still admits to
some frustration at the slow pace of change. 'We're moving in the right
direction, but I'd like to see it happen faster,' he says.
However, Mr Breeden points out that the SEC is not a trade association for
US stock exchanges. 'The SEC's core mission is to protect investors.' He
says it should not become involved in a global race to lower disclosure
standards.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940428

