FT944-6137

FT  30 NOV 94 / International Company News: Rudloff group begins operations


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


Mr Hans-Jorg Rudloff, former head of CS First Boston in London and one of
the founders of the euromarkets, said his new venture, MC Securities Geneve,
would begin operations tomorrow in Geneva.
It will conduct advisory work in Europe with a particular emphasis on the
former communist states of eastern Europe. It will be pitted against CS
First Boston, which dominates eastern Europe's securities business.
'We are no more vulnerable than before,' said Mr Ian Molson, co-head of
investment banking in Europe for CS First Boston. Mr Rudloff said of his
recruitment drive: 'CSFB is not the target company'.
However, the opening of MC group for business coincides with the disclosure
that another leading CS First Boston executive had joined the five or more
that have defected to their former manager and the MC group.
Mr Charles Harman, head of investment banking for Poland, the Czech
Republic, Hungary and other former Soviet satellites, will become head of
corporate finance at Mr Rudloff's new company, which is backed by Banque
Bruxelles Lambert of Belgium.
Mr Harman's move raises the prospect of further departures from CS First
Boston's east European operations.
Mr Zdenek Bakala, former head of CS First Boston in Prague has left to set
up Patria Finance, a domestic securities house, and Mr Rudloff said he and
some friends had backed the venture and taken a 25 per cent stake.
Other east European executives have strong personal loyalty to Mr Rudloff,
stemming from his role as the force behind CS First Boston's move into
eastern Europe.
The strategy was derided at the time, but executives say the region is
contributing significant profits in a year in which falling bond markets
have hit the international business.
Mr Rudloff was moved to CS Holding, CS First Boston's parent, and left the
group last year.
However, the most lucrative area of all for CS First Boston has been
securities trading in Russia, and Mr Boris Jordan, head of the Moscow
office, is not thought to be close to Mr Rudloff.
Further defections, if any, are only likely to take place after executives
receive their annual bonuses early next year. Mr Harman has forgone his
payment.
Mr Rudloff said he would hire about 150 staff over 15 months for offices in
Geneva, and in London, where MC is seeking the relevant licences.

The Financial Times


London Page 53

941130

