FT943-12720

FT  23 JUL 94 / Blair says unions will have no special place


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mr Tony Blair yesterday warned union leaders not to expect privileged access
to the next Labour government and suggested that only millionaires would pay
more tax.
As cabinet ministers launched a vitriolic attack on the new Labour leader,
Mr Blair set out his vision for the party in a series of interviews charting
his course for the centre ground of British politics.
He firmly slapped down Mr Ken Livingstone, the only leftwing MP openly to
criticise his election, and dismissed forecasts of a clash on employment
policy with Mrs Margaret Beckett, the former deputy leader whom he beat in
the leadership ballot.
Mr Blair told BBC Radio that unions would have no more influence over the
next Labour government than employers, in spite of the unions'
constitutional role in the Labour party.
He said: 'Trade unions will have no special or privileged place within the
Labour party. They will have the same access as the other side of industry.
They are not going to be told that they are not a part of our society. But
we are not running the next Labour government for anyone other than the
people of this country.'
Mr Blair went out of his way to reassure better-off voters that Labour had
abandoned the 'soak-the-rich' approach of the 1970s, and had no plans for a
return to penal taxation.
Using language calculated to demonstrate the depth of change in Labour's
approach, he pledged: 'I am not anti-wealth. If someone goes out through
hard work and graft and makes themselves a millionaire, good luck to them.
'But it is right, in that set of circumstances, that they should not be
able, by hiring the right accountants, to avoid paying tax altogether.'
But, he said, the number of top-rate taxpayers had tripled under the
Conservatives to include primary school teachers and policemen, who could
not be called rich.
'That is not what the Labour party is talking about at all,' he said. The
objective was to tax those who 'end up paying virtually no tax or can use
offshore trusts or tax shelters not to pay their fair share'.
Mr Blair was clearly irritated by Mr Livingstone's claims that the 'lovey
creatures and the spin-doctors' running the party had avoided substantive
policy issues in the election campaign.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, dismissed Mr Blair in a speech in
Edinburgh as a 'political mannequin'. Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health
secretary, described his election campaign as 'candy floss'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940723

