FT941-4232

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (9): More resilient than most -
There was a marked pick-up in demand for good quality buildings in the
second half of 1993, after two sluggish years / The Netherlands


   By VANESSA HOULDER


The recession has dealt lightly with the Dutch property market. While it has
not escaped entirely from rising vacancy rates, stagnating rents and
sluggish investment markets, it has remained more stable than most of its
continental European counterparts.
This resilience can, in part, be attributed to the decentralised structure
of the Dutch property market. Dutch businesses are scattered throughout the
principle Netherlands cities of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, the Hague and Utrecht.
As a result, rents are rarely driven up by the pressure of demand, and
therefore Dutch property rental values tend to be lower and more stable that
other European cities.
Another factor influencing the stability of the market is the dominant role
played by institutions. This means that property is usually funded with
equity, rather than bank finance.
As a result, there is little pressure on property owners to sell property
during the trough of a cycle. 'In a downturn, there is the appearance of a
stable market,' says Mr Glen Cowan of Jones Lang Wootton, property advisers.
'There is no distressed selling.'
Many property owners are hoping that the downturn is over as far as the
investment market is concerned. There was a marked pick-up in demand for
good quality buildings in the second half of 1993, after two sluggish years.
The upturn was particularly pronounced in the retail sector, which accounted
for almost 60 per cent of the Fl2.2bn invested in property last year.
As interest rates fell, the high initial yields available on property have
begun to look more attractive.
The improvement in the investment market has not embraced poorer-quality
buildings, for which yields have increased by about one percentage point.
However, fully let, well-located buildings in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, the
Hague and Utrecht are in demand; yields have dropped by between a quarter
and a half of a percentage point.
In the largest single office investment deal ever done in Amsterdam, MBO,
development arm of Internationale Nederlanden Group, sold its 34,000 sq m
Atrium building in Amsterdam South to Zurich Life Insurance on a yield of
under 6.5 per cent.
The fortunes of the occupational market are generally less encouraging,
although they vary markedly from sector to sector.
The retail market has been relatively robust in 1993, with vacancy rates of
just 1-2 per cent. Some prime units which were let between 1989 and 1992 may
now be slightly over-rented as a result of a slight decline in consumer
spending, according to Richard Ellis. But shopping centres with strong
anchor tenants and individual secondary retail units are continuing to
experience some rental growth.
The strength of the retail property market has prompted developers to draw
up plans for a significant number of new shopping centres. These proposals
add about 300,000 sq m of retail space to the pipeline, bringing the
projected development total to about 1m sq m.
In the industrial sector, the economic downturn resulted in a 15 per cent
drop in institutional demand, according to DTZ. Despite this, small modern
industrial units are in short supply; most of the surplus space is in
relatively large, industrial complexes. Overall, rents remained stable last
year.
In the office market there is, on the face of it, little cause for concern.
Last year, demand for offices rose sharply to a record 1.37m sq m across the
Netherlands, according to DTZ Zadelhoff.
In part, this was because government agencies agreed to let 530,000 sq m of
space, which partly resulted from a government decision to relocate many of
the judicial authorities. Most parts of the country registered higher demand
in 1993, but Amsterdam proved to be the most popular office location with
take-up reaching some 200,000 sq m.
However, these strong take-up figures mask the fact that tenants are
relinquishing space when they move into new buildings. With hardly any net
absorption of office space, the availability of space rose by 8 per cent to
stand at 2.7m sq m. Agents expect vacancy rates to remain high this year, as
companies announce cut-backs in staffing levels.
As a result there has been pressure on rents. Rents on space in some of the
most expensive offices in southern Amsterdam have fallen by 5-10 per cent.
Elsewhere, the pressure from rising vacancy rates has forced landlords to
make larger concessions in the form of rent-free periods and other
incentives. Although the supply of new space coming on the market has
fallen, agents do not expect rents to grow in real terms this year. Hopes
are pinned on an improvement in the economy, coupled with a reduction in
available space, which could result in a pick-up in rental growth next year.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940311

