FT941-5464

FT  07 MAR 94 / Rousselet plans libel writ against minister


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


Mr Andre Rousselet, the French businessman who last month resigned as
chairman of the Canal-Plus television group, plans to sue Mr Alain Carignon,
the communications minister, for libel.
Canal-Plus, one of Europe's most successful pay-TV companies, has been
clouded by controversy since Mr Rousselet's resignation, with some analysts
saying it has lost considerable independence. Mr Rousselet, one of the most
influential figures in European media and a close friend of Mr Francois
Mitterrand, the socialist French president, founded the company 10 years
ago.
He resigned in protest at the formation of a concert party to take control
of Canal-Plus by its largest shareholders, all of which were privatised by
France's last right-wing government.
Mr Rousselet has since publicly accused Mr Edouard Balladur, the
conservative prime minister, of orchestrating a campaign against him.
Mr Rousselet said at the weekend that he planned to pursue a civil libel
suit against Mr Carignon over remarks about Mr Rousselet's role in
broadcasting appointments in the early 1980s, when he was head of President
Mitterrand's private office. He also plans to sue Mr Philippe Alexandre, a
prominent French political commentator, over comments on Mr Rousselet's
personal wealth. The libel suits should ensure that the row over Mr
Rousselet's resignation stays in the limelight.
The concert party has raised important questions about the future
relationship between the French government and industry at a time when the
Balladur government is pursuing an ambitious privatisation programme.
Until recently most French companies in 'sensitive' sectors such as
broadcasting have been state controlled, and governments have openly
intervened in management and personnel issues, notably in the appointment of
the chairman.
But in theory the state should have no influence over the affairs of a
private sector company such as Canal-Plus, which is publicly quoted with a
large part of its equity owned by companies in related industries that act
as noyaux durs or 'hard core' investors.
The Balladur government is now introducing noyaux durs to the companies
being sold in its privatisation drive. These hard core investors tend to be
companies sympathetic to the aims of the Balladur administration.
Mr Rousselet's conspiracy allegations have fuelled fears among international
investors that future French governments could use the noyaux durs
indirectly to influence the affairs of private-sector companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940307

