FT944-5855

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Company News: Hungary delays decision on hotel
sale


   By VIRGINIA MARSH


Hungary's privatisation authorities have postponed a decision on the
controversial sale of its last remaining state-owned hotel chain. This
follows the failure to meet yesterday's deadline for agreement with the top
bidder.
American General Hospitality, a privately-held US company which outbid its
nearest rival by more than 20 per cent, was last week close to signing a
deal to acquire 51 per cent of HungarHotels when it was asked to raise its
bid by another 20 per cent.
The two sides were unable to reach a compromise during further negotiations
this week.
The sudden price increase, which came after local pressure to ignore the
tender, has led investment advisers to doubt the government's willingness to
sell the group. It also puts into question its commitment to privatisation
at a time when it is budgeting for Dollars 3bn-Dollars 4bn in privatisation
revenues over the next two years.
The State Property Agency (SPA), which is handling the sale, said yesterday
it was considering re-opening talks with other bidders for the chain over
the next two weeks. The other main contender for HungarHotels, which owns 15
hotels, is Intercontinental, the Japanese-owned international hotel chain.
However, the SPA also hinted it might cancel the sale, which is only the
second significant privatisation since the socialist-led government took
office in July.
Mr Gabor Halmi, SPA deputy managing director, said: 'This is a high-value
company. It is not a company we need to sell quickly and it is not a problem
for us if we don't sell it now.'
A cancellation of the tender would be a victory for the social security
fund, which has campaigned against the deal. The fund, which is backed by
powerful trade unions, is pressing the government to meet obligations to
transfer state assets of Ft300bn (Dollars 2.7bn) to it and other related
funds by handing over the hotel group.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

941201

