FT942-16140

FT  12 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Conflicting interests if BAe articles
are changed


   From Mr NOEL FALCONER


Sir, I rejoice at the first flight of the British Eurofighter.
I wonder if it will be produced - and worry for British Aerospace if it
isn't. For there is no fall-back, because of its cost, which is appalling,
notwithstanding the Eurofighter's undoubted excellence.
The project cost is admitted as Pounds 33bn, of which Pounds 11bn is R&D.
That leaves Pounds 22bn to build 453 fighters - Pounds 50m each, for
production only, more if the UK has to go it alone, more yet if the RAF cuts
its order for 250, worth Pounds 12.5bn, a quarter of the public sector
borrowing requirement deficit.
Neither the UK nor Germany, Italy, or Spain is committed to its
construction, so securing national and international agreement for it must
involve a struggle.
Consequently, at this of all junctures, BAe needs the most influential
leadership possible. A non-executive American chairman, hired for whatever
tiny part of Bob Bauman's year Pounds 50,000 buys, is the opposite of what
is essential. Why, in any event, is John Cahill being ousted when, less than
halfway through his term and with his task incomplete, he has lifted the
shares fourfold?
The company's articles require that the BAe chairman be British, for the
sound reason that the head of the prime armourer of our nation is privy to
our deepest secrets. Yes, America long stood with us against the Russian
hegemony; but the Soviet Union has fragmented and, according to Pitt the
Younger, 'nations have no friends, only interests'. Interests that are
diverging.
Requirements conflict: most obviously, America wants to sell its aeroplanes
in preference to BAe's, and vice versa. Mr Bauman would have to be disloyal
either to his country or to the organisation he has been invited to lead.
I beg shareholders concerned for the security of the nation, and for the
future of their company, to oppose the enabling amendment of its Articles.
Noel Falconer,
223 Bramhall Moor Lane,
Hazel Grove,
Stockport SK7 5JL.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940412

