FT944-11079

FT  08 NOV 94 / Arts: Sibelius' Shakespeare


   By DAVID MURRAY


In 1925, when he was 60, Sibelius composed some substantial scene-music for
The Tempest. It was one of his last scores before his legendary tight-lipped
silence, coming just after the Seventh Symphony and before Tapiola. You
might expect the autumnal quality of late Sibelius to be apt for
Shakespeare's last play, and so it is; but he interpreted his theatrical
brief rather modestly, never pretending to fill out a conspectus of the
whole piece. The metaphysical depths of The Tempest lie wholly in its
language, and Sibelius was not writing an opera.
At the Barbican on Saturday, Neeme Jarvi and the Gothenburg Symphony gave us
a glowing account of the complete music. Hard to resist the familiar sense
that native players (Sibelius was after all a Swedish Finn) can play such
stuff, folk-based as it mostly is, with a radiant simplicity that nobody
else can match] Richard Williams contrived to put everything properly in
context with a team of ten actors, headed by Alec McCowen's Prospero,
declaiming just enough of the play to let us know where we were from number
to number. Some 34 of them, all told - though the whole performance lasted
little more than 90 minutes.
It was good to hear, but one felt no great need to hear it all ever again.
Evidently the masque-side of The Tempest was to be emphasised; generous time
is allotted to the formal dances, entries and retreats, which are graciously
folksy. The actual masque-within-the-play, however, must have been trimmed:
we got only a splash of Iris's rainbow, a brightly urgent aria from Juno
(Susan Gritton) and two perfunctory dances.
Elsewhere, Sibelius exploited the simple theatrical possibilities of the
whole-tone scale, the augmented triad and the diminished-7th chord - none of
them new in 1925, but rediscovered here with uncomplicated enthusiasm. In
the solo songs for Ariel and Caliban (sometimes with chorus, and much more
ingeniously wrought) Monica Groop spun an opulent, penetrating line, and
Alan Opie displayed ripe comic character. Above all there were two
extraordinary numbers: the Overture, in which a monstrous, eerily oppressive
storm pre-echoes Tapiola with lashings of furious rain instead of a dry
blizzard, and a jaggedly eloquent paragraph or two of baffled anguish for
Prospero toward the end.
Sponsored by Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken

The Financial Times


London Page 15

941108

