FT941-3291

FT  16 MAR 94 / Spanish workers prepare to fight Suzuki cutbacks


   By TOM BURNS


   MADRID


The future of Suzuki's Spanish subsidiary remained in doubt yesterday after
workers flatly refused to negotiate drastic job cuts demanded by the
Japanese company.
Suzuki told union leaders it intended to reduce the labour force at its main
plant in Linares by 70 per cent from 2,437 to 941. The company also plans to
reduce production of the four-wheel drive vehicles that the factory produces
by 50 per cent to 25,000 units this year and to impose a two-year wage
freeze.
Earlier this week Suzuki said it would drop a threat to close the plant if
unions agreed to job cuts. Santana, which is some 80 per cent owned by
Suzuki, applied for receivership last month saying it had sustained
accumulated losses of Pta21bn (Dollars 151m) in the past three years.
Union leaders said Suzuki had delivered a 'take it or leave it' ultimatum
which was completely unacceptable. They said there was no point in further
talks and that they would now concentrate on mobilising the Linares area in
southern Spain, where Santana represents the sole industrial activity and
provides for more than 30,000 indirect jobs.
The anger in Linares has been fuelled by the failure by both Suzuki and the
regional government to implement an agreement signed last year. Suzuki had
agreed to wage increases of between 4-6 per cent and to raise output to
50,000 units a year, while the authorities had promised subsidies.
The Santana union leaders are understood to be preparing big demonstrations
in Madrid at the weekend when the ruling Socialist party meets to holds its
national congress. Yesterday, plant workers put up road blocks around
Linares and temporarily occupied government offices in the nearby provincial
capital of Jaen.
The future of Santana, which previously made Land Rover vehicles, has been
in doubt since early last year.
The issue came to a head when the company filed for protection from
creditors on February 18, provoking fierce public reaction in Linares and
the surrounding region.
The strength of the Santana protest against the parent company Suzuki has
created concern in the government about its possible impact on the climate
for foreign investment in Spain.
The dispute has also generated political worries, with regional elections in
Andalucia less than three months away.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940316

