FT941-4046

FT  12 MAR 94 / Fashion (The Global Wardrobe - At a Wedding): The bride
wears white but the guests are a mess - In the last of our series on dress
codes around the world, FT writers attend a wedding / Tokyo


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


The wedding reception is a grand affair in Japan and one of the very few
occasions that calls for serious dressing up.
The Japanese take it for granted that looking elegant for a wedding
celebration is a must, regardless of cost.
The bride's family will typically spend at least Y100,000 (Pounds 635) on
hiring a traditional bride's kimono, if they do not own one, and guests will
also readily hire formal outfits.
To keep up with the bride, who will change from a traditional kimono to a
western style wedding dress and then a formal gown, women guests favour
glamorous gowns that are only tolerated for the most formal of events.
There is a difference, however, in rules for married and single women.
Although not necessarily strictly adhered to, it is generally expected that
young, single women will wear a rented ballgown or a silk kimono,
beautifully embroidered in gold, vermillion, purple and other bright colours
and featuring various nature motifs. These long-sleeved kimonos are called
furisode.
Western-style gowns will feature costly materials of all hues, beads,
spangles, or lace and will often be worn in the winter with ostrich
mufflers, long gloves and all.
Married women tend not to wear full gowns and generally opt for something
more subdued. And in the case of kimonos, there is a strict code that
married women do not wear furisode. Instead, they wear a black kimono
embroidered in gold with the family crest visibly presented.
Jewellery is always in abundance among the women, married or not, and pearls
are favoured this year.
As for the men, weddings do not provide the same opportunities for dressing
up: morning coats were the rule, and still are on the whole, although
younger men are experimenting with stylish tuxedos.
The problem with tuxedos however, is that since the only people who wear
them outside wedding receptions are usually waiters, it is not difficult to
be mistaken for one.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940312

