FT942-15766

FT  14 APR 94 / Italian alliance split over choice of speakers


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


Italy's victorious Freedom Alliance is deadlocked over choosing candidates
for the key positions of speaker in the chamber of deputies and in the
senate.
The disagreement underlines the serious differences that continue to dog the
formation of a new government.
A meeting to resolve the deadlock, due yesterday, was postponed at the last
moment without explanation. The postponement followed a meeting between
President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro and media magnate Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the
man considered most likely to be asked to form the next government.
The choice of speakers for the two houses of parliament is the first step in
the opening of the new legislature. This will take place tomorrow and
precedes the formal consultations by the president on forming a new
government.
The most difficult choice concerns that of speaker for the Senate, where the
Freedom Alliance failed to win a majority of the 320 seats. The Alliance of
Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia movement, the populist Northern League and the
neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance, plus the rump of the former Christian
Democrat Party, the Christian Democrat Centre won 154 seats.
The League wants its own senator Mr Francesco Speroni. Mr Berlusconi has
been looking for someone capable of attracting some eight small party
senators to ensure an upper house majority. This has led to talk of Mr
Giovanni Spadolini, the outgoing Republica speaker and former premier, being
asked to stay on. But the League rejects this.
suggested its Mr Cesare Previti. But yesterday the MSI proposed its own
candidate, Mr Giulio Maceratini.
In the case of the chamber, the League has again been touting one of its
leading figures Mr Roberto Maroni. However, Mr Maroni seems more likely to
be earmarked for a senior cabinet position. This could leave the way open
for one of he veteran politicians who has changed sides to back Forza Italia
like the Liberal deputy Mr Alfredo Biondi.
These difficulties also reflect the intense bargaining over the composition
of the next government. Mr Berlusconi is under pressure to draw his
ministerial team from within the Freedom Alliance; but he has discovered in
recent days a paucity of ministerial talent. This has led him to look
elsewhere, including approaching some members of the Ciampi government such
as Mr Piero Barucci, the Treasury minister.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940414

