FT943-12727

FT  23 JUL 94 / LDP changes mind over N-arms rally


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Japan's odd ruling couple yesterday showed conjugal give and take when the
conservative Liberal Democratic party agreed, for the first time, to take
part in a rally against nuclear arms, writes William Dawkins.
Mr Yoshiro Mori, LDP secretary general, said the party had accepted an
invitation from its new coalition partner and former adversary, the
left-wing Social Democratic party, to send representatives to the
demonstration in Hiroshima next month.
The LDP's gesture to the anti-nuclear left came two days after Mr Tomiichi
Murayama, SDP prime minister, made an unprecedented gesture to the
pro-military right by abandoning his party's belief that Japan's defence
forces were unconstitutional.
'The banning of nuclear weapons is a common theme among the people of the
world and, as the only nation to have suffered from atomic bombing, Japan
must be serious about this spirit,' Mr Mori said.
The annual rally, organised by the Japan Congress Against Atomic and
Hydrogen Bombs, starts on August 3 and ends three days later on the
anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Until this year the LDP had
refused to attend, on the grounds that it was organised by the Socialist
opposition, with which it formed a government last month.
The LDP does, however, attend memorial ceremonies at Hiroshima on August 6
and at Nagasaki on August 9. Nagasaki was also bombed in 1945.
In another gesture to its left-wing allies, the LDP said yesterday that it
had shelved plans to rewrite Japan's US-drafted pacifist constitution.
However, Mr Yohei Kono, LDP president, said there would be no change in the
party's resistance to another Socialist demand, for better government
medical help for the 340,000 registered hibakusha, people of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki suffering from radiation sickness. The Socialists also argue there
are a large number of unregistered victims deserving state assistance.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940723

