FT943-12965

FT  22 JUL 94 / UN plan for criminal court takes shape


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


The first step towards establishing an international criminal court to try
such crimes as genocide, war crimes, terrorist acts and drug trafficking was
taken yesterday, with the adoption of the court's draft statutes by the
United Nations International Law Commission.
Mr James Crawford, an Australian lawyer who chaired negotiations on the
statutes, said such a court would avoid the 'second-class justice' of ad hoc
tribunals set up after crimes have been committed and before charges against
individuals have been brought.
The UN Security Council last year set up a war crimes tribunal for former
Yugoslavia and a similar tribunal has been proposed to try perpetrators of
genocide in Rwanda.
The court's statutes are due to be debated by the UN General Assembly later
this year. If approved, the way would be clear for negotiations to put them
into international treaty form. Among crimes over which the court would have
jurisdiction are genocide, aggression by one state against another, crimes
against humanity and violation of Geneva Conventions on conduct in wartime.
It would also try 'exceptionally serious crimes of international concern'
involving breaches of international treaties that outlaw torture, apartheid,
hijacking and hostage-taking, and other internationally recognised crimes
such as drug trafficking.
Mr Crawford said the court could have jurisdiction over such cases as the
Lockerbie airliner bombing. Libya has so far refused a Security Council
demand for the accused to be extradited to stand trial, on the grounds they
would not get a fair hearing.
But except for genocide and cases initiated by the Security Council, the
court could try suspects only if the country holding them and the country
where the crime was committed agreed that it should.
Mr Vladen Vereshchetin, Russian chairman of the commission, stressed
yesterday the court was intended to complement national justice systems and
to act in cases where national procedures were not available or effective.
Under the draft statutes, the court could issue warrants for arrest and
detention of suspects. They would have the right to silence, the right not
to incriminate themselves and the right to a public trial with legal defence
of their choice.
If they are found guilty, the court could impose a prison term or a fine,
but not the death penalty. Prisoners would serve sentences in a designated
country.
The court would have its own independent prosecutor and consist of 18 judges
elected by treaty members, with a seven-person appeals chamber. Five judges
would be selected to hear each trial.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940722

