FT941-16969

FT  07 JAN 94 / Press war flares in France: Le Monde to launch new paper in
price and advertising battle


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


Le Monde, the traditional bastion of the French press, on Monday joins the
increasingly bitter battle in the newspaper industry by launching InfoMatin,
a new morning paper.
The launch of InfoMatin, which comes when the French press is badly bruised
by recession, will follow a few days after Wednesday's introduction of
Aujourd'hui, the national version of Le Parisien, the popular Parisian
tabloid.
Both new titles are going on sale at cut prices - Aujourd'hui for FFr3.50
(40 pence) and InfoMatin for FFr3. Both will be cheaper than existing French
dailies, including Le Monde at FFr7 and Le Parisien at FFr4.50.
InfoMatin, which is backed financially by Le Monde, will be slightly smaller
than a tabloid paper. It is intended to appeal to the young, urban readers
outside Paris who have eluded Le Monde in recent years. Aujourd'hui, also
aimed at a young readership, will be a regionalised version of Le Parisien
to be distributed outside Paris and the surrounding Ile de France area.
The price-cutting tactics of InfoMatin and Aujourd'hui threaten to intensify
the fierce competition within the French press where circulation and
advertising revenue are already under intense pressure.
France's newspapers and magazines, like other areas of the economy, have
been badly affected by the recession. But these general problems have been
aggravated by the instability caused by the reform of the media buying
system implemented by Mr Michel Sapin, the former socialist finance
minister.
Mr Sapin's law, which has transferred responsibility for media buying from
intermediaries such as advertising agencies to advertisers themselves, has
triggered a shift in media expenditure to television, thereby contributing
to a reduction in press advertising rates of up to 25 per cent.
Some titles have already come under strain. LVMH, the luxury goods group,
last year took over La Tribune Desfosse, the financial daily.
Alcatel-Alsthom, the engineering group, bought into Le Point, the weekly
news magazine. L'Humanite, the old communist paper, is seeking new capital
to try to defuse its financial difficulties.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940107

