FT941-4051

FT  12 MAR 94 / Food and Drink: Hey, hey listen to the band - Nicholas
Lander feeds on music during a short visit to Cuba


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


A 45-minute journey along the road east of Havana brings you to the
struggling oil wells that litter this coast. It also brings you to one of
the most enjoyable restaurants in Cuba.
It is called El C--a-el.
It is not a desire to conceal professional secrets which prevents me
revealing its full name. It is more simple than that: the missing letters
have fallen off and, like so much else in Cuba, cannot be replaced because
of lack of cash.
Business in these restaurants is not too good for the same reason. When we
lunched there one weekday, only one other table was occupied in a room that
could seat 70.
Nevertheless, a seven-piece Cuban band was warming up and they greeted us
with huge smiles and waves. The waitress, also delighted to see us, handed
over a large red menu, in Spanish and English, with about 30 items on it.
No sooner had we sat down and chosen our fare than the waitress said that,
unfortunately, there was no gas for the kitchen stoves and all the cooked
items were off. Would we like a sandwich instead? We had no option - even
though we already knew that the range of sandwiches on offer in Cuba is
limited to ham and cheese or cheese and ham.
The band comprised three guitars, a double bass, bongo drums, maracas,
andolave and a singer who announced 'traditional Cuban song' before each
number.
They played with all their heart and soul and within minutes I had forgotten
the unpleasant smell of oil from the wells on the shore, the cloudy weather
and that I was eating another ham and cheese sandwich. Suddenly, I started
enjoying the meal.
In Cuba live music is not just an integral part of every meal but also
almost the best value on any menu. We gave the band members Dollars 20
(Pounds 13.50) and they went away even happier. Our 12 sandwiches and beers
cost twice that. And however tough the sandwiches, they were certainly more
enjoyable than any meal in the restaurants of hotels such as the Nacional in
Havana or the Melia in Varadero, where so little respect is paid to Cuban
culinary tradition that you could close your eyes and imagine you were in
any hotel anywhere in the world.
Invariably, the two best items on offer are Cuban ice-cream and papaya. The
fruit has been crossed with the Spanish 'mamey', a tree that takes 17 years
to produce its first crop. It is deep red, slightly putrid, but wonderful.
An indication of how disappointing hotel restaurants are came last year
when, as the Cuban economy was being opened up to private enterprise, many
Cubans turned their houses into restaurants and began to entertain fellow
citizens and tourists to delicious home-cooked meals in return for US
dollars.
These enterprises, known as paladares, became instantly popular, with one
man reputedly clearing more than Dollars 1,000 a week. The hotels
retaliated, unfortunately not by raising standards, but by complaining to
the government which, sadly, closed larger premises.
Like so many other tourists, I went initially to La Bodeguita del Medio in
old Havana for a mojito, just one of the drinks Ernest Hemingway made famous
while living in a nearby hotel. The ingredients are ice, sugar, lime,
three-year-old white rum, mint leaves and soda water.
The restaurant behind the bar served Cuban food at tourist prices. The
traditional moros y cristianos (Moors and Christians - white rice and black
beans), roast pork and black bean soup was served along with the most
innovative dish, deep fried sweet potato. Dinner was Dollars 40 for two -
not including the music. At 9.30pm two guitarists swept in and sang as
though we were a room of impresarios.
For a final mojito in old Havana I went to sit on the terrace of El Patio
looking on to the faded grandeur of Havana's cathedral. The sky was blue,
the wind blowing in off the sea and, naturally, a four-piece band was
playing.
Until they heard the competition, that is. Across the small square another
band had set up and, with the aid of amplifiers, filled the square with
music. Discretion overcame pride and the four musicians I had noticed
earlier had put down their instruments and were standing in the audience.
Cuba may not thrill gastronomically, but it does provide the most exciting
music I have ever eaten to.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940312

