FT944-10874

FT  09 NOV 94 / Spiders, cookies and a lot of abuse: US campaign
unwholesome, hypocrisy rampant and invective childish


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


Forget Fleetwood Mac's 'Don't stop thinking about tomorrow,' which echoed
endlessly through President Bill Clinton's campaign rallies in 1992; the hit
political song of 1994 is, more poignantly, 'The itsy-bitsy spider.'
Film of Senator Ted Kennedy singing along with the children's ditty provided
one of the few high points in a campaign season that almost everyone agrees
is one of the dirtiest in recent memory.
The image must have been so memorable Congressman Jim Nussle of Iowa filmed
a campaign advertisement solely of him singing the Spider with his three
children.
Acting with kids or animals carries its own risks. Mr Michael Huffington,
who has spent as much as Dollars 25m, mostly his own money, in a bid to
unseat Democratic Senator Dianne Feinstein in California, campaigned last
month at the Bundy Scott Child Care Centre in Pasadena, reading 'The little
seed' and 'The little boot' to the toddlers.
'They seemed to like him. I don't know why,' said Mr Anthony Henry, the
centre's director. This endorsement may have two edges, but could be
important in a campaign where one of the principal issues has been the
immigration status of Mr Huffington's nanny.
In other races the central issues have sometimes been even stranger. In the
race for Wyoming's only seat in the House of Representatives, Republican
Barbara Cubin's campaign has been rocked by 'Cookiegate' - charges that she
once passed around suggestively masculine-shaped biscuits at a meeting. The
Casper Star-Tribune reports that Ms Cubin admits passing the cookies around,
but says she did not bake them herself.
In most parts of the country, the campaign has been unwholesome, the
hypocrisy rampant and the invective childish.
A spokesman for Congressman Jim Cooper, who is running for one of
Tennessee's Senate seats against Republican lawyer Fred Thompson, calls his
opponent 'a Gucci-wearing, Lincoln-driving, Perrier-drinking, Grey
Poupon-spreading, millionaire Washington special interest lobbyist.'
But the prize for the funniest political advertisement in a losing cause
goes to the campaign of former Congressman Jim Jontz to unseat Republican
Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana. Mr Jontz drives around Indiana towns such
as Lebanon, Peru and Moscow, in a search for the billions of dollars of
foreign aid Mr Lugar has voted for.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941109

