FT941-16793

FT  07 JAN 94 / Markets Report: Bundesbank delays cuts


   By GILLIAN TETT


The D-Mark dominated money market attention yesterday, after the Bundesbank
decided against cutting German interest rates, writes Gillian Tett.
With the markets convinced that cuts have only been delayed, rather than
abandoned, the move failed to boost the German currency. And in spite of the
Bundesbank's attempt to stabilise the German money markets with a fixed repo
rate, these seem set to remain volatile in the coming weeks.
The Bundesbank's decision to leave its discount and Lombard rates unchanged
at 5.75 per cent and 6.75 per cent respectively had been widely predicted,
and in spite of the recent weakening of the D-Mark against the dollar there
were no dramatic currency moves yesterday.
After the announcement, the D-Mark firmed against the dollar to end at
DM1.7397, but was still slightly down from the previous day's close. In New
York it finished at DM1.7445. Further movement seems set to be dollar rather
than D-Mark led, with the publication of US non-farm payroll figures today.
The more surprising announcement was the Bundesbank's decision to retain a
fixed repo rate of 6.00 per cent for two weeks - a move which underlined the
problems that German money market volatility is now posing. Indeed, Ms
Alison Cottrell of Midland Global Markets believes concern about this
volatility, rather than D-Mark weakness, may have guided the Bundesbank's
decision yesterday.
The volatility primarily stems from the gradual abolition of the 'Chapter
17' practices on German money markets, which previously allowed the
Bundesbank to use government funds deposited with it to provide temporary
liquidity for the markets. In exchange, government institutions enjoyed
favourable overdraft facilities. But new European regulations abolished
these facilities six days ago, depriving the Bundesbank of a key source of
liquidity.
The freeing of these funds has fuelled market volatility. With the market
confident that German rates will fall soon, there is strong downward
pressure on money market rates. Three-month money was yesterday priced at
5.81 per cent.
If the Bundesbank had left the repo rate variable, it could have fallen
below the discount rate, Keith Edmonds, chief analyst at IBJ International,
pointed out.
But Ms Cottrell believes that the Bundesbank's decision to fix the repo rate
only until the next council meeting on January 20 has 'left it in a hole'.
'Money market rates could fall below the discount rate or even go up to 7
per cent, particularly towards the end of the month,' said Ms Cottrell, who
believes the instability could continue into February.
As a sign of the scepticism generated by the Bundesbank's decision, the
D-Mark dipped against many European currencies yesterday, although the
Netherlands and Belgium joined Austria and Denmark in reducing their own
rates in spite of Germany.
The Belgian franc firmed slightly against the D-Mark, to Bfr20.70 from a
previous Bfr 20.75 after Belgium's central bank cut its central rate to 7.10
per cent from 7.25 per cent.
In Denmark, the Danish central bank lowered its 14-day repo rate to 6.50 per
cent from 6.75, following its  1/4 percentage point cut in its discount and
deposit rates on Wednesday. The kroner ended unchanged at DM0.2576. The
Dutch guilder also remained firm against the D-Mark after the Dutch central
bank cut its Lombard special advances rate to 5.5 per cent from 5.6 per
cent.
Meanwhile the French franc strengthened against the D-Mark to FFr3.3933 from
FFr3.3952 in the morning after the Bundesbank's decision. It later softened
to FFr3.396.
The move came after the Bank of France announced that its intervention rate
for securities repurchase tender would remain at 6.20 per cent, the level
ruling since December 3.
It announced that it had drained a net FFr40bn from the money market.
One currency that the D-Mark did gain strongly against yesterday was the
beleaguered Spanish peseta, which weakened to Pta83.51 per D-Mark, from
Pta83.13 at the previous day's close.
The peseta's fall is noteworthy since it has now broken ranks with the other
'high yielding' currency, the Ita-lian lira, said Mr Avinash Persaud,
currency analyst at JP Morgan.
Unlike the lira, which has risen in recent days, the peseta is unlikely to
improve until the Bundesbank eases pressure on the Spanish currency by
cutting German rates, he thinks. 'The fiscal and banking problems developing
in Spain now are of a considerably worse order than elsewhere in Europe,' he
added.
A report published by the Spanish Economic and Social Council yesterday
predicted only modest signs of recovery in Spain this year, and bleak
prospects for cutting the budget deficit and unemployment. Reports that the
Bank of Spain will meet leading Spanish bank chairmen to discuss the Banco
Espanol de Credito-Banesto further unsettled markets.
Sterling briefly touched a six-month high against the D-Mark yesterday, of
DM2.5903, though it finished at DM2.5886.
The Bank of England forecast a shortage of Pounds 1.6bn in its daily money
market operations, before removing most of this by purchasing bills at 5 5/8
per cent.
 -----------------------------------------
            POUND IN NEW YORK
 -----------------------------------------
Jan 6              Close    Prev. close
 -----------------------------------------
Pound spot        1.4820      1.4875
1 mth             1.4791      1.4846
3 mth             1.4745      1.4799
1 yr              1.4630      1.4680
 -----------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940107

