FT942-15331

FT  15 APR 94 / International Company News: RJR Nabisco forced to alter
offer


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


The barrage of criticism afflicting the US cigarette industry yesterday
forced RJR Nabisco, the food and tobacco group that makes Camel and Winston
cigarettes, into an embarrassing turnabout over its Dollars 2bn stock
offering.
It said that it was changing the terms of the offer so that the stock would
be convertible into shares in both the food and tobacco parts of the
business if the two were split - not just the tobacco business, as
previously planned.
In February RJR Nabisco announced that it was launching an offer of Dollars
2bn worth of preferred equity redemption cumulative shares, or 'percs'.
These would help pay off some of its debt and to raise funds for
acquisitions or other transactions.
RJR Nabisco said that the percs would be convertible into ordinary shares in
the company on a one-for-one basis at the end of three years. But analysts
studying the fine print of the offer quickly learned that if the food and
tobacco businesses were split, the percs would convert into tobacco stock.
The day after the offering was announced, the US Food and Drug
Administration released a letter saying that it was considering evidence
that might result in a decision to start regulating cigarettes as a drug.
This came amid an unprecedented wave of attacks on the industry from
politicians, legislators and anti-smoking groups. Yesterday leading figures
from the industry were called before a congressional hearing to answer
allegations that they were manipulating the amount of nicotine in cigarettes
to make them more addictive.
Many potential investors had made it clear to RJR Nabisco that they would
not be interested in subscribing to a Dollars 2bn share offering linked so
closely to the tobacco side of the business, especially when a split of the
food and tobacco operations was widely regarded as imminent.
RJR Nabisco said yesterday: 'Our decision was in response to a desire from
investors to participate in both parts of the business. We would not have
made this decision unless we felt it was the right thing to do in terms of
having a successful offering.'
Each perc will now be convertible into one share in the food business and
one share in the tobacco business in the event that the two are split.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940415

