FT942-16111

FT  12 APR 94 / UK Company News: Weisfelds give Brown Jackson cash injection


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


The millionaire couple who created What Everyone Wants, the discounting
chain now owned by WEW Group, have come to the rescue of rival Brown &
Jackson, which has been in talks with bankers and potential investors for
the last three weeks.
Mr Gerald and Mrs Vera Weisfeld, and a charitable trust which they founded,
are injecting Pounds 6m to meet immediate working capital needs in return
for a 19 per cent stake and two seats on the board.
They will have options on a further 298.8m shares at 7 1/2 p, which with the
3m shares they already own would bring their holding to 41.46 per cent for a
total investment of about Pounds 28m. Brown's shares closed yesterday 1 1/2
p higher at 4 1/2 p.
The investment is the Weisfelds' first business venture since they
unexpectedly left Amber Day, as WEW was known then, just eight months after
selling WEW to the quoted company for Pounds 47m in 1990. Since then, the
Weisfelds, who sold their 15 per cent stake in Amber Day for Pounds 11m,
have devoted most of their time to charity work.
Mr Weisfeld said he was confident he and his wife could add value to the
Poundstretcher business of Brown & Jackson. 'This is where our
entrepreneurial flair lies,' he said. The couple built their Scottish-based
discount fashion retailer into a Pounds 75m business over 20 years.
The Weisfelds will be appointed non-executive directors on a salary of
Pounds 15,000. They will also act as consultants to Brown & Jackson for a
daily rate of Pounds 500, or a maximum of Pounds 25,000. No other changes to
the board are expected in the immediate future.
The proposals are subject to the Takeover Panel waiving the requirement for
the Weisfelds to make a general offer to shareholders once their stake
breaches 29.9 per cent.
Brown & Jackson has been struggling to recover since the Pounds 16m rescue
rights issue which brought in new management in 1992. However, poorer than
expected trading at Christmas led to a profits warning in January. Last
month the group announced losses of Pounds 12.7m for 1993, against
expectations before the warning of a Pounds 4m deficit.
In light of the losses, banks refused to agree working capital facilities of
Pounds 14m to fund peak demands in September.
Brown & Jackson said in its statement yesterday that trading had improved
with like-for-like sales in the 13 weeks to April 2 about 1 per cent ahead.
The company now hopes to complete the sale and leaseback of a group of
properties and asset disposals which will raise Pounds 9.3m. These
transactions were delayed by the difficulties with the banks.
Mr Ian Gray, chief executive, said Brown & Jackson had been negotiating with
several possible investors, including Pepcor, the South African retailer.
However, pressure from trade creditors meant a deal had to be concluded
quickly.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940412

