FT942-12786

FT  28 APR 94 / South Africa Votes: Mandela fulfils dream - Patti Waldmeir
witnesses dawn at Inanda, Natal


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


Mr Nelson Mandela's long walk to freedom ended yesterday on the concrete
verandah of a small rural secondary school in Natal, where he cast the first
national vote of his 75 years, and fulfilled the dream of a lifetime.
In an emotional ceremony held just after dawn at the Ohlange High School in
the black township of Inanda outside Durban, Mr Mandela repeated the
eloquent words with which he addressed the court which in 1964 sentenced him
to what were to be 27 years in prison: 'I have fought very firmly throughout
my life against white domination and I have fought very firmly against black
domination . . . I cherish the idea of a new South Africa where all South
Africans are equal and where all South Africans work together to bring about
security, peace and democracy.'
The stately Mr Mandela, dressed in a simple beige shirt buttoned tight at
the neck and casual trousers, flashed his radiant smile for the cameras as
he held his ballot poised above the polling box for several seconds before
dropping it in with the cry, 'Going, going, gone.'
Nonetheless, the grey-haired African National Congress leader appeared
visibly strained by the three-month election campaign. Surrounded by at
least 20 security guards, he looked tired and drained, and every bit his
age.
'This is for all South Africans an unforgettable occasion. It is the
realisation of the hopes and dreams we have cherished over the decades: the
dream of a South Africa that represents all South Africans. It is the
beginning of a new era,' he said afterwards.
Speaking outside in the school yard, Mr Mandela repeated the message he
stressed incessantly in the final days of campaigning. 'We are very
concerned about minorities, especially about the white minority,' he said,
adding in a radio interview only seconds after his vote: 'We would like the
white community to realise that we cannot build this country without them.
We are appealing to them to regard themselves as an essential part of the
transition' to democracy.
It was a good start towards the goal of a non-racial nation. There is a hard
road ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940428

