FT941-5521

FT  05 MAR 94 / Travel: The view from the porch - James Henderson tours
South Carolina and finds the cool balconies are the best place to relax


   By JAMES HENDERSON


The porch has always been central to life in the American south. It is a
fine place to take the cool evening air, to watch what goes by on the road
(standard entertainment before cable TV and air-conditioning began to take
people inside), or to relax after surveying the plantation. And some porches
are beautiful features in themselves - an expanse of wooden floorboards with
carved balustrades wrapped around entire houses.
In South Carolina the drawl is not as deep as in parts of Georgia or
Alabama, but there is plenty of 'y'all' and girls with sculpted hair and
fearsome finger-nails. There is also gracious hospitality and paternalistic
gentility.
South Carolina considers itself something of an aristocrat in the south
because it was the first state to secede from the Union. I touched down in
Columbia, the state capital, which lies about 100 miles inland. It is a
quiet town, hot and humid in summer. The centre has a mix of neo-classical
monumental buildings, brick-built commercial warehouses and a clutch of
sky-scrapers.
It is set out on a leisurely grid; in the 1770s it was thought that malaria
(as the name hints) was borne by pockets of stagnant air clinging in narrow
streets. More accustomed to close and busy European towns, I found Columbia
curiously agoraphobic.
With the buildings so sparse, the grand old town houses were set in
magnificent gardens. Many of the houses were burned when General Sherman
swept through the country taking revenge after the civil war, but some
survive.
There is a nice story about the First Baptist Church. Sherman particularly
wanted it torched because the ordinance of secession was prepared there. But
it was saved by a quick-thinking retainer. When the troops arrived he
assured them that they had the wrong building and promptly sent them round
the corner to the Methodist Church, which they burned instead.
A very personal view of the civil war was left by Mary Chesnut, the wife of
a confederalist general, in her Diary from Dixie. She tells of the war, of
politics and of the goings-on around her house, particularly of the day when
the president of the confederacy, Jefferson Davis, came to visit.
He was spotted by some local men and was persuaded to address the people of
Columbia from the front porch of their house. The Chesnut Cottage, a pretty
pink clapboard house with a triangular gable, also escaped the revenge
torchings and now offers bed-and-breakfast. It has been restored to its
condition of October 1864, the date of Jefferson Davis's speech.
There are a few concessions to the 20th century, among them
air-conditioning, but what you find in the Chesnut Cottage is typical of
many of the guest houses in the area and it is a pleasure to visit. It has
high ceilings and wide corridors to encourage a through-flow of air; the
polished floors are covered with rugs and the rooms are furnished with
antiques. Often you sleep in a Victorian four-poster bed. And there is the
personal service of a bed and breakfast establishment, which allows southern
hospitality to extend its enveloping welcome.
Columbia seemed to be full of cars, but then driving is part of the American
experience. I hired one and headed off at a stately pace on cruise control,
hermetically sealed and air-conditioned, with a rumbling stereo that made
the rear-view mirror shudder. I scanned radio channels, skipping from the
easy-listening love-rock stations to hard rap. The most entertaining,
though, was FM With Love from Jesus, with details of church meetings,
personal messages and songs.
If the town seemed agoraphobic, I soon discovered why. Most of the activity
has found its way on to the suburban roadside. The main arteries out of town
were a relentless line of strip-malls, muffler-stalls and cheery
restaurants, all set in spacious plots and advertised with vast billboards.
Through forests of long-needled pine I finally reached the neat lines of
plantations - peach and kiwi-fruit mainly, now that the cotton industry has
died in these parts. With the plantations comes the occasional grand house,
standing in a grove of trees to keep it shaded. Hammocks and chairs on
chains hung on the verandas.
I arrived in the town of Edgefield, discernable by a steadily denser line of
houses and businesses among the trees, leading ultimately to a quiet central
square and court-house.
I stayed at Carnoosie, a forbidding-looking house completely out of style
with the region - covered in Victorian conceits and with a steeply-sloping
roof in French style. It was formerly the home of a governor of the state.
But it was a welcoming house, with an acreage of wooden floor inside and
out. In spite of its ghostly appearance, it is not haunted, or so I was
told.
Carnoosie is run by a lady optician who owns two huge black poodles. Betty
Jean Wood spent most of her life in New Orleans, but she has returned to
Edgefield for her semi-retirement. With a little encouragement she told
stories of life, jazz and Mardi Gras. When I left she bade me return: 'You
come back any time and rock on the porch some more,' she said.
For such a small town, there are some pretty fancy houses in Edgefield. Some
are completely wrapped in two stories of wooden balcony, supported by
slender columns. But the most typical feature, as seen in Gone with the
Wind, is the grand classical facade, with a triangular pediment supported by
four columns. This is supposed to have originated up north, but was readily
adopted in the south because it provided extra shade and lent an air of
grandeur. I was surprised to discover that the pillars are mostly made of
wood and are hollow. They make a fine noise when you thump them.
South Carolina Tourism in London offers a full visitor pack, including a map
and a guide to the state's B & Bs: 121 Gloucester Place, W1H 3PJ, tel:
071-224-1780, fax: 071-224-5164.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940305

