FT942-16144

FT  12 APR 94 / Arts: Why Janacek is out of fashion at home - Czech opera
houses are opting for Verdi and the quick buck nowadays


   By ANDREW CLARK


It is Monday night in the Moravian city of Brno, where the composer Leos
Janacek lived, worked and died. The municipal theatre which bears his name
is presenting a new production of Katya Kabanova but the auditorium is
half-empty. The theatre manager says Czech audiences are not interested in
Janacek - 'they want Verdi, they want spectacle, they want entertainment'.
In Prague earlier this season, a new production of The Makropoulos Case was
taken off the National Theatre's programme after a handful of performances,
the last of which attracted just 27 paying customers. At the State Opera,
the title role in Jenufa is sung not by a Czech soprano but a Romanian.
Neither company has plans for a new Janacek production in the foreseeable
future.
While packed houses in London, Paris and New York applaud international
casts performing Janacek in a language few understand, the tradition in his
own country is dying away. Young Czech conductors and singers are focusing
on popular repertoire which will bring them foreign engagements and easy
money. Second-rate artists from the West and the former Soviet empire fill
the gaps, accelerating the break with the native tradition.
For much of the postwar era, Czech audiences were exposed to Janacek through
cheap tickets and factory outings. Now they spend their free time watching
television or nurturing private businesses. 'We know in advance that Janacek
will be empty and Verdi will be full,' observes Tibor Varga, Brno's opera
director. 'We want to perform Janacek but if we carried on playing to empty
houses, the city would cut our subsidy. Under Communism, the people had no
ideas, no problems. The unions bought the tickets and we had busloads from
everywhere. It didn't matter what we played, it was an outing for them. The
public is different now. They don't see art as a spiritual outlet, they no
longer get free tickets. They want a show.'
Janacek scholars from around the world still flock to Brno to study the
collection of original manuscripts at the Moravian Museum. This is where
Charles Mackerras discovered the orchestral interludes for Katya and the
original score of Jenufa, which had been ignored by Czech conductors; where
British Janacek expert John Tyrrell selected texts for his
recently-published translations of the composer's correspondence with Kamila
Stosslova the woman who inspired his Indian summer of creativity.
But few people make the journey to Brno in the hope of hearing a
well-preserved performing tradition. The new shoe-string production of Katya
offers one classic piece of casting - the veteran bass Richard Novak as
Dikoy - as well as some of the clipped Moravian song-speech which informed
Janacek's compositional style. But there is little indication that Brno was
once a beacon of Janacek interpretation, long before his music became
familiar in the West.
When Janacek died in 1928, he left a group of interpreters with an
instinctive understanding of his work - men like Bretislav Bakala, Vaclav
Talich, Zdenek Chalabala and Jaroslav Vogel. They in turn spawned a postwar
generation of interpreters.
In Brno, Frantisek Jilek forged new ground with a cycle of Janacek operas in
1958, repeated in 1978 - after which, in the words of Brno musicologist
Alena Nemcova 'things began to slide. Conductors today are no longer willing
to devote the time to it, to work with singers on it. No-one is being
encouraged to carry forward the tradition.'
Of the postwar generation of Janacek specialists, only Bohumil Gregor is
still alive and active. Like several of his contemporaries, he was steeped
in Janacek by the time he reached Prague, because he had served a long
apprenticeship in the provinces. He bemoans the fact that this kind of
lengthy preparation is no longer possible, that Czech theatres have given
themselves over to fail-safe repertoire like Aida, Madama Butterfly and The
Bartered Bride.
'They live from day to day,' comments Gregor, whose Janacek performances
during the National Theatre's visit to the 1964 Edinburgh Festival won him
an international reputation. 'They want to do it the quick way, the cheap
way - art as a commercial commodity, managements following rather than
leading. Instead of building for the future, they're destroying the link
with the past.'

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940412

