FT942-14586

FT  20 APR 94 / Israel rounds up Hamas supporters


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   RAMALLAH


Israel yesterday rounded up over 200 supporters of the Hamas Islamic
resistance movement in the Gaza Strip and West Bank in an effort to curb
more bomb attacks threatened by the militant group, which opposes
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, writes Julian Ozanne in Ramallah.
The crackdown has piled intense pressure on the Palestine Liberation
Organisation and could derail hopes for an Israeli-PLO agreement on
Palestinian self rule, expected to be signed next week.
Palestinians said soldiers and plain-clothes intelligence agents raided
homes across the occupied territories, breaking into houses and putting
Hamas sympathisers on to waiting buses. Yesterday's arrests brought the
number of Islamists detained since last week to more than 400.
Hamas has carried out two suicide bomb attacks this month, killing 12
Israelis, and has threatened three more attacks to revenge the February 25
Hebron Mosque massacre.
'We will fight those who continue terror with all the means that are
available to us,' Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, said yesterday.
Islamic movement supporters at large yesterday warned the Israeli crackdown
would fuel further violence. In Gaza City Dr Omar Farwana, one of those
temporarily deported to south Lebanon in 1992, said: 'I am afraid instead of
peace and peaceful days there will be more revenge because of this mass
punishment.'
The Hamas issue is becoming a big obstacle in the peace process. The PLO,
which claims to speak for the entire Palestinian nation and is afraid of the
power of Hamas in the occupied territories, has increasingly been forced to
defend Hamas. This week two senior PLO negotiators left peace talks in Cairo
after Israel refused to accede to PLO demands for release of Hamas
prisoners. Israel is deeply concerned by any PLO-Hamas link and Mr Rabin has
warned the PLO that local PLO-Hamas co-operation agreements could sabotage
the peace accord.
'The recent Hamas attacks are directed equally at Israel and at the PLO to
remind the PLO Hamas has substantial power on the ground which cannot be
ignored by the PLO leadership,' said Mr Ziad Abu-Amr, a Palestinian
specialist in Islamic fundamentalism.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940420

