FT942-15469

FT  15 APR 94 / Reviewing a fatal aerial engagement: Jurek Martin examines
the downing of two helicopters over Iraq yesterday


   By JUREK MARTIN


The chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, General John Shalikashvili,
almost bristled yesterday when asked a question about the rules of
engagement of US forces operating under UN mandate and over Iraq. The
general made clear that such rules were not in the public domain, for good
reasons of mission security.
But the tragic incident over the skies of northern Iraq yesterday - an
apparent accident - combined with the circumstances of the Nato air strikes
against Bosnian Serb positions around Gorazde this week to demonstrate the
extent to which authority to initiate action may now be vested in local
commanders.
This represents a marked departure from the military practices of the Cold
War, when it was assumed that decisions to take offensive actions were
passed to the highest levels of the chain of command in both Washinghton and
Moscow, including the offices of the respective heads of government.
This was not an infallible safeguard, as the downing in 1983 by Soviet
fighters of the Korean airliner to the north of Japan showed. Nor, in the US
case, were local commanders completely hamstrung, as was demonstrated in
1987 when the USS Vincennes, sailing in the Gulf, misidentified and shot
down an Iranian Airbus.
In both Bosnia and Iraq, US officials made clear this week that no prior
authorisation for each action by the president or his secretary of defence
was now necessary. In the case of Bosnia, the authority to call in air
strikes resides with UN military and civilian officials in New York and on
the ground, specifically and respectively General Sir Michael Rose and Mr
Yasushi Akashi.
In the US view, Russian anger at not being informed in advance of the
Gorazde air strikes, even if that anger was relatively muted, might have
reflected real or feigned ignorance of the automatic rules of engagement of
the Nato air force. They point out that even President Bill Clinton himself
was not apprised of that action before the event.
Pending further knowledge of the latest incident over Iraq, all Gen
Shalikashvili could suggest yesterday was that the US Blackhawk helicopters
had been misidentified by the two F-15 jets which had shot them down, even
though visual contact had been established and even though an Awacs US radar
aircraft was on patrol at the time.
In New York, a UN spokesman emphasised that the downed helicopters were
neither on a UN mission nor were part of any operation under the
organisation's authority. He said they were from a military co-ordination
centre set up by Operation Provide Comfort, a multilateral exercise by the
US, Britain and France, albeit under the terms of UN resolutions.
Gen Shalikashvili resisted suggestions that operating procedures had been
broken. A clear comparison exists with the incident, days after Mr Clinton
took office last year, when US fighters shot down Iraqi jets flying in
apparently clear violation of the northern Iraq no-fly zone. The decision to
engage in combat was taken on the ground.
There is political concern in the US, shared by Mr Clinton, about any
abrogation of US military command and control in international peace-keeping
or enforcement operations. This reached a pitch last autumn after 18 US
troops in Somalia were killed in a Mogadishu firefight, a disaster brought
about at least in part by the determination of Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN
secretary general, to strike at General Aideed, the Somali warlord.
Weeks before, Mr Les Aspin, then US secretary of defence, had refused a
request for reinforcement from the US ground commander in Somalia, on the
grounds that it would send the wrong signal while peace negotiations were
being explored. The administration's overall conclusion was that the views
of local US commanders should be respected.
But there was no inclination yesterday to shift the blame for what happened
over Iraq to local commanders. Both Mr William Perry, secretary of defence,
and Gen Shalikashvili assumed 'full responsibility' for what happened. They
implied that all local rules of engagement under the UN umbrella will be
thoroughly reviewed.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940415

