FT941-5511

FT  05 MAR 94 / Food & Drink: Beware if offered a taste of paradise -
Experience has taught Giles MacDonogh which drinks to avoid


   By GILES MACDONOGH


We had eaten in a pub. Now, the meal was over and my host went to the bar to
buy me 'something rather special'. He returned with a broad grin on his face
and a glass filled with a pale liquid. It must have been a quadruple
measure.
It had a synthetic smell of coconuts and a coarse, rum-like taste, not
unlike bad rhum-babas. He went to get the bill. While he was gone, I tossed
the drink into my coffee cup. I was foolish enough to believe that the
alleged 'espresso' would hide some of its more unpleasant characteristics. I
was wrong. It made the coffee undrinkable, too.
I had not forgotten my first taste of Malibu when, a few months later, I met
the brand manager. An adolescence spent reading Raymond Chandler made me
think the drink would originate in California, but I thought I should check.
'Where does it come from, your Malibu?' I asked. 'Malibu comes from paradise
and tastes like heaven,' said the brand manager. Then he smiled and added
that, in this instance, paradise was Harlow, in Essex, where the drinks
giant IDV had its headquarters.
I have seen a bit of Harlow in my time. If that was paradise, I thought,
then we had all better start looking into the other place before we shuffle
off our mortal coils. I, for one, was not going to put up with an eternity
of Malibu as nectar.
Malibu has been a big success but, for every drink like it, there have been
handfuls of bold conceptions consigned to the kitchen sink of history. What
happened to Bezique? Mirage? Midori? Where are Greensleeves and Topaz?
When I rooted around at the bottom of a cupboard the other day, I came up
with a miniature of something called Montezuma, which I do not recall having
seen on the shelves of any dingy bars these past few years. Amanda looked
even more peculiar. I opened the little bottle. Out came an unlovely brown
liquid which did not exactly recommend itself for drinking: over the years
it had curdled, and now looked like a cup of coffee left out in the sun too
long.
An ever-hopeful bad penny is the drink known as a wine cooler. Some of these
were launched one miserable, liquid summer when everyone was shivering under
their raincoats and the drinks 'sensation' proved a flop. There are still
plenty of them about, however, and Taboo has been hewn from the same rock.
Flavoured wines really succeeded only in their sparkling versions. There was
one named after a television station (or vice versa), and another called
'Peachy' which someone once described as 'smelling like the urine of a fruit
bat'. Wines such as Thunderbird and Concorde are rather more down-market;
almost at the level of meths. 'Thunderbirds are go,' says my local
off-licence manager, 'but Concorde gets you there rather faster.'
One of the most successful sections of the novelty drinks market has been
cream liqueurs. International Distillers and Vintners laughed all the way to
the bank with Bailey's, a concoction which has sired a mass of illegitimate
children.
In a shop recently, I encountered Irish Velvet and Carolans. The latter came
complete with a comforting inscription in Irish - a tongue used also to
recommend a complicated looking bottle called Sheridans. Sheridans is
actually two bottles welded together. One contains a white liquid, the other
black. You pour the black in first then top up with the white, like an Irish
coffee.
'It's actually rather good,' says the off-licence manager, but he doesn't
see it selling. 'They don't seem to have advertised it on television.' If
they are not careful, Sheridans could join Bezique and Montezuma.
One category of new drinks which excites my middle-aged rage is 'schnapps'.
These sweet, fruit-flavoured drinks bear no relation to the divine
distillates of central Europe. In Louisville, Kentucky, I was offered a
glass of schnapps as a nightcap and, thinking it a German spirit, I
accepted. It turned out to taste like a mixture of liquid sugar and
toothpaste.
Big companies such as IDV manufacture these brews in a desperate attempt to
capture the young drinker who haunts louche bars and nightclubs. The more
sensible of these probably drinks bourbon whiskey (with cola) or a
fashionable vodka, such as Absolut from Sweden.
In this world, fashion is everything; and if you fail, then a lot of sticky
liquid has to be poured away. Beer is one of the most fickle fashions of all
but, as I have had cause to say, it is generally the worst which tends to
catch on.
Perhaps I should make a rash prophecy for the rest of this year? More awful
American beers will hit the market. Someone will dig up Texas Lone Star or
Dixie. Worse, a brewer will begin to make America's most lacklustre beer -
Old Milwaukee - under licence.
In the meantime, you can bet your life that Cadbury's Cream Liqueur will not
take up even a millimetre of my shelf space.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940305

