FT941-4096

FT  12 MAR 94 / Markets: RTZ digs deep for its dividend - The Bottom Line


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


Sir Derek Birkin, chairman of RTZ, is justly proud that the company has
never cut its dividend. This week the world's biggest mining company
surprised many in the City with an increase in the dividend for 1993 - a
year when base metals prices continued on their well-trodden downward path.
RTZ last year completed a restructuring programme, begun in 1988, which
leaves it wholly focused on mining. While Birkin spoke of the resilience of
the company to adverse market conditions, he also warned that the dividend
increase of 1p to 20.5p 'should be taken as an indicator not of the outlook
for 1994, but of our confidence in the company's potential once recovery is
soundly established.'
Since RTZ began to reorganise, average dollar non-ferrous base metal prices
have fallen 44 per cent, including last year's 15 per cent decline. At the
pre-tax level profits were down from Pounds 521m to Pounds 435m on turnover
up from Pounds 4.6bn to Pounds 4.8bn. But adjusted earnings, which are seen
as a truer reflection of the underlying performance, were ahead by 10 per
cent from Pounds 338m to Pounds 373m.
Birkin, presenting his last results as executive chairman, said the prices
of most metals appeared to have stopped falling. 'However, they are likely
to be volatile for some time because of a combination of renewed investor
interest, possibly erratic supplies, and high inventories.'
RTZ is relying on continuing volume growth and low costs to increase its
profits. In copper it expects benefits this year from a rise in production
at Escondida in Chile, the second biggest copper mine in the world in which
it has a 30 per cent stake, and at Bingham Canyon in the US where a new
smelter will cut costs next year. The mine at Marandoo in Australia should
start producing this autumn increasing RTZ's annual iron ore output from 50m
to 60m tonnes. Total capital expenditure is expected to double from 1993's
Pounds 265m.
Philip Crowson, RTZ's chief economist, underlined the company's caution with
an analysis suggesting that average base metals prices are unlikely to
differ much this year from 1993. In spite of some signs of economic recovery
around the world, there would certainly not be enough of a rise in demand to
reverse the flood of metal into stocks, he said.
The extent of world oversupply of copper and aluminium, the two base metals
that most affect RTZ's performance, is illustrated by yesterday's London
Metal Exchange warehouse stock figures. Aluminium stands at a record
2,589,575 tonnes, and copper at 537,475 tonnes, well off the January peak
but still high.
Most analysts who watch base metals prices agree with Crowson that 1994 is
unlikely to prove exciting. Lawrence Eagles, of futures brokers GNI, is
forecasting 'several lacklustre years' before stocks are drawn down.
Crowson's projection is that prices this year will be liable 'to fluctuate
over a fairly wide range before any clear tends become established'. But
they should not drop back to the lows reached last November.
Since then, prices have risen about 20 per cent. The rise 'was triggered,
and even sustained by investors acting largely on technical analysis of
chart patterns', Crowson said.
Nick Moore, of Ord Minnett, an affiliate of the Jardine Fleming group, says
this is consistent with speculators moving in ahead of evidence of recovery.
He also points out that in the past three peak periods for base metals - in
1974, 1980, and 1988 - prices rose 150 per cent ahead of the low. But the
next peak could be three years away.
Kleinwort Benson last week said that for the first time all 15 prices in its
commodity index were rising at the same time. Leo Doyle, of Kleinwort, says
the index was not designed to say anything about the future direction of
commodity prices. It was an indicator of world economic activity. However,
if the underlying strength of the world economy is improving faster than
other estimates indicate, then base metal stocks could be drawn down faster
than many believe.
Whatever happens in the markets, says Moore, 'RTZ is in a terrific position
if it can make this sort of money in a recession.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

940312

