FT942-12540

FT  29 APR 94 / World Trade News: US to plug holes in flat panel industry -
Louise Kehoe looks at a bold initiative for development and manufacturing


   By LOUISE KEHOE


The Clinton administration's plan to provide about Dollars 700m (Pounds
479m) for the development and manufacture of flat panel displays represents
the boldest US industrial policy initiative in many years.
The goal is to create a new US industry, where virtually none exists today.
The Dollars 4.6bn world market for flat panel displays (FPDs), such as those
used in portable personal computers, is dominated by Japanese producers,
with a handful of small US manufacturers holding about 3 per cent of the
market.
The Clinton administration aims to start high-volume FPD manufacturing in
the US with federal funds, expected to be about Dollars 350m in the form of
research grant incentives to US companies or groups of companies,
constructing up to four FPD factories.
The proposals also call for continuing existing FPD research and development
programmes funded by the departments of defence and energy at about the
current level of Dollars 70m a year for five years.
The increased funding for FPDs reflects a consensus within the US
electronics industry that flat panels represent a 'critical technology' in
which the US is seriously lagging.
'The flat panel display industry is critical to US national and economic
security,' the American Electronics Association, an influential trade group,
said in a recent report which called for increased government funding.
FPDs are classified as a 'dual use technology' as defence contractors use
the displays in the cockpits of aircraft, tanks, ships and in command and
control systems.
The far bigger commercial market for FPDs encompasses portable computers,
consumer electronics and a broad range of electronic instruments.
Dependence on foreign suppliers has long concerned the Pentagon, which began
modest funding for display research in 1989. These concerns have been
exacerbated because US defence contractors have faced problems in obtaining
FPDs, according to US industry officials.
Japanese display manufacturers, geared to high-volume manufacturing of
standard displays for the computer and consumer electronics industries, have
apparently been unwilling to manufacture custom versions in smaller
quantities to meet the special needs of US military equipment manufacturers.
The US computer industry's interest in domestic FPD manufacturing was
fuelled when, in 1991, the Bush administration slapped dumping duties of 63
per cent on Japanese-made displays. Although these duties have been lifted,
their effects on the US computer industry has not been forgotten.
More recently, shortages of FPDs, particularly advanced colour versions,
have limited US production of popular portable computers and again focused
the US computer industry's attention on the issue.
Despite agreement that the US should have its own FPD industry, no US
company has been prepared to make the substantial investment required to
construct a high volume manufacturing plant.
'There are high barriers to entry in the FPD industry,' says Mr Peter Mills,
chief executive of the US Display Consortium, a group representing existing
US display manufacturers.
A single large scale FPD production plant is expected to cost about Dollars
300m and the complexities of the production process mean that even the best
Japanese manufacturers are said to achieve a production yield of only about
30 per cent.
Although demand for FPD's outstrips supplies and the world market is
expected to exceed Dollars 20bn by the end of the decade, display
manufacturing represents a high cost, high risk investment.
Attempts by existing US manufacturers to raise funds for expansion have so
far failed and large users of FPDs in the US computer industry have rejected
proposals that they co-invest in FPD production. Hence industry groups led
by the American Electronics Association have called for a new level of
'co-operation' with the federal government.
The Clinton plan for FPD funding is, however, controversial. By including
incentives for the construction of manufacturing facilities in its
proposals, the administration appears to be taking a significant step beyond
previous US government involvement in commercial activities.
Most prior US funding for industry has been in the form of either
procurement or research grants. One exception is Sematech, the US
semiconductor industry consortium established to regain US technology
leadership in chip manufacturing technology, which gets half of its annual
Dollars 200m budget from member companies and the balance from the defence
department.
However, even Sematech's activities are restricted to 'pre-competitive
research,' and in practice much of the consortium's spending has comprised
technology development grants to US semiconductor production equipment
manufacturers.
It is a measure of the changing political climate in Washington that when
Sematech was formed the US semiconductor industry backed away from initial
plans to include manufacturing in the consortium's activities, recognising
that this would not win the approval of 'free marketeers'.
It may now appear that the US is moving closer to an interventionist
industrial policy by providing incentives for commercial manufacturing
enterprises. Yet the private sector will retain the lead role, industry
officials insist. Grant awards will be subject to review by private sector
experts and recipients will have to provide at least half of the funds for
manufacturing ventures.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940429

