FT944-5805

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (5): Local support
proves a tonic - Controlling global costs / Multinational pharmaceuticals
company Syntex needed a swift answer to a sudden unprecedented loss of sales


   By CLAIRE GOODING


Like all pharmaceuticals companies, Syntex is operating in a fast-changing
market in which profit margins are under threat. Best known for its
anti-arthritic drug Naprosyn, Syntex is in the pharmaceuticals diagnostics
and animal health business.
Although well prepared for the moment when Naprosyn came off patent in the
US and generic alternatives became available, the effect came as a shock to
Syntex. 'We lost an unprecedented level of sales,' says Ronan Byrne,
formerly European finance director, now director of EFSO, the European
Financial Services Organisation set up by Syntex to implement its new
business systems in Europe.
'In a business used to high margins and high research expenditure, we had to
look at our cost base with some urgency,' says Mr Byrne. 'The loss of
revenue at an unprecedented rate focused our attention on scaling down
costs.'
The decision to control costs by using standard systems internationally was
taken in the US headquarters in Palo Alto. The aim was to use a common
system to improve the quality of the information on which operating units
worldwide based their decisions.
A crucial factor in the decision was the availability of local support and
the ability to run in a decentralised organisation. SAP's R/3, a client
server solution was chosen in the US from a shortlist including JD Edwards,
BPCS, and Oracle. The selectors saw SAP as an astute company: 'SAP was
regarded as the only game in town in terms of the global answer,' says Mr
Byrne. 'It couldn't do everything we wanted but it was still streets ahead
of the competition.'
As is typical of a pharmaceuticals company, Syntex is customer focused. Mr
Byrne, who has been with the company since 1975, wanted to make the new
business systems part of the 'quality ethos' that he says pervades Syntex
and set up EFSO to create a pan-European service.
'We accountants need to focus on providing a truly 'added value' service
which can support the business decision making and not just focus on
historic events.'
The EFSO team used the concept of 'better information delivery' to sell the
idea to those users who (until they saw something better) were satisfied
with what they had. 'The system promised meaningful information, rather than
just what they did last month,' says Mr Byrne.
The other main objective is to do away with the rush of month-end
processing. 'We want interactive systems on-line the whole time so that we
can do away with the concept of month end, and know where we are by pressing
a button at any one time.'
Syntex has standardised on hardware from Hewlett-Packard, and in the long
term is planning links between its laboratory information systems (on
Perkin-Elmer computers) and its supply and sales systems. Mr Byrne estimates
that the software itself accounts for only a tenth of the entire cost, with
large amounts going on training and some on consultancy from KPMG on
business process re-engineering and project management.
The two pilot sites up and running are Nordica, consisting of four
countries, and Benelux, made up of three, working closely with EFSO via
dedicated telecommunications. Each country has scaled down its internal
accounts departments.
The pilots have taught the EFSO team a great deal about change management.
'A lot of the groundwork is in mapping out the organisational structure
before implementation,' says Mr Byrne.
The company had to take a long hard look at itself. It had to decide on
international standards for such things as chart of accounts, product
numbering and nomenclature, which meant people had to give up their
long-establish codes or names for products and raw materials.
In some cases people's objections were hidden and resistance was more
difficult to overcome. 'Some cultures accept change more than others.' says
Mr Byrne.
'It is essential that users have ownership of the system and do not see it
as something that is being imposed.'
Chris Knight, European information systems manager of EFSO, says: 'There was
a real sense of urgency that focused us, in that everyone realised that we
couldn't go on as we were. There were national variations, such as pricing,
reimbursement, just about every aspect of the business.'
Tailoring options built into the software have largely catered for national
differences but some national quirks - banking in Sweden, for example, -
have been dealt with in SAP's ABAP programming language, with extra coding
shared between SAP and Syntex. Obtaining updates, new releases and
alterations delivered on time has sometimes been a problem for SAP,
according to Mr Byrne, but this is as a result of its success. 'The uptake
of SAP's software - for the same reasons that we chose it - has been so
great that there simply aren't enough people to go round.'
The Syntex goal is a worldwide system that can close the books within two
days and deliver almost immediate information while moving towards a
paperless environment. Mr Knight estimates that the pilot systems use only
10 per cent of the SAP software's potential.
'The objective is to use 80 per cent of the logistics and accounting
functionality, so that we map our entire business process through the
software.'
Mr Knight believes SAP is one of the few packages that can deal with the
complexities of an international company that operates in multiple
currencies and languages with research and development, manufacturing and
marketing operations.
EFSO has used the well-trodden path of picking 'super-users' to popularise
the system. Some of the most experienced users have become part of EFSO. Ann
Page, formerly financial manager of the UK, now does the same job for EFSO,
and is a regular user of the live systems.
'Integrated systems have changed the job. The time that used to be spent
reconciling systems, accounts receivable to general ledger, cash book to
general ledger, can now be devoted to supporting the decision making
process,' she says.
'This system gives me more analytical power. I can look at sales
achievements for an area, or expenses over a period. Eventually we will be
able to look at anything from anywhere, compare costs and outgoings in
different operations.'
Supplier profile Product: SAP's R/3 system, current release 2.1, launched in
January 1993, is an integrated suite of client/server-based applications
software covering the entire scope of business operations, from accounting
and financial management to manufacturing, logisitics and human resources.
Suppliers: SAP UK is a privately held wholly-owned subsidiary of SAP AG, the
world's sixth largest software company, which is publicly quoted in Germany.
SAP AG was founded in 1972 in Germany and SAP UK was established in in 1988.
Turnover: DM1.1bn in 1993; DM831.2m in 1992; SAP UK Pounds 10.1m turnover in
1993. Employees: 60 in the UK.
Number of users: 1,6000 (R/3 only).
Price: from Pounds 80,000 for a 32-user system.
Hardware and operating systems: BOS (Bull), OSF/1 and Open VMS (Digital)
HP-UX, MPE/iX, AIX, SINIX, Solaris, Windows NT.
Sales and support/maintenance: through selected business partners, including
consultants. Maintenance, including on-line help and Early Watch remote
diagnostics services, charged at 15 per cent of software price.
Other services available: pre and post-sales support, technical and
applications consultancy, software upgrade installation, education and
training.
User views: highly flexible, feature-rich, adaptable to company structure,
local support exists in most countries, but SAP skills shortage a problem.
Contact: Trevor Salomon, SAP UK Ltd.
Tel: 081 893 2893.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941201

