FT942-14882

FT  18 APR 94 / Santa Fe to float gold subsidiary


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


Santa Fe Pacific, the US railroad and pipeline group, is to float its gold
subsidiary on the New York Stock Exchange on terms which value Santa Fe Gold
Corporation at between Dollars 1.76bn and Dollars 2.1bn.
The gold business includes some of the US assets Hanson, the Anglo-American
conglomerate, acquired with Consolidated Gold Fields of the UK and swapped
last year for Santa Fe's coal and aggregate operations. That deal
transformed Santa Fe Gold into the sixth-largest North American gold
producer with an anticipated 1994 output of 900,000 troy ounces. It also has
one of the biggest gold reserves in North America, amounting to 14.1m
ounces.
Santa Fe Gold said at the weekend it would initially offer newly-created
shares to raise between Dollars 243m and Dollars 279m which will be used to
pay down debt of about Dollars 340m.
The parent group's holding will be diluted to 86.2 per cent as a result. It
has received notification from the US Revenue Service that it can distribute
the rest of Santa Fe Gold to shareholders tax free.
Analysts expect this to happen before the year-end, qualifying Santa Fe Gold
for inclusion in the new Financial Times Gold Mines Index.
A syndicate of underwriters led by Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and SG
Warburg will offer 12m Santa Fe Gold shares in the US while a further 6m
shares will be offered internationally by those three underwriters plus JP
Morgan, and Union Bank of Switzerland.
Shares will be priced between Dollars 13.50 and Dollars 15.50 each.
Santa Fe Gold has three mines in northern Nevada: Lone Tree, Mesquite and
Twin Creeks (a combination of Hanson's Chimney Creek and Santa Fe's Rabbit
Creek). It is one of the biggest holders of mineral rights in the western US
 -7.2m acres in some of the most prospective regions, inherited from its
parent.
Ms Lindsey Falconer, analyst at Ord Minnett, an affiliate of Jardine
Fleming, said the market expects the offering to be priced at the top end of
the indicated range. Santa Fe Gold was 'a top quality North American senior
producer and will be seen as a core holding in this group,' she suggested.
Mr Richard Zitting, chairman and chief executive of Santa Fe Gold, said:
'This step enables (the company) to access the gold equities market, an
important source of capital which is available to other major gold
companies.'
Santa Fe is the second big gold offering to international investors this
year; Ghana's Ashanti Goldfields is floated in London this week on terms
expected to value it at Dollars 1.67bn.

The Financial Times


Frankfurt Page 13

940418

