FT942-16374

FT  11 APR 94 / Arts: Glass-fancier's feast illuminates 4,000 years -
Computerise, modernise, popularise are the watchwords of the V&A's latest
gallery


   By PATRICIA MORISON


Slowly, expensively, and not without controversy, the Victoria and Albert
Museum is turning itself into a museum for the 21st century. The latest
stage is the new Glass Gallery which opens on 20 April. Not only does it
look good, it looks different. This is important, because the gallery marks
the first step in an ambitious programme reaching into every corner of this
huge museum. Three words seem to summarise the new V&A now in the making;
computerise, modernise, popularise.
A first impression of the 350 square metre gallery is of colour and sparkle.
Lumbered with a boring design by Edwardian architect Aston Webb, Penny
Richards of Pringle + Richards Architects has created within it a
light-filled, mirrored space. Green glass treads ascend to a mezzanine with
a balustrade of gleaming ice-green float glass by artist Danny Lane.
A redesigned museum display used to mean violent purging. Glory be, the
fashion for parsimony seems to be over. The new Glass Gallery is crammed
with stuff, a lot on the ground floor and twice as much again on the
mezzanine which is deemed to be more for specialists than the general
public. That seems a pretty artificial distinction. Miss going up the glass
steps, and you miss superb Roman beads and the nostalgic sight of glass
Christmas-tree ornaments, the last still in production, given last year by a
German firm.
This is a glass-fancier's feast of things marvellous and ghastly, from
exceptional mosque lamps to Restoration punchbowls, from Lalique and Czech
modernism to Pyrex cookware. The display is chronological over four thousand
years, since the Egyptians used dollops of glass to make jewellery. One
third of the display is 20th-century, very little previously exhibited. A
dozen pieces get cases to themselves, such as the famous 13th-century
Saracen goblet known to legend as the Luck of the Edenhalls. The mild
disappointment is to find only three chandeliers; Venetian, 18th-century
English and Victorian. I had hoped for a constellation.
Forty-three display cases made by Glasbau Hahn of Frankfurt mopped up
two-thirds of the Pounds 1m cost of the gallery. Beneath the gallery windows
runs one of London's most polluted streets. Since the new gallery was not to
be air-conditioned, the display cases had to be as nearly airtight as
possible, and yet these are so designed that a curator can open a case
unaided.
Conservation made a new gallery urgently necessary. Most of us imagine that
glass out of elbow-reach is durable stuff, yet this is to reckon without
'glass disease'.
Five years ago, a survey showed symptoms of glass disease in ten per cent of
the V&A's National Collection of some 8,0000 objects.
Roman and Islamic glass-making is magnificently proof against the disease,
as is 18th-century English lead crystal. Scandinavian glass can sicken and,
although Italian conservators dispute it, the V&A view is that all Venetian
glass has this fatal flaw.
Look for sweaty surfaces on the glass in the Murano tourist shops, says Dr
Oliver Watson, curator of the Ceramic and Glass Department. The cause is the
chemically unstable relationship of flux to stabiliser, made worse by
environmental fluctuations. Crystals leach out and build up until the
surface 'crizzles'. To illustrate every collector's nightmare there is a
cloudy half-shattered goblet in the new gallery.
On top of Pounds 1m for building the Glass Gallery, largely found from the
museum's own resources, Watson had to find Pounds 115,000 for computers and
a software programme from the Gloucestershire company, Art of Memory. In the
end, the Corning Glass Museum in upstate New York went halves on the cost.
The system is more sophisticated than anything the V&A has used so far in
its campaign to make its collections accessible and entertaining.
I have seen only a demonstration and cannot vouch for how the three computer
'pods' will actually perform.
The idea is that one moves rapidly around 'The Story of Glass', from film of
glass-blowing through data on types, glass-artists and factories. Somewhat
misleadingly, half the objects illustrated actually turn out to be in the
Corning Museum, which points to one drawback of this kind of deal. On the
plus side, the video is blessedly silent.
More innovative is the electronic labelling programme. There are 6,000
objects in the new display, twice as many as in the old one. Printed labels
could never supply enough data, so the curious visitor is meant to note the
exhibit or shelf number, then consult the terminal.
Watson, a computer enthusiast, has achieved still more behind the scenes.
His is the only department in the museum to boast a computerised catalogue.
The standard catalogue for the V&A is an unmanageable set of volumes
recording pieces as entered in the collection. Particularly in early years,
entries were often vague, not infrequently wrong. Selecting pieces for the
new gallery revealed that many glasses labelled as 17th-century Venetian
were 19th-century imitations.
It has taken three years for the department's ten members to produce a
data-base of the 70,000 glass and ceramic collection. 'Before, if someone
asked what Venini glass we had, it could take two days' work. Now we can
give the answer at the press of a key' says Watson. Will that kind of
inquiry be answered free? Probably not, he admits.
Watson sees the Glass Gallery as only the start of introducing more
innovative techniques essential if the V & A is to compete in an industry
classified as entertainment, not education. 'For the government to spend
Pounds 30m a year is predicated on getting people in to see the stuff.'
He believes that only the most dessicated curator could regret the solitude
which reigned in the old glass gallery.
'There simply wasn't an audience, and the only people who came wanted to see
18th-century English glass'. Dim and glum, the glass stood in antiquated
wooden cabinets. Take a look at the remaining study galleries, and you see
at once how it was. There stand cases like a thousand oubliettes, packed
with beautiful things displayed in a way which induces instant torpor.
The Glass Gallery is the first of the Materials and Techniques galleries, as
opposed to the Art And Design galleries, which show the material culture of
an era or society.
More M and T galleries are meant to follow. Yet notices at the museum
entrance, announcing that the cast iron collection is to remain closed for
lack of a sponsor, are not encouraging.
Glass and ceramics are far more widely collected so they have more popular
appeal. Even so, it would take ten new galleries for Watson to get the
ceramic collection attractively shown.
A long road lies ahead of the V&A. At least the Glass Gallery, sparkling
with interest, is a good place to measure the distance already travelled.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940411

