FT943-13019

FT  21 JUL 94 / Technology: Inventors with time to think - A look at the
potential of independent projects


   By HUGH ALDERSEY-WILLIAMS


Corporate research is excellent at bringing incremental improvements to
technology that is already available, but it is far less good at coming up
with bright ideas that could lead directly to entirely new products. And
when it does the final connection may not be made.
It was, for instance, Xerox Corporation's Palo Alto Research Centre in
California that did much of the work leading to intuitive interaction with
computers based on using visual icons on the screen. Seeing itself as a
copier company, however, Xerox did not reap the benefit of the ideas
embodied in the prototype 'Star workstation'. Apple Computer's Steve Jobs
did.
To overcome this kind of mental block, David Liddle, formerly of Xerox
Corporation, and Paul Allen, one of the founders of Microsoft, have set up
Interval Research, which aims to explore new ways that we might interact
with technology.
They dislike being labelled a thinktank. 'We are inventors, not writers of
papers,' says Bill Verplank, a researcher at the company who worked on the
Star workstation. Interval Research, of Palo Alto, has a foundation
investment of Dollars 100m (Pounds 67m) to fund it over five years.
This provides breathing space - the 'interval' - to embark on projects that
are not beholden to any particular manufacturer or type of product. 'A lot
of the computer companies are so tied up in doing incremental product
design, that it is difficult to stand back and say, well, 'what's the next
great thing to do?',' says research fellow Colin Burns.
Interval Research aims to profit from its inventions by selling its ideas or
by spinning off small, start-up companies to pursue them further.
In London, Liddle has arranged the five-year sponsorship of a research
design studio at the Royal College of Art. The Pounds 2.5m programme will
allow Interval researchers to participate in design projects at the college
and students to work in California. The RCA is the first design school
Interval has worked with.
'They are interested in the different take that designers have from
engineers,' says Gillian Crampton-Smith, professor of computer-related
design at the RCA. The other aim of the liaison is to encourage involvement
from British and European companies. The RCA already has links with
companies such as BT, Logica and Philips, which are likely to take an active
role.
The starting point for Interval Research activity is 'interaction design' -
the shaping of the way people use technology. Disciplines as diverse as
design, psychology, anthropology and dramatic arts are brought under this
banner in an attempt to make people's interaction with products more
natural.
One topic concerns 'place' in a computer environment. For example, asks
Crampton-Smith, 'how do you do the equivalent of putting your head round the
door of the canteen to see if there is anyone there you would like to have a
chat with?' Designers can use their skill in visualising in three dimensions
to give this electronic landscape an appearance that is usable in an
intuitive way. Such understanding is expected to help in the design of
products that incorporate a computer in such a way that its presence does
not intimidate ordinary users.
One putative example is a telephone-answering machine designed by Durrell
Bishop, a graduate of the RCA and now a research fellow at Interval. This
would spit out messages in the form of marbles with solid-state memory chips
embedded in them; to replay the message, the user would simply drop the
marble into the right slot on the machine.
Other items on the research agenda include the combinination of forms of
sensory interaction - sound and a more subtle use of feel as well as sight
and touch. As Crampton-Smith points out: 'We are stuck with a keyboard and a
mouse and pathetic feedback, so that you have to concentrate on using a
computer. You should be able to concentrate on your work.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940721

