FT943-13338

FT  20 JUL 94 / Business and the Environment: Making plans for rubbish


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


To their dismay, the Poles are finding that market-based societies produce a
great deal of waste.
They are struggling to deal with growing mounds of rubbish as the
consumption of packaged consumer goods rises, although city populations
remain stable.
Warsaw produces 470,000 tonnes of solid waste a year. Now, the Polish
capital, with a population of 1.6m, has chosen an Italian-led consortium to
study its problems in a Dollars 500,000 (Pounds 329,000) European
Union-financed study designed to pave the way for the restructuring and
privatisation of the city's disposal systems.
Officials hope the study will also lead to a 'garbage' law regulating an
area once left to the municipal authorities. Private competition is growing;
as much as 30 per cent of solid waste is taken to the city's only rubbish
dump 50km away by independent contractors, leaving less profitable 'routes'
to municipal employees.
The law would provide a regulatory framework to marry market needs with
assurances that city dwellers will be adequately served by the city's
disposal system.
Financial institutions such as the World Bank are waiting for such rules to
be put into place before considering loans to the municipal sector, since
they see the Warsaw project as a pilot scheme.
The consortium led by Fi. Mar, part of the Marchini group, includes AMIU
Modena, an Italian waste disposal company, and Prochem, a privatised Polish
chemical industry design company.
Market research will be carried out to gauge opinion among the city's 2,000
dustmen who are likely to resist change.
Already, a restructuring and privatisation scheme, prepared by Drawline, a
UK consultancy, for the city's buses has drawn criticism from the unions
representing some 10,000 transport employees.
The waste disposal project, in common with the transport plan and planned
studies on the city's water and road system, will form a blueprint for the
reform and privatisation of the city's infrastructure.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940720

