FT941-5490

FT  05 MAR 94 / Sport: Charmed by the rudest of clubs - Golf


   By DEREK LAWRENSON


It is not easy to decide which has produced more anguish over the years: the
Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers or the rules of golf.
Words such as pig-headed, irrational and incomprehensible abound when either
is the topic of conversation. Both are 250 years old on Monday, which makes
the former the oldest golf club in the world.
To be fair to the Honourable Company, whose present home is the sublime
links course at Muirfield, when they came up with the original rules of golf
on March 7 1744 they made a great deal more sense than the labyrinthine set
of clauses and sub-clauses that the Royal and Ancient Golf Club applies to
today's game.
Alas, if only the same could be said about the behaviour of certain Company
men down the years, or their representatives. When Golf Digest, the US
magazine, ran a piece on Muirfield before the 1992 Open there, it headlined
it: 'The rudest golf club in the world.'
It is said that one Muirfield member, a distinguished politician, was so
appalled by the attitudes of his peers that he refused to go to his own golf
club. One man came up from the English Midlands to play and was bowled over
by the reception he received from the then secretary, the usually fearsome
Paddy Hamner.
Hamner was most taken by the man's cravat. They settled into a conversation
about the guest's textile business and he revealed proudly that his cravats
were made from the finest silk.
Hamner was delighted with the offer of a couple as gifts. The visitor made
his way towards the lounge to order some lunch, wondering how Hamner had
come to earn such an unjust reputation. As he stood at the threshold of the
beautiful room, Hamner roared down the corridor: 'You won't be having lunch
in there. You're not allowed in without a tie.'
At first glance, not much has changed. The notice on the entrance gate tells
you that this club is 'strictly private'. One door in the clubhouse has
'lavatories' written on it, but do not think it opens to reveal further
doors for men and women. There are no women members. The oldest golf club
has never had any. Its waiting list is enormously long and closed - and
there are no women on it.
But Muirfield has taken steps to soften its image. These began three years
ago with the appointment of Group Captain John Prideaux as secretary.
Where previous holders of this office had been obstructive and rude, he
could not be more effusive or helpful. 'I just do the job as I see fit. I
think some of the criticism of Muirfield for being snobbish or offhand was
justified, but equally a lot of it was people believing what they wanted to
believe. There's also a lot of jealousy about the way we do things here. The
game has changed greatly in recent years but Muirfield has remained free of
rampant commercialism, and some people resent that.'
Contrary to myth, it is not impossible to play Muirfield. On Tuesdays and
Thursdays, 60 men and women out of the 300 or so who make the request each
week are allowed to sample its pleasures, and while Prideaux is almost
apologetic at the charge of Pounds 50 for the round or Pounds 70 for the day
 -'very high for the east of Scotland' - this is one of the great golfing
bargains.
The fact is that you cannot help but fall in love with Muirfield - with the
course, for one thing, and with its innate fairness, which makes it the
favourite of all the great players.
There is also the fact that the club makes no tawdry effort to cash in on
its unique place in the game's lore. The following day I visited another
Open championship course, where they have a thousand souvenirs covered in
tacky 'Turnberry, Scotland' logos and where they discriminate by means of a
pricing policy which places it outside the budget of all but the wealthy.
Muirfield, with plenty to flaunt, is surely the only club in the world that
offers no souvenirs. They have no golf shop. They have no pro.
In the breakfast room a wonderful photograph caught my eye. A letter
underneath tells of four golfers who decided to visit an optician because
one of them had become unhappy with his putting, and decided it was because
of his eyesight.
He was right, too. But the others were in for a shock: they all had poor
vision, which is how they came to pose for the light-hearted photograph. The
quartet were J H Taylor, Harry Vardon, Alex Herd and James Braid and, bad
eyesight or not, between them they won 17 of the 21 Open Championships
played from 1894 to 1914.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

940305

