FT944-14513

FT  22 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Value of coal assets questioned - Demand
from generators will slump in late 1990s, report predicts


The successful bidders for British Coal mines have offered far more than is
being paid for coal assets on the international market, according to an
analysis published yesterday.
The report in Coal UK, the Financial Times newsletter, predicts a slump in
demand for coal from the electricity generators in the late 1990s. It will
fuel questions over whether the bidders have paid too much and can sustain
long-term profits.
The report casts doubts over the ability of RJB Mining, chosen as preferred
bidder for all three English regions, to make significant profits after
1998, when existing contracts with the generators end.
After 1998, 'it is difficult to believe that its margins will be sufficient
to cover ongoing costs, the costs of closures and any leftovers from the
bid'.
Coal UK says that whether the bids are measured in pounds per tonne of
reserves or pounds per tonne of saleable coal, the winning bidders for
England and Wales are paying much more than has recently been paid for coal
assets in other countries.
'Overseas investors would almost certainly look on British Coal as high cost
and producing poor quality coal.'
RJB's Pounds 900m bid equates to Pounds 1.54 per tonne of reserves and
Pounds 28 per tonne for saleable coal.
The report says that only one international sale has been higher recently
and that involved low sulphur mines.
'All other international deals were at less than Pounds 24 a tonne and the
vast bulk at below Pounds 20.'
The report forecasts that the English power market for coal is likely to be
squeezed further following government decisions to allow new gas-fired power
stations.
The English market could be below 25m tonnes by 2000, according to the
analysis.
National Power and PowerGen, the two fossil-fuel generators, currently buy
30m tonnes a year. RJB has said it sees limited decline after 1998.
Mining (Scotland), the consortium in which Waverley Mining Finance and Coal
Investments have stakes, is believed to have offered Pounds 60m to become
the preferred bidder for British Coal's Scottish mining assets.
This equates to Pounds 1.58 per tonne for the reserves and Pounds 12 a tonne
for saleable coal.
'The latter figure is the only one that fits into the international
perspective. The reserve valuation is way above comparable international
deals which range from 20p to 40p per tonne.'
Celtic Energy's estimated Pounds 95m tender for South Wales, which also has
preferred bidder status, equates to Pounds 1.79 per tonne of reserves and
Pounds 47.50 per tonne of saleable coal.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941022

