FT944-14562

FT  22 OCT 94 / Backbench rebels threaten to scupper Post Office sale


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Tory opponents of the privatisation of the Royal Mail yesterday stepped up
their campaign to force the government to abandon the proposed sale by
tabling a formal House of Commons motion demanding it be kept in the public
sector.
With a divided cabinet expected to decide next week whether to press ahead
with the sale, eight Conservative MPs signed an early day motion voicing
concern that privatisation would lead to widespread closures of rural post
offices.
The opposition of the eight MPs would be sufficient to overturn any
legislation in the Commons as the government holds an overall majority of
only 14. The signatures on the motion were led by Mr Hugh Dykes and Sir
David Knox and included Sir Keith Speed and Mr Robert Hicks.
Tory party managers have warned Mr John Major that several other MPs are
threatening to vote down the privatisation plan in favour of moves to hold
the Royal Mail and Post Office Counters intact in the public sector. The
rebels believe the government could meet mounting international competition
by giving the Post Office greater commercial freedom.
Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip, and Mr Tony Newton, the leader of the
House of Commons, are both understood to have told the prime minister that
they could not guarantee sufficient votes.
However, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, and Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, are insisting the government should face down the
rebels. The two ministers, backed by several cabinet colleagues, believe
that enough opponents can be won over to guarantee passage of the
legislation.
Cabinet supporters of the privatisation are arguing also that an
embarrassing U-turn over the issue would allow the opposition to brand Mr
Major's government a 'lame-duck' administration unable to win its business
in parliament. They believe some Ulster Unionists MPs, who are formally
opposed to the sell-off, might well decide to abstain on any key votes.
The UCW communication workers' union said yesterday that it thought the MPs'
motion would lead to the dropping of the privatisation plans.
Post Office Counters said yesterday that 178 main high street post offices -
a quarter of the total - will stay open until 7pm on Saturdays to sell
tickets for the National Lottery.
All other Post Office services will be available during the extended hours.
At the moment main post offices close at either 12.30pm or 1pm on Saturdays.
The extra hours will be worked by voluntary overtime.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

