FT941-3573

FT  16 MAR 94 / G7 urges IMF to release Dollars 1.5bn for Russian reform


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


The Group of Seven leading industrial countries, fearful that the Russian
economy may collapse, are pressing the International Monetary Fund to agree
to lend the second Dollars 1.5bn tranche of funds aimed at assisting reform.
Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, is expected in Moscow tomorrow.
During his five-day visit he will have to decide whether to recommend to the
fund's board to pay the second tranche of the systemic transformation
facility or again delay payment because of fears that the budget will not be
adhered to and that inflation - down to a monthly 9 per cent in February -
will again soar, as expected.
A continued fall in production and the huge indebtedness in Russian industry
have meant that government income is running at half of the budgeted figures
for the first two months of this year.
Meanwhile, powerful lobbies, especially the military, are demanding higher
allocations than the present budget allows - with General Pavel Grachev,
defence minister, warning that his troops will go unfed unless the
allocation to defence of Rbs37,000bn (Pounds 14.4bn) for this year is more
than doubled.
One senior western financial expert in Moscow said yesterday: 'The base to
support the infrastructure of the country is shrinking and at some point
soon you will not have enough resources to support the minimum services.'
Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, prime minister. has sought to impress on the IMF -
which has a team negotiating with Russian ministers in Moscow - that he and
senior colleagues are at least as pro-market as radicals such as Mr Yegor
Gaidar and Mr Boris Fyodorov, who left the cabinet this year.
The G7 countries had relaxed their pressure on the IMF and the other
international financial institutions such as the World Bank to lend to
Russia after the December elections, as the outcome led them to believe that
further reform was unlikely.
Mr Chernomyrdin has drawn up a list of companies to be declared bankrupt,
has enthusiastically endorsed the sell-off of state and collective farms to
individuals, and says he will repel all advances from the
military,industrial, energy and agricultural lobbies for more credits.
However, he has also tried to make clear to the IMF the severity of the
crisis he faces. The draft budget - which has not yet gone to the state
duma, or lower house of parliament, for the required ratification  -
envisages expenditure of Rbs183,000bn and income of about Rbs120,000bn -
leaving a budget deficit of about 10 per cent of gross national product, a
figure generally regarded as tight in present circumstances.
The income, however, is proving wildly optimistic. Government insiders said
yesterday that government income, mainly from taxes, was running at only
some Rbs70,000bn to Rbs80,000bn a year.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940316

