FT941-5625

FT  05 MAR 94 / Smith targets rising crime for elections push


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Labour's campaign for the May local government elections will focus sharply
on public anxiety about rising crime, Mr John Smith, the party leader,
signalled yesterday.
Mr Smith told a rally of London Labour candidates and MPs that the party's
plans for economic revival would win votes in 'massive numbers' at the
elections.
He promised better transport and health services for the capital, and
confirmed Labour's plans for a city-wide local government to replace the
defunct Greater London Council.
But Mr Smith's speech concentrated on increases of 287 per cent in
burglaries and 174 per cent in violent crime in London since the
Conservatives came to power in 1979.
He ridiculed the fresh approach to crime prevention outlined last week by Mr
John Major, the prime minister, which included plans for prickly bushes
around buildings to deter thieves.
'Burglars throughout Britain are now quaking in their boots at the prospect
of this latest bold, indeed draconian, initiative by the prime minister,' he
said.
Mr Smith said the government had no strategy to combat crime except 'talking
tough'. At the same time, it was dismantling programmes such as the safer
cities and urban redevelopment initiatives which helped to prevent crime.
'Drug education officers' posts are being cut; local authorities are being
forced to cut youth services; mentally ill people are left to roam the
streets with tragic consequences. And the prime minister shakes his head and
wrings his hands at the rising crime rates,' said Mr Smith.
Mr Smith promised a 'concerted strategy to smash the culture of despair,
hopelessness, drugs, violence, poor education and poor job prospects in
which so many young people live'.
He said Labour would establish a separate London police authority, create a
new category of racial violence offences, and set up a national campaign to
combat drug abuse.
Mr Smith said no one should seek excuses for criminal behaviour, but Labour
would tackle the poverty, deprivation, and squalor that provided fertile
soil for crime to flourish.
The tone of Mr Smith's speech reflects a growing belief among Labour leaders
that the party has neutralised the Tories' traditional advantage on law and
order issues.
Mr Smith carefully followed the approach pioneered by Mr Tony Blair, shadow
home secretary, who has promised that Labour would be tough on both crime
and the causes of crime.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940305

