FT943-12704

FT  23 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Policy in the upturn


Now more than ever, the makers of monetary policy can expect their every
word to be probed for signs of a change in policy. The trouble is that both
the tools of their trade and market reactions to their efforts have become
increasingly unreliable.
The obvious approach is to make things clearer. The decision to publish the
minutes of the British chancellor of the exchequer's monthly meetings with
the governor of the Bank of England was a significant step in this
direction. In the account of the June meeting - published this week - Mr
Eddie George judged the situation 'very favourable' and Mr Kenneth Clarke
was happy to agree.
UK growth in output, as evidenced by Friday's preliminary estimates of
growth in total gross domestic product of 3.3 per cent for the year to June,
continues to exceed the historical trend. Excluding the erratic output of
oil from the North Sea, however, the increase was only 2.7 per cent.
Although the narrow measure of money supply is currently growing above its
target range, the eclectic range of other monitored variables does not
indicate any need for immediate monetary tightening. Or so the chancellor
and the governor agreed.
Their judgment looks sensible. One reason the Bank seems to be relatively
sanguine about inflation is its estimate that the economy has an output gap
of 6 per cent of GDP, following the long recession. For all that,
bottlenecks may emerge quite soon. The steep slope of the UK yield curve
indicates that the markets are concerned about the possibility of higher
inflation (and higher interest rates) in the not too distant future. Base
rates will indeed have to rise from their current low level, though, with
luck, not much before the end of the year.
Timid moves
The same has been said for some time about American official interest rates,
an impression which the Federal Reserve chairman, Mr Alan Greenspan, did
nothing to remove this week. During the first of his biannual testimonies to
Congress at the beginning of the year, he tried to forewarn the markets of
higher interest rates. Consequently, he was surprised by the dramatic plunge
in the bond market that followed his first timid moves towards a
long-canvassed tightening of the US monetary stance.
It seems that for a central bank to explain what it is about to do is not as
helpful as might be expected. The only answer is for it to try still harder.
One thing he has consistently pointed out is that for the US to take the
lead in tightening monetary policy is a necessary side-effect of America's
head-start in the world's move out of recession. He also signalled that the
international aspects of monetary policy - above all, the level of the
dollar - were not going to be left out of the equation.
Bids for a dollar recovery are also being voiced by members of the Clinton
administration. Yet, ever since the G7 in Naples decided that the dollar's
fall could not be prevented, the currency has in fact stabilised. An adapted
law of unintended consequences might suggest that supportive comments from
Washington will send it down again. A steady further depreciation of the
American currency remains the conventional financial market wisdom. But the
market's conventional wisdom is almost automatically wrong. If everyone has
sold the dollar short already, who is left to do so?
Odd weakness
For all the concern about the American trade account, the dollar's weakness
looks somewhat odd, given that short-term US interest rates may soon exceed
German ones, an event which Mr Greenspan's careful comments brings closer.
The betting on such a 'cross-over' was only marginally confused by the
Bundesbank's decision, announced on Thursday, to fix its 'repurchase' rate
at 4.85 per cent for the next four weeks. In effect, this reduced the rate
by only 3 basis points over the coming weeks, a contorted way of limiting
speculation about the timing of future rate cuts.
The Bundesbank had reason enough for its contortions. It has been cutting
interest rates in the light of the performance of inflation, which has been
falling, and of the economy, which has been recovering slowly. In the
meantime, it has chosen to ignore its target for broad money, whose growth
this year has been far above the 4-6 per cent target range. In the last two
months, however, the money supply has ceased growing, while the economy has
been picking up. As a result, pressure to cut interest rates has diminished.
It is even possible that German interest rates are not far from their floor.
This week's talk from the Bank of Japan about recovery suggests that the
same is true there.
Yet even if the global short-term interest rate cycle is near bottom, US
and, for that matter, UK rates are almost certain to rise, relative to those
in D-Marks and yen. In their myopic way, markets may suddenly notice this
development. If so, the story of the second half of 1994 might be the
strength of the dollar, and even of the pound.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940723

