FT942-15522

FT  14 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russian aluminium cuts still
well short of target


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


Russia is having severe difficulty keeping to its undertaking, given to some
western nations in January, to reduce its aluminium production by 500,000
tonnes a year.
This emerged yesterday when Concern Aluminiy, the Russian producers'
association, gave output figures for the first time. By the end of March
annual cuts totalling 142,000 tonnes had been made at seven smelters. This
was well short of the 300,000 tonnes Russia promised to make by the end of
April. Aluminiy officials admitted that the data were incomplete and that it
would be difficult to persuade some smelters to agree on more cuts.
Mr Alexander Isayev told Reuter in Moscow that the Bratsk smelter, the
biggest in the world with an annual capacity of about 820,000 tonnes, was
refusing to supply statistics and there seemed no way the government could
force it to comply because it had been privatised.
'It's ending as we expected, a complete shambles in Russia,' said Mr Angus
MacMillan, research manager at Billiton-Enthoven Metals, part of the Royal
Dutch/Shell group. 'Most people were pretty sceptical about whether the
Russians could deliver what they promised. At some stage, though, the
Russians will be forced to cut production. They can't keep the smelters
together for ever with paper clips and string.'
Mr Nick Moore, analyst at Ord Minnett, an affiliate of Jardine Fleming, said
there was scepticism because it was doubted if the Russian smelters could
afford the social cost of cuts - nearly every one has a complete community
to support. Nevertheless, western producers should be encouraged that some
cuts had been announced in good time for another meeting in Brussels next
week between the big producers (Australia, Canada, the European Union,
Norway and the US as well as Russia).
He pointed out that, since aluminium reached an all-time low of 47.2 cents a
pound in November, cuts announced by western producers - now totalling more
than 900,000 tonnes a year - had helped it climb by 24 per cent to an
average of 58.5 cents in March.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940414

