FT944-14559

FT  22 OCT 94 / Waldegrave plans tough 'green' farm measures


   By ALISON MAITLAND and DEBORAH HARGREAVES


Mr William Waldegrave, the agriculture minister, is discussing controversial
proposals to force European Union cereal farmers to adopt environmentally
friendly practices in return for the Pounds 8.1bn payments they receive each
year as compensation for cuts in grain prices.
Mr Waldegrave described the proposals - which would need approval from
Brussels - as a 'complete revolution' in how a large part of EU farm
spending is allocated. 'I'm sure it's right and sensible for farmers to
widen the base of their subsidy to take account of environmental
conditions,' he said. 'It helps to explain to the public why they are paid.'
He added there would be a lot of hard negotiating before headway was made on
the idea. He will also face opposition from British farmers who fear
environmental conditions would not be implemented by other EU countries,
leaving the UK at a disadvantage.
The NFU farmers' union said: 'Our primary concern is the extra cost such a
policy would impose on UK farming businesses when we are competing with
other European countries which don't have those costs.'
Britain has already imposed over-grazing penalties on livestock farmers as a
unilateral measure. Mr Waldegrave did not rule out applying environmental
conditions unilaterally.
Ministry officials met representatives of the NFU, the Country Landowners'
Association - which represents many farmers - and conservation bodies,
including the Council for the Protection of Rural England and the Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds, earlier this week to discuss how
environmental conditions could be attached to payments to cereal farmers.
The discussions centred on a scheme that would involve farmers protecting
environmental features of their land such as hedgerows, ponds, dry-stone
walls and wildlife habitats in return for subsidies. The Milk Marketing
Board said yesterday that it had secured a Pounds 30m loan from its bankers
for reorganising itself into a voluntary farmers' co-operative on November
1. The board had threatened to impose a levy on farmers to finance the
deregulation move if loan guarantees had not been forthcoming.
The Ministry of Agriculture yesterday gave its approval for live calves to
be flown from Humberside to Rotterdam to get around a ban imposed by ferry
companies on the shipment of live animals to Europe. Animal welfare groups
have protested against the flights of up to 200 calves in unpressurised
aircraft.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

