FT944-10870

FT  09 NOV 94 / Mitterrand defends Africa record: French president skims
over French role in Rwanda


   By REUTER


   BIARRITZ


France's President Francois Mitterrand mounted a strong defence of his
record in Africa yesterday but did not reply to harsh critics of France's
policy before and after this year's Rwandan genocide, Reuter reports from
Biarritz.
Addressing his last Franco-African summit, the 78-year-old leader said
France remained Africa's firmest foreign friend and its biggest aid donor.
In a valedictory message ending his 50-year association with Africa, Mr
Mitterrand appealed to whoever succeeds him as president next May to
maintain France's strong ties with the world's 'most fragile continent'.
But he skimmed over France's much-criticised role in Rwanda where hardliners
in the ousted Hutu-led government organised the genocide of up to 1m people
between April and July. Under President Mitterrand, France gave sustained
military and political support to the former regime.
The new Tutsi-led government accuses Paris of orchestrating efforts to
destabilise it, citing the blocking of European aid and delays in bringing
the culprits to international justice.
For the first time since 1975, Rwanda was not invited to attend the
Franco-African summit. France said it preferred to see the situation
'evolve' in Kigali, but many African delegates said they regretted the new
government's absence.
Delegates expected Rwanda to be at the centre of the summit's two plenary
sessions before today's close. But France was promoting a debate on the
creation of an African intervention force to respond quickly to the
continent's frequent and bloody conflicts.
French media and African opposition parties accused Mr Mitterrand before the
summit of betraying his early promises to help end the autocratic rule of
African political 'dinosaurs' personified by Zaire's Mobutu Sese Seko.
Mr Mobutu, who earned French gratitude for his support on Rwanda, was in
Biarritz and back in limited favour with France despite Zaire's continued
state of economic chaos and political in-stability.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941109

