FT941-4251

FT  11 MAR 94 / Markets Report: Clinton worries hit dollar


   By PHILIP GAWITH


President Clinton's political woes finally caught up with the dollar
yesterday as fears about further damaging disclosures knocked nearly two
pfennigs off the currency, writes Philip Gawith.
The dollar weakened in Asia as rumours circulated about President Clinton
resigning, and bearish sentiment spilled over into European and US trading.
It closed in London at DM1.6893, down from DM1.7070 on Wednesday, and in New
York it finished at DM1.6835.
The market is now split on the outlook for the dollar. While many observers
believe economic fundamentals continue to favour it, there is increasing
scepticism about where support for the currency is going to come from.
Either way, the market is now pricing an element of political risk into the
dollar. Until yesterday foreign exchanges had paid little attention to the
Whitewater land and financial scandal in which President Clinton and his
wife are implicated. With the story now grabbing the headlines of the
mainstream US media, however, it has increasingly impinged on the markets.
In Europe, meanwhile, the D-Mark put on a mixed performance. It was
unchanged against the French franc at FFr3.404, stronger against the Italian
lira, which fell to L990.1 from L988.6, and weaker against the Spanish
peseta, which recovered to Pta82.37 from Pta82.45.
Mr Rob Loewy, head of foreign exchange at Midland Global Markets, said the
catalyst for yesterday's weakness was increasing market concern that Mr
Clinton 'may find himself in a very, very difficult situation'. He added
that US institutional holders of dollars had been particularly keen to
unload some of their long dollar positions.
This selling needs to be seen against the background of general
disillusionment about the dollar's performance. At the beginning of the year
the US currency was seen by most as a virtual one-way upwards bet. Since
then, however, it has weakened by five pfen-nigs from the DM1.7340 position
where it started the year.
The dollar has also been undermined by the slow pace of monetary easing by
the Bundesbank, and fears that the US Federal Reserve will not tighten
policy as aggressively as previously anticipated.
To some observers it is a case of deja vu. Mr Jeremy Hawkins, senior
economic adviser at Bank of America, said it was back to a year ago when
bullishness about the dollar stumbled on the rocks of a slower than
anticipated monetary easing from the Bundesbank.
Mr Hawkins said he viewed the current dip in the dollar as a 'temporary',
and perhaps necessary, correction given the extent to which the market had
been long of dollars.
The carrying cost of holding dollar assets - on a one-month view there is a
2.5 per cent interest rate differential in favour of the D-Mark over the
dollar - also bites deeper when the outlook for the currency being held is
called more into question.
The Bank of America economist said there had not been 'huge aggressive
selling' of the dollar. Rather, it was a case of a 'still market looking for
a reason to kick the dollar around a bit'. The spectre of Mr Clinton's
political problems offered just this excuse.
Mr Jeremy Hodges, head of global foreign exchange sales at Lehman Brothers,
took a more gloomy view, commenting: 'I feel strongly that we are into a
downward dollar mode now.' He said he thought the dollar could fall as low
as DM1.60 (also the level Swiss Bank Corp has predicted for the dollar at
the middle and end of the year).
Aside from the interest rate and political risk arguments weighing on the
dollar, Mr Hodges cited two other factors giving reason for caution: that
'everything is priced into this dollar'; and, with investors dumping their
long dollar positions, it is difficult to see who will be willing to buy the
currency.
One option would be the central banks, and there were rumours yesterday that
the New York Federal Reserve was buying dollars just below the DM1.69 level.
It declined to comment.
In Europe, the Bank of France left its intervention rate unchanged at 6.10
per cent at a securities repurchase tender, held to inject money into the
money markets. Speculation that the BOF might trim the intervention rate
again - it was cut by 10 basis points on February 24  - receded on Wednesday
when the Bundesbank reduced its corresponding repo rate by only three basis
points.
Sterling had a quiet day with little interest in the currency. The market is
awaiting a raft of important data next week - unemployment, producer prices
and retail sales - to help form a view on the strength of the UK economic
recovery. It closed in London more than a pfennig weaker at DM2.5364 and was
nearly a cent higher against the dollar at Dollars 1.5015.
The Bank of England provided UK money markets with Pounds 731m of assistance
yesterday at the established rate of 5 1/8 per cent. The revised forecast of
the shortage was Pounds 700m.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940311

