FT941-3586

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (18): History can be helpful, up
to a point - No society should wish its business people to be too
backward-looking / Problem solving


   By TIM DICKSON


Scuttle your Ships Before Advancing, and other
lessons from history on leadership and chance
for today's managers
by Richard A Luecke
Oxford University Press, Pounds 14.95
240 pages
The use of great literature to shed light on business problems was exploited
by two American academics in The Classic Touch: Lessons in Leadership from
Homer to Hemingway, published by Dow Jones-Irwin in 1987.
But if art mirrors executive life, so managers who cannot remember the past
must be condemned to repeat it. That, at any rate, is the thesis of Richard
Luecke, a business writer who has entertainingly brought together a handful
of instructive historical episodes for those struggling to cope with late
20th century corporate change.
Hernan Cortes, the Spanish adventurer who penetrated the heart of the
powerful Aztec empire, is presented as the archetypal risk-taking
entrepreneur (he was so confident of success after landing in Mexico that he
scuttled his ships - hence the title of the book).
The Roman Emperor Hadrian and Louis X1 of France - the cunning 'Spider King'
of the late Middle Ages - are both shown to have been early exponents of the
art now known as 'management by wandering around' (MBWA). And the way in
which radical new ideas are only accepted when the time is ripe is explored
through the markedly different stories of the religious reformer Martin
Luther, and that recently deceased American missionary of industrial quality
W Edwards Deming.
At a time when many multinationals are trying to shake off any national
identity, perhaps the likes of ABB's chief executive Percy Barnevik can
learn something from the way the Roman Empire enlisted the allegiance of
different peoples and blended different cultures.
Perhaps the fiasco of the Battle of Midway - the second world war naval
encounter in the Pacific which, against the odds ended in a US victory over
the Japanese fleet - is a salutary tale of the unexpected and of the
limitations of strategic planning. And perhaps the career of Thomas
Hutchinson, of Massachusetts who represented the King's interests in the
colony before the American War of Independence, is a striking example of how
the leadership qualities that serve organisations well in one era are
sometimes inadequate to the challenges of another.
But historians, politicians, strategists and business people should beware
reading too much into the past; and Luecke has not always heeded advice
offered by a New York professor to 'let the history tell its own story' and
to keep the 'B-school' interpretation to a minimum. 'Like a 1970s-style CEO,
Trajan (Hadrian's predecessor) expanded the Roman conglomerate still
further' is the sort of sentence that for some readers will jar.
Luecke admittedly goes out of his way to stress the limitations as well as
the lessons of history. He quotes the ill-fated memorandum which compared
the situations facing the French in 1954 and the Americans in 1965, and
which influenced Lyndon Johnson's decision to send major US ground forces to
Vietnam. And he cites approvingly the historian Carl Gustavson's warning
that 'any statement in which the prefatory 'history teaches us that. . .'
used as a springboard should be very carefully scrutinised'.
History is helpful because it is full of people, experiences and challenges
with which we can identify today. It is surely appropriate, therefore, that
business leaders in this of all eras - faced with an unprecedented degree of
change and the task of guiding anxious and confused workers - should find
time to study the past as a means of understanding the present, and perhaps
as an inspiration for finding solutions for the future.
No society, though, should wish its business people to be too
backward-looking. History is littered with failure and disappointment, and
too close scrutiny of the statistically poor chances of, say, successfully
starting a new company or launching a new product might persuade tomorrow's
risk-takers to pack it in.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940315

