FT942-14533

FT  20 APR 94 / Official chemicals statistics shunned


   By DANIEL GREEN


The Chemicals Industry Association has abandoned official government
statistics on investment in favour of its own surveys.
Its estimate of chemicals industry capital spending last year, published
yesterday, is more than 10 per cent lower than that from the government's
Central Statistical Office. In 1992 the association adopted the CSO figures
only to find them later revised down.
Its 29th annual survey of its members' investment intentions indicates that
the industry's capital spending is continuing to fall in real terms. The CSO
figures suggest a rise.
'We have been concerned (about CSO figures) for some time, but when the
difference gets as high as this we can't ignore it,' said Mr Keith Wey,
senior economist at the association. He added that the association was in
talks with the CSO about the discrepancies.
The CSO said it 'had not been made aware of any criticisms from the
Chemicals Industry Association. We are happy with the figures we have
published and are happy to listen to the CIA.'
The association's members include pharmaceuticals companies as well as
chemicals manufacturers. They invested Pounds 1.92bn last year, according to
the association's survey, a 10 per cent fall on 1992 in real terms. The CSO
figure is Pounds 2.12bn.
The association's forecast for this year's investment is Pounds 1.97bn
'which, allowing for inflation, represents a further small decline on 1993,'
said the report. The decline was a response to 'difficult economic
conditions'.
Dr Robin Paul, managing director of chemicals manufacturer Albright and
Wilson, speaking yesterday at the association's national conference, said
the UK's investment levels were 'about on the median trend for Europe as a
whole'.
More than two-thirds of the new capital spending is on high profit margin
goods such as speciality chemicals and pharmaceuticals, as opposed to the
traditional bulk chemical side, much of which has been suffering from
overcapacity.
The report also forecast that the cost of plant would rise at 3.7 per cent a
year between now and 1996.
Spending on environmental protection would rise from 14 per cent of total
capital spending now to 20 per cent by 1996.
In a boost to Mr Michael Heseltine's style of running the Department of
Trade and Industry, the report said: 'A growing number of companies have
stressed the importance of a supportive and competitive government.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940420

