FT943-12995

FT  21 JUL 94 / International Company News: AGF may sell bank stake


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


Assurances Generales de France (AGF), the insurance company scheduled for
privatisation in the autumn, yesterday confirmed it was considering the sale
of its 43 per cent stake in Banque Francaise du Commerce Exterieur (BFCE),
the specialist banking group.
AGF also verified that it was in talks with Credit Lyonnais, the troubled
French banking group that owns 24 per cent of BFCE, over the proposed
disposal. However, AGF and Credit Lyonnais declined to comment on
speculation that they were considering selling their holdings together as a
controlling stake.
The disposal of their combined holdings, a majority stake of 67 per cent
with an estimated value of FFr2.8bn (Dollars 534m), would in theory raise
more money than the separate sales of the individual stakes, given that a
potential purchaser could be expected to pay a premium for control of BFCE.
AGF and Credit Lyonnais are making disposals. AGF, which has denied
speculation about substantial losses on the bond market, is trying to raise
capital after last year's making of heavy provisions on its property
portfolio and its exposure to ailing concerns such as Comptoir des
Entrepreneurs, the troubled financial group.
Mr Antoine Jeancourt-Galignani, AGF chairman, is reviewing the future of all
the insurer's non-strategic interests. AGF yesterday confirmed that the BFCE
stake was 'not considered to be a strategic investment' and might therefore
be sold.
Credit Lyonnais is under even greater financial pressure. Mr Jean
Peyrelevade, its chairman, this spring secured the government's support for
a FFr44.9bn rescue package after disclosing a net loss of FFr6.9bn for 1993.
However, he recently confirmed that his group would require yet another
capital injection following the discovery of more financial problems. Mr
Peyrelevade is also intent on raising capital from disposals.
Credit Lyonnais last week agreed terms to sell its controlling stake in
Fnac, the music retailing group, to Mr Francois Pinault, the entrepreneur,
for FFr1.9bn.

The Financial Times


International Page 16

940721

