FT941-5517

FT  05 MAR 94 / Caught in a Russian labyrinth: Colin Walsh and his Georgian
wife took a romantic trip to St Petersburg. All went well until they tried
to leave. This is his account.


   By COLIN WALSH


It began as a romantic idea. We would travel to St Petersburg, my wife and
I, on a second visit to the city where we spent our honeymoon in the summer
of 1992. Intourist, the Russian state travel agency, told us that Marina,
who is Georgian and holds a Soviet passport issued by the former Soviet
Union, would not need a visa for the trip. We left on December 17, intending
to return home for Christmas. We were ill-prepared for the ordeal that
followed.
When we landed in the afternoon it was already dark, with a light covering
of snow.
A young woman in passport control seemed about to wave us through when a
heavy man in the green uniform of the immigration service studied my wife's
passport, becoming hostile when she was unable to show a currency
declaration. In spite of his loud lecturing and a threat not to allow Marina
into the country, we passed through. I assumed this was typical of Russian
officials.
We spent a pleasant few days at the St Petersburg hotel, where our room
overlooked the frozen Neva. On our first visit to St Petersburg the fresh
summer days had seemed endless as we walked through the city or took boat
trips, planning our future together.
A year and a half later, St Petersburg wore an altogether sadder look. Night
came early and the poor street lighting made little impression on the
darkness. In the evenings we took a taxi along pot-holed streets to visit
Marina's mother. Time passed quickly. Marina bade an emotional farewell to
her mother and we left for the airport.
Our bags were checked in and we proceeded to passport control. A
severe-looking man in green uniform examined Marina's passport at length,
his expression becoming increasingly serious. 'Big problem,' he said loudly,
and disappeared.
He returned with the senior immigration officer, a large, pale young woman
with glittering brown eyes. These she fixed on my wife, lecturing her at
length, loudly and scornfully, and gesticulating with the passport.
I could not understand her, but my wife's sinking expression confirmed that
we were in trouble.
In panic, I demanded to know what the problem was. 'No English,' I was told
in reply. Marina was mesmerised by this hectoring official, who was telling
her that she 'didn't have the right to cross the border' and 'would never go
back to England'.
These terrible words induced such fear that Marina panicked and grabbed at
her passport (containing her precious British Home Office visas designating
her as my wife and giving her the right to UK residence). After a determined
tug-of-war, she won it back.
We still had no idea what was wrong. I could scarcely believe what was
happening. I tucked Marina's passport into my coat pocket, determined not to
let it go. Then an airline official explained why Marina was not going to be
allowed on the aircraft.
Her passport lacked an exit visa. Apparently she needed permission from
someone before she could leave Russia, but no-one would say who this was.
Our bags were unloaded. The time was approaching for take-off - without us.
I could not accept that anyone could block my wife's freedom to return home
with me. I telephoned the British consulate in St Petersburg and asked for
help. We still had a little time before the aircraft departed, and it was
vital that we were on it. Our money was almost all spent, and I did not
fancy spending Christmas in a Russian hotel.
To add to the tension, I discovered the consulate had moved to another
building. But eventually I heard a calm, thoroughly English voice breaking
through the insanity. After hearing my story, however, the consular official
was not encouraging. 'What do you think I can do about it?' he asked.
'We need some sort of diplomatic help,' I said. 'We're in a desperate
situation.'
After questioning me about the specific reasons why Marina was not being
allowed to go home, he told me that he believed it was sometimes possible to
buy an exit visa at the airport if one could find the right official.
Meanwhile, he would see what he could do.
I found Marina standing alone in the departure area, looking down at the
floor. I put my arm round her shoulder and we were led off in search of the
official who, we hoped, would be able to mark her passport with the missing
stamp. I assumed that it was merely a question of paying some money.
We entered a small room and met a thin young man dressed in a worn-out suit.
His manner was quiet and reasonable and he spoke English. What he said to
us, though, was far from reasonable. He would charge Dollars 110 to grant me
an extension to my visa and we would have to travel to Georgia to sort out
my wife's passport.
Prevented from leaving the country because of the obstacles placed in front
of my wife, I was to be made to pay to stay. They were also telling us to go
thousands of miles to a country we knew to be riven by internal conflict.
Experiencing fear and rage, but trying not to show it, I asked: 'Who has
made this decision?'
He replied: 'The senior immigration officer.' He suggested that we go and
see the ovir, a regional official, and told us that this important official
might be able to grant my wife an exit visa.
We found the senior immigration officer standing with a couple of other
officials, dressed in green, apparently with little to do.
I confronted her, getting Marina to translate. I demanded that the officer
put in writing her reasons for preventing my wife leaving the country.
She refused, saying they never wrote anything down. However, I noticed that
something had changed. They now seemed to be engaging in a two-way
conversation with my wife, and the decibel level was lower. I realised later
that this might have had something to do with a call from the British
official.
Even so, they remained intransigent. Marina would not be allowed to leave
without an exit visa. Our bags had been unloaded from the aircraft.
Dispirited, we picked them up and found a taxi back to our hotel in the
early darkness.
We rose early next day and I put on a shirt and tie, which I hoped would
make a good impression on the ovir, even if I froze in the icy weather.
Fortified with a good breakfast, we took a taxi to the British consulate.
Comforted by the sight of the British flag hanging limply in the still cold
air, we entered the consulate through the security door and I gave our names
to the young woman at reception.
It was clear that we were expected. She indicated a door through which we
passed to a waiting-room. After a long delay the consular official, whose
manner was capable and friendly, arrived. He looked at Marina's passport,
commenting that it was probably a good thing that Marina's citizenship was
recorded as Soviet rather than Georgian.
He said he would speak to the ovir on our behalf, putting forward the
argument that if Marina was regarded as Georgian, she did not need the
Georgian government's permission to leave as she had already left her
country, and if she were regarded as Soviet, then, as the Russians were
insisting on an exit visa, they themselves would have to provide one.
He left the room to make the call, returning to tell us that Nina
Vasilievna, at the ovir's office, had agreed to see us on any Tuesday - it
was Wednesday - but if we went there immediately she would see us straight
away.
Certain that our difficulties were almost over, we took a taxi to Ulitsa
Saltikova Shedrina and climbed the stairs to a huge room, bare of all
furniture except for a large desk at which was seated a grandmotherly
looking woman.
We assumed that she was the receptionist, told her that we had an
appointment to see Nina Vasilievna, and were surprised when she indicated
that that was her name. Marina began to explain the problem while Vasilievna
examined her passport. 'Aha] So you're Georgian]' she exclaimed. 'They told
me different. Go to Georgia and they will help you.'
I did not need Marina to translate, as the official's voice was laden with
sarcasm and her look unmistakably hostile. She stalked into another room,
presumably to show Marina's passport to someone else. Marina broke down in
tears, saying to me between sobs: 'Why did you bring me here, why, why?'
Vasilievna returned with the passport, indicated that the business was
finished, and began dealing with someone else. It was terrible to see the
effect on my wife. Almost in tears myself, I began shouting but my voice
sounded feeble in the gigantic room.
We arrived back at the British consulate downcast. We met the same official.
I said that I could not understand the logic of the Russian position. Their
requirement for an exit visa made sense only if the Soviet Union had somehow
been brought back to life. Georgia had broken away from the Soviet Union
before it was officially dissolved in December 1991.
Now, the Russian authorities were claiming authority over my wife by
insisting on an exit visa, while maintaining that they had no authority to
grant an exit visa because Marina was not Russian.
I noticed that the British official did not explicitly criticise the
Russians' behaviour. I asked if my wife could accompany me home under the
protection of the British government. He told me this was not possible as
Marina was not British.
I pointed out that according to her papers she was not a citizen of any
existing state. However, as she was married to a British citizen, and as
there was nobody else in St Petersburg to whom she could turn for help, she
was entitled to British assistance.
He left the room and returned a short time later to say that the Russians
had told him to 'back off'. He said again that as Marina was not British, he
could not apply any more pressure.
When she expressed her surprise and disappointment, he told her that it was
her problem, and that I was technically free to leave.
I was crushed by this interpretation of the rules of the game, which seemed
to leave the Russians free to do as they pleased with my wife, because she
was on Russian soil and not British. I tried to get across the idea that my
wife was my vital interest, and that the British consulate had a
responsibility to protect my interests as much as possible. But I was too
upset to state my case clearly.
Our ordeal was at last ended in Moscow, where we sought the assistance of
the Georgian embassy. They gave my wife everything she needed to escape -
which amounted to an extra couple of stamps on her passport.
We took a British Airways flight out of Moscow the same day.
I tried to understand what had gone wrong. I had met Marina in Tbilisi in
1992, and decided to bring her back to Britain for a holiday. I wanted to
marry her, but first I wanted to make sure that she knew what life was like
in Britain.
Marina had obtained a permit from an official in Tbilisi allowing a
'personal visit' abroad. We were married on my second visit to Tbilisi and
Marina joined me in Britain some weeks later, her documents having been
vetted by the home office.
She had no problem leaving Georgia via Moscow in 1992, but she had
inadvertently failed to get a 'permanent emigration' permit in her passport
to replace the 'personal visit' stamp which would soon expire.
This had been the cause of our difficulties in St Petersburg, but the
question remained - why were the Russians so keen to enforce Georgian
emigration regulations?
In spite of all the political changes, the reality for ordinary former
Soviet citizens is that travel abroad remains a distant dream.
Even if the cost is somehow met, the obstacles created by governments are
formidable. In a couple of years, Marina will be eligible for a British
passport.
Inside the front cover of a UK passport are inscribed noble and optimistic
words, redolent of a time when all you needed for world travel was a
passport and enough money. Times are changing.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940305

