FT944-10939

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (8): Writing is on the wall for controllers
 -The highly regulated financial system is being drastically overhauled


   By PAUL TAYLOR


India's financial system is being transformed. The highly regulated system
dominated by state-controlled institutions is being pushed aside to make way
for what policy makers hope will be a modern, efficient system based on
market mechanisms.
Some significant reforms have taken place in monetary policy where there has
been a marked shift from direct instruments of control, such as the
prescription of reserve requirements for banks, administered interest rates
and credit controls, towards indirect instruments such as the freeing of
interest rates and the use of open market operations.
The restrictions placed on commercial banks over their applications of funds
have been eased and both the cash reserve requirement and the statutory
liquidity ratio, which lay down the proportion of incremental deposits which
must be held as cash deposits or eligible government securities with the
reserve bank, are being reduced.
At the same time, the priority sector lending requirements and credit norms
imposed on the banks have been relaxed, while controls on interest rates
have been curbed. On October 17, most of the remaining controls on bank
lending rates - except those over small loans - were scrapped to promote
cheaper credit, greater liberalisation in financial markets and more
competition in the banking industry.
Perhaps even more important, the government and the reserve bank have signed
an agreement to phase out ad hoc treasury bills, on which the government
paid a fixed interest rate of 4.6 per cent.
Along with open market auctions, new government money market and debt
instruments now include 91-day and 364-day treasury bills, longer dated five
and 10-year securities and of zero coupon bonds. In addition, a system of
primary dealers is planned to encourage the growth of the secondary
government securities market.
The authorities have also unveiled a comprehensive programme to strengthen
the state-owned banks and increase competition. New prudential norms have
been prescribed and commercial banks have been told they must meet the Basle
Accord minimum 8 per cent capital adequacy requirement by 1996.
To assist the process, the Word Bank is working on a new Dollars 600m loan
for nine selected public banks which will provide an incentive for
recapitalisation as well as general development. Three of the banks have
already reached the 8 per cent target, but the other six would share a
Dollars 300m recapitalisation loan. Another Dollars 100m would be earmarked
for technical assistance and the final Dollars 200m tranche would provide a
backstop facility for export finance.
After the Rs40bn Bombay securities scandal in 1992 which implicated a number
of domestic and foreign banks, Mr DR Mehta, Reserve Bank deputy governor,
says the central bank has 'totally revamped its regulation and supervision
system', splitting the two functions and creating an autonomous Board for
Financial Supervision.
The government has cut its stake in two large medium-term lending
institutions to below 50 per cent and has approved private ownership up to
49 per cent for other state-owned banks as part of their recapitalisation.
Nevertheless, banking regulators accept that the weakest public banks may
need more assistance.
In order to increase competition, 10 new private sector banks have been
approved and eight foreign banks have been given permission to open maiden
branches in India.
But the government's critics still say the reforms do not go far enough.
They argue that, so long as commercial banking is dominated by
state-controlled institutions, real competition will be missing.
Similar concerns are expressed about the insurance sector, which is
controlled by two state-owned organisations, the Life Insurance Corporation
of India and the General Insurance Corporation. A report on the sector was
delivered by the Malhotra committee early this year but is still 'under
government consideration'. Given the size of the two insurers, Mr Tarun Das,
director general of the Confederation of Indian Industry, claims that 'the
only way competition will come is with privatisation'.
In contrast, reform of the capital markets is well advanced. Companies have
a wider range of financing options now and can tap the international debt
and equity markets through Euro issues or global depositary receipts. The
Controller of Capital Issues was abolished in 1992, allowing companies more
flexibility in pricing new issues, subject to the guidelines of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi), whose powers have been
enhanced.
From the investor's perspective the launch of new private sector mutual
funds last year provided another investment vehicle. So far 22 private
sector funds have been approved, of which seven are trading alongside funds
offered by the Unit Trust of India and public sector banks and institutions.
In the wake of the Bombay securities scandal, Sebi has tried to move quickly
to estabLish itself as a regulator over the equity markets, determined to
improve disclosure requirements and increase transparency and investor
protection.
The need for a more transparent market has been highlighted by the inflow of
funds from registered Foreign Institutional Investors, who have been allowed
to buy shares directly since late 1992. Since then 224 FIIs have registered
with Sebi and have bought Dollars 2.7bn of Indian equities.
But this sudden influx of foreign funds, together with the steady stream of
new issues, has thrown a spotlight on the archaic paper-based trading,
settlements and stock transfer system which can cause delays of up to six
months between payment and the formal registration of share ownership.
To alleviate these problems, Sebi has made regulatory changes, permitting
the use of 'jumbo' transfer deeds and share certificates and encouraging the
expansion of custodial services for foreign investors. It admits that the
long-term solution is to move to paperless electronic trading.
In Bombay the stock exchange's 628 members are investing Dollars 25m to
install an electronic trading system which Mr Bhagirat Merchant, president
of the exchange, claims will be running by the start of next year. But fully
automated paperless trading is probably some years away.
Other changes could take longer. The Bombay exchange recently agreed to
admit corporate members but so far its individual and partnership members
have shown little interest in taking advantage of this. To date the exchange
has just 10 corporate members.
The exchange says it will eventually admit foreign members, but Mr Merchant
admits there is no timetable. 'I cannot throw my members to the wolves.'
Like most policy makers and regulators, he emphasises that India does not
like rapid change.
While most industrialists and financiers believe the reforms enacted so far
are irreversible, they fear that the liberalisation programme could stall,
leaving the Indian markets in an unstable limbo.
These concerns are brushed aside by Mr Shanker Acharya, an economic adviser
in the Ministry of Finance. He denies that the programme is losing momentum.
Financial reform, he says, is a process which takes several years,
particularly when institutional inertia has to be overcome.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
            DIRECT FOREIGN INVESTMENT APPROVALS
 ------------------------------------------------------------
                     1991    1992    1993    1994 (to June)
Total value Rs bn     5.3    38.9    88.6        24.6
Number of cases       289     692     785         439
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Ministry of Industry
 ------------------------------------------------------------
           FOREIGN INVESTMENT INFLOWS (DOLLARS M)
 ------------------------------------------------------------
                             1991-92    1992-93    1993-94
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Direct investment              150        341        620
Portfolio investment:
 Indian issues abroad            -          86      1,460
 Foreign institutions            -          1      1,665
 Others                          8          5        365
TOTAL                          158        433      4,110
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Reserve Bank of India
 ------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941108

