FT943-13330

FT  20 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Misleading view of tax effects


   From Mr DOUGLAS MCWILLIAMS


Sir, I have no quarrel with most of Howard Davies's helpful summary of the
economic situation (Personal View, July 19), though he may be a touch
sanguine about investment prospects. The tide of inward investment has ebbed
and while construction activity in major projects like the Channel Tunnel
and Docklands has slowed down, the next round of equivalent projects is as
yet still on the drawing board.
But his assertion that personal tax increases have 'had so little effect so
far' is misleading. His argument seems to be that the economy is growing and
taxes have risen, ergo tax increases are having little impact. I suspect
that his former tutor in logic would have reminded him that the right way to
measure whether the tax increases are having an effect is to compare what is
happening with what might have happened had there been no tax increases.
Constructing the counter-factual hypothesis is, of course, complicated. But
the average rate of real gross domestic product growth in the second
calendar years of previous UK recoveries (1954, 1960, 1964, 1968, 1973, 1977
and 1983) has been 4.8 per cent. Growth usually picks up considerable
momentum at this stage of the cycle. The Treasury's forecast for 1994 is 2
3/4 per cent - only half the normal cyclical growth. The only comparable
year in recent history with growth as low was 1977, another year when taxes
were raised, on that occasion as part of the International Monetary Fund
package.
The weakness in demand this year owes a certain amount to the state of the
property market but is also influenced by the tax rises. Moreover, as Howard
Davies points out, these tax rises have yet to bite fully. The suggestion
that taxes can be raised without harming the economy is seductive for those
who believe in high government spending. But it should not be allowed to
pass unchallenged by those who prefer to rely on checking the facts rather
than on wishful thinking.
These facts show that tax cuts in 1988 had a much bigger effect than
expected, that the introduction of the poll tax in 1990 was associated with
a sudden drop in consumers' spending which started the recession, and that
the tax increases this year are associated with much slower growth than
usual at this stage of the cycle. A future chancellor who ignores this
evidence when considering whether to cut or raise taxes does so at his
peril.
Douglas McWilliams,
chief executive,
Centre for Economics and
Business Research,
18 Kent Terrace,
London NW1 4RP

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940720

