FT944-14435

FT  22 OCT 94 / Food and Drink: End the mobile menace - Appetisers


   By NICHOLAS LANDER, GILES MACDONOGH and JILL JAMES


In the mail this week comes an impassioned, angry letter from a reader whose
meal at the Blueprint Cafe, London SE1, was ruined because neighbouring
diners made continuous use of mobile telephones.
Britain has the highest concentration of mobile phones in Europe with 20 per
1,000 people. Although some restaurants, particularly in hotels, have a sign
asking customers to leave phones with the receptionist, many do not and the
problem is likely to get worse.
A bottle of pink champagne is offered to the reader who proposes the best
solution to this restaurant nuisance. And another bottle for the best
one-liner with which to silence those who choose to use phones loudly and
over-zealously in public places.
PJ's Bar and Grill (52 Fulham Road, London, SW3, tel: 071-581 0025) is a
lively nightspot which took over the site of one of the dullest pubs on the
Fulham Road. It serves decent food and wines with the accent placed on the
new world.
PJ's latest venture has been to sell a range of cask-strength malt whiskies
by the glass. There are seven in all, of which the least impressive are two
vintages of Knockdhu, a Speyside malt which has gone over to bottling only
recently.
The other five, however, were very fine: a 1984 Bladnoch with all the
delicacy and elegance of a Lowland malt; a 1979 Benrinnes with an aroma of
toffee and hazelnuts; a fine 1973 Glenrothes which put me in mind of sponge
cake; and a 1975 Ardbeg which was all you would expect from this great Islay
 -all iodine and new leather.
The best of the lot was a 1965 Springbank from Campbeltown: the nose seemed
one-dimensional and too strongly marked by a sherry butt, but the palate was
wonderfully complex.
I love that mix of directness and scarcely-concealed irritation that French
chef Albert Roux manages to convey in the London newspaper, the Evening
Standard, in his column answering readers' queries about food.
It is the naff questions that make the column such a good read: 'Dear Albert
 -How can I make the definitive cooked English breakfast.'
Who, in England, needs to ask any Frenchman that?
Nevertheless, the Roux solutions to these cris de coeur are often charming
and funny: 'Dear Albert, I was as surprised as my husband was pleased when
he came back from the pub with two pheasants and an unskinned hare. These
dead animals are now cluttering up my kitchen. What do I do?'
Roux's answer: 'My love, bring them to Le Gavroche (his restaurant) at 3pm,
then go shopping, take a bath, make yourself even more beautiful and return
to Le Gavroche at 7.30pm, with your husband in tow, in time for pre-dinner
drinks.'
These questions and answers have now been compiled in a book, Cher Albert
(Pavilion, Pounds 9.99, 128 pages) and provide a very jolly read.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941022

