FT944-2792

FT  16 DEC 94 / SG Warburg and Morgan Stanley: Back to the drawing board -
What now for Morgan Stanley?


   By RICHARD WATERS


An opportunistic move to pick up a leading UK fund management company on the
cheap? Or part of a broader strategic move to outflank other US investment
banks on the international stage?
Whatever the real motivation behind Morgan Stanley's interest in SG Warburg,
the collapse of the proposed deal raises questions about its international
aspirations.
Morgan Stanley remains a relative minnow in asset management, though bigger
than Wall Street rivals such as Goldman Sachs or Salomon.
The bank has set a high priority on building this business further: in the
increasingly capital-intensive and volatile investment banking business it
remains a relatively stable source of fee income, says Mr Richard Fisher,
chairman.
Morgan Stanley executives yesterday ruled out buying another UK merchant
bank - but, notably, did not rule out buying another asset management firm
outside the US.
Meanwhile, in the broader business of investment banking - raising capital
for companies and others, distributing and trading securities and advising
on mergers and acquisitions - Morgan already has highly developed
international operations. Two out of five employees are based overseas, with
700 in Tokyo, 400 in Hong Kong and nearly 2,000 in London.
Gaps remain: in equities research in Asia, for instance, or in its
relationships with UK companies and equities distribution in Europe. Morgan
executives say these weaknesses can be met by growing its existing business,
rather than buying a competitor.
Revenues from outside the US, largely from trading and corporate advisory
work, are already stronger than most other US investment banks.
In 1993, thanks to a good year in Europe's bond markets, Morgan Stanley made
pre-tax income of Dollars 720m (Pounds 439m) in the region - 60 per cent of
its worldwide income, and far more than the Pounds 179m reported by Warburg.
'The profitability of our operations outside the US, as measured either by
return on capital, or profit per professional, has been at least as big as
in the US,' says Mr Phil Duff, Morgan's chief financial officer.
The US and European bond markets have been volatile this year. But Mr Fisher
says: 'We have made the decision to fund the growth through this difficult
period.' Staff growth outside the US bears this out this year: numbers have
grown by 15 per cent, at a time when US investment banks generally have been
shrinking.
If, however, financial markets remain weak for long, then those investments
seem certain to be scaled back.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941216

