FT942-16138

FT  12 APR 94 / The prisoner's dilemma


   By JOE ROGALY


The best that can be expected from South Africa this year is the emergence
of a government strong enough to restore order and wise enough to lay the
foundations of a liberal economy. The worst is chaos, civil war, a botched
social revolution, the end of any chance that sub-Saharan Africa's
rehabilitation might be led from its southern tip.
The first of this pair of anticipations is philosophically improper. It says
nothing of democracy, or human rights, or cutting a deal with Inkatha. It
implies the emergence of an over-mighty government such as that of Malaysia
or Singapore. It suggests autocracy; a controlled, censored, or obedient
media; an absence of those civic freedoms in which the north Atlantic
countries luxuriate; an ominous willingness to deploy the security forces
wherever necessary.
Is that really the best that years of struggle against apartheid is destined
to achieve? Probably. This foreboding is expressed without relish. Nobody,
least of all those of us privileged to enjoy something better, should wish
such a fate on post-apartheid South Africa. The world's hope for the
republic, the goal to which its friends should assist it to strive, must be
that a peaceful, open, democratic polity emerges as the 'new South Africa'.
Many intelligent, decent South Africans clearly harbour such a vision. Pray
that they are right. It is, however impossible to maintain the fiction that
such a fairy-tale ending is imminent.
For a start, the received wisdom among those close to the affairs of the
republic has been that the appalling bloodshed, the killings of supporters
of one party by another, can only be stopped by a 'crackdown'. This
proposition has been argued with increasing confidence over the past year.
The mailed fist will be visible before the government due to be elected at
the end of this month has tidied up the crumbs left behind after the
celebration banquets. There will be no doubt about what to do. South Africa
has had years of practice at 'crackdowns', in which states of emergency are
declared, 'troublemakers' are arrested and detained, and the press is
censored. The first step, the declaration of an emergency, has already been
taken in kwaZulu.
A long-unanswered question has been whether the white-led security forces
would take orders from a black-led administration. The signs are mixed, but
encouraging for those who believe in civilian control of armed forces. It is
not clear that the white-officered South African police (the rank and file
is mostly black) are reconciled to the change of government. They do,
however, know where their pay comes from. Most of them are expected to obey
their new political masters. The SA Defence Force has shown that it will
take orders from the mouth of Mr FW de Klerk, even when the president of the
African National Congress, Mr Nelson Mandela, is visibly pulling the
strings. Thus were lesser tribal homelands such as Bophutatswana and Ciskei
brought into line. So, if need be, will kwaZulu be tackled.
This time the order will be given by Mr Mandela, as the new president. When
I was growing up in Johannesburg the ANC was the embodiment of non-racial,
liberal, democratic virtue. The South African Communist party, its close
ally, was the only white-led political organisation that could be wholly
relied upon to support black aspirations. Others in the 'congress movement'
represented Indians and mixed-race 'coloureds'. Liberation from apartheid
was the goal that united all such groupings. If you be-lieved that that was
an overriding necessity, your support for them was un-wavering.
It is different today. I share the global admiration for Mr Mandela. The
Nobel prize for peace sits comfortably upon his distinguished shoulders. It
does, however, look as if he may be destined to crown his lifetime's
achievement, the overthrow of apartheid, by slamming political opponents
into the very jails from which he and other ANC leaders were so recently
released. Since politics and murder are intertwined in parts of South
Africa, he may be said to have little option. That does not detract from the
bitter irony of what fate appears to have in store for him.
South Africa cannot afford a provincial war, as in Katanga, Biafra or
Angola. The ANC might try harder for a political settlement with Chief
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, chief minister of kwaZulu, but it may be that the
trick is not possible. Mediation will only succeed if both sides are ready
to agree. But Chief Buthelezi, the darling of the dewy-eyed anti-communist
right, is not a man anyone can easily do business with. The ANC clearly
seeks centralised power over all the territory of the republic. The ANC
assumption must be that the army, the most powerful in Africa, could quell a
rebellion on its home ground. The elephant, as Mr Mandela has taken to
calling his party, is in rampant mood.
It would be comforting to stand aside from these hard realities and cry out
for justice. The truth is that no clear road to a just settlement exists.
South Africa will fail absolutely if there is no economic growth. The
economy cannot prosper if there is chaos. The imposition of order by the ANC
is thus likely to be a painful prerequisite for a resumption of inward
investment, and a resurgence of the economy. Even that would not suffice.
Only the free market, the proven stimulator of capitalist energy, can ensure
that growth is sufficiently rapid to enable the ANC to keep its election
promises.
Outsiders can read recent ANC statements to mean that South Africa's new
masters have begun to understand this. Mr de Klerk's National party formerly
prospered by creating state-financed jobs for Afrikaners. Now it appears to
have become a late convert to the merits of private finance. The National
party may win as much as a fifth of the vote, perhaps even a quarter. That
is not enough to temper the demands of the ANC. It might be sufficient to be
useful if Mr Mandela perceives the value of familiar faces in important
economic posts. A post-election alliance with Mr de Klerk could produce two
Nobel peace prize winners' signatures at the foot of orders to the security
forces to 'pacify' troublespots. Together the old jailer and his old
prisoner might avert the disintegration of their country. They might also
reassure potential investors, if Africa's luck turns.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940412

