FT943-12702

FT  23 JUL 94 / Man in the news: Lara's lucrative theme


   By NORMA COHEN and WILLIAM LEWIS


Brian Lara, the phenomenon from Trinidad, broke another world record last
week, landing the largest individual corporate sponsorship contract ever
awarded to a cricketer.
Mercury Asset Management, the UK's largest fund manager, has signed Lara to
a two and a half year contract for Pounds 100,000. Its value could rise to
Pounds 500,000 depending upon his performance on the cricket field. MAM has
also informally agreed to make contributions to mostly Trinidadian charities
in Lara's name.
This deal is unique in a sport in which the average England county cricketer
earns Pounds 20,000 a year or less. Nick Leigh, a director of
Birmingham-based Kennedy Street Enterprises, the agent for Ian Botham and
Viv Richards, says it is worth paying Lara such sums because of the crowds
he attracts. 'You go to your average county cricket game and it's just one
man and his dog,' he says, adding that the attendance is perhaps 1,800.
Denis Amiss, chief executive of Warwickshire, Lara's club, says gate
receipts from crucial home matches are likely at least to double this year
to Pounds 100,000. He says Lara's arrival added 900 members to the club, to
take the total to 8,400.
The conversion of Brian Charles Lara, cricket sensation, into Brian Lara,
earnings sensation, occurred over several years, according to his agent, Mr
Jonathan Barnett, director of Stellar Promotions.
Lara is the youngest of 11 children of a close-knit family from the village
of Cantar, Trinidad. Barnett says Lara got his first cricket bat at the age
of six from an older sister who had spotted an advertisement in a local
newspaper for the Harvard Clinic, where children were taught cricket.
Barnett first met Lara, then 22, during the West Indies tour of England in
the summer of 1991. He was a junior player who never got on to the field,
but even so, West Indian batsman Viv Richard hailed him as the next
sensation from the Caribbean.
Barnett, who used to run the sports promotion division of the failed Levitt
Group, was asked by Richards' then agent, David Cobb, to take Lara on as a
client. Richards' own agent was leaving the business and could not do it
himself. 'I went to see him up at Worcester,' Barnett said. 'Viv introduced
me to Brian Lara and said, 'This guy is going to be a star.' '
Sponsorship came early. Since he was a teenage batting sensation in
Trinidad, Angostura Bitters has been a backer, putting Lara on the payroll
as a public relations consultant. Smaller local firms have paid for coaching
sessions and equipment. 'The ones who sponsored him early we have kept on,'
Barnett said. 'And we haven't raised the rates.'
The first sponsorship deal arranged by Barnett was a Dollars 10,000-a-year
contract with Oakley, the US-based sunglass manufacturer, which also signed
similar contracts with two other Pakistani cricketers, both clients of
Barnett. Although Barnett was unsuccessful in negotiating a sponsorship
arrangement for Lara with BWIA, the West Indian airline, Lara was given the
equivalent of Pounds 40,000 worth of free air miles for himself and his
mother, Pearl.
When Shami Ahmed, chief executive of Joe Bloggs sportswear, saw Lara step
off an aircraft after his triumphant West Indies tour in April, wearing a
Joe Bloggs shirt, he approached Barnett about a deal. Lara wears the
company's jeans and T-shirts exclusively whenever he wears casual clothing,
and the company is marketing a line of shirts and trousers to capitalise on
his batting score.
It was Barnett who initiated the deal with MAM. David Manasseh, Barnett's
partner, said he spotted MAM's use of vivid sports imagery in the company's
first-ever print advertising campaign and asked whether it would like a real
sports superstar to promote its image. The answer was a resounding yes.
But despite the higher profile that Lara has brought to the game and to his
sponsors, questions are being raised by sports commentators and other
cricketers about the effect of the sponsorship contracts on his talent. He
has been criticised in the press for taking out a mobile phone on the field,
with commentators pointing out that one sponsor is a mobile phone company.
Such actions have not endeared him to his team-mates, and threaten to
undermine the widespread public admiration for a man who, off the field, is
widely described as modest, gracious and warm.
Ted Dexter, former England team captain and former head of the England Test
Match Selectors, says: 'Yes, there is such a thing as too much sponsorship.
The fact is you can't just turn playing concentration on and off.'
However, he says, Lara will have to learn how to juggle his interests, just
like other leading sports figures such as Botham and David Gower. Dexter,
who now heads a sports sponsorship firm bearing his name, is sympathetic.
'Lara just wants financial security like the rest of us,' he says.
Barnett dismisses the carping as 'jealousy and navete', and says that all
Lara's sponsorship activities should not take up more than 14 days a year in
total.
He argues that cricketers generally suffer from a kind of collective public
view - fostered by sportswriters - that it is unseemly for them to earn
large sums. He points out that the cricket players' union, the Cricketers'
Association, is funded by the Test and County Cricket Board, the owners'
association, a relationship which limits the players' ability to campaign
aggressively for better pay and conditions.
But if Lara continues to break world records, public sentiment is likely to
endorse every penny he earns. In April, he broke the world record for the
highest score in a Test innings when, playing for the West Indies, he made
375 against England. In June, he hit a world record for a first-class
innings, 501 for Warwickshire, against Durham. He is the first cricketer to
hold both world records since Sir Donald Bradman, widely regarded as the
greatest batsman of all time.
Whatever deals Lara does, he has already made history.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940723

