FT943-952

FT  27 SEP 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Hard sell for enterprise
cells - A look at an innovative scheme that assembles teams ahead of a
business idea


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Early next month a new company will begin trading in Doncaster, South
Yorkshire. Unlike many start-ups, Magnatech is moderately well capitalised,
is not being run by one entrepreneur out of a garage, and will be able to
lean on an unusual amount of external advice and support - including the
services of a non-executive director.
What is also novel about Magnatech is that the four members of its
management team were brought together with no idea of what business they
would start. The company is one of about 40 experimental 'enterprise cells'
being set up by some Training and Enterprise Councils (Tecs) and their
Scottish equivalents, the Local Enterprise Councils, with the support of the
David Hall Partnership, a Rotherham-based consultancy involved in supporting
the government's business start-up scheme.
The aim is not only to try to increase the rate of manufacturing business
start-ups, particularly in areas where traditional manufacturing industry
has closed; it is also designed to increase the likelihood that enterprises
have a reasonable chance of becoming viable growing businesses. By
comparison, the government's business start-up scheme - which makes payments
to recipients of about Pounds 50 a week - has generally backed ventures that
have only helped unemployed people become self-employed.
'The enterprise cell process is more dynamic,' says Julie Readman, research
manager of Barnsley and Doncaster Tec, which is hoping to have helped six
cells set up by Christmas. 'The principle is we look for good ideas and try
to find people who can service this market instead of waiting for
entrepreneurs to come along.'
Magnatech will be importing and modifying a Swedish invention that has been
developed in the US. The equipment heats metals in a uniform manner by the
use of oscillating magnetic fields. Colin Wilson, Magnatech's marketing
director, says the technology produces less thermal stress in metals than
conventional induction heating and will find applications throughout
industry, including the aerospace and automotive industries.
While Magnatech, which raised Pounds 150,000 in capital, is probably the
largest enterprise cell, the basic approach is the same in each case.
'Most start-up schemes look for people with ideas to support and that is
generally not successful,' says Bill Bolton, a former Cambridge academic who
helped set up the St John's College Innovation Centre and is one of the
architects of enterprise cells. 'We create teams and put ideas around them.'
The process starts with the David Hall Partnership advertising for people
interested in starting their own businesses. From applicants, some
unemployed but many who are middle managers with jobs, David Hall conducts
psychometric tests to assemble balanced teams. Bolton says: 'I am not not
naive enough to believe you can get good teams that way, but you can avoid
disasters.'
The partners in the team then receive training, funded by the Tecs, in basic
business skills and are introduced to what Jeff Cooke, a David Hall director
and architect of the cell scheme, calls 'a data base of business ideas'. It
assembles these from a range of sources, including the import statistics
from the Customs and Excise (for possible import substitution opportunities)
and trade missions that hold lists of foreign companies interested in
alliances in the UK.
Having chosen and researched their market, the businesses then have to seek
backing. In the case of Magnatech, it raised start-up funding from its
founders, the loan guarantee scheme and a regional venture capital group.
David Hall then acts as hands-on consultants to the cells' partners for up
to two years.
The scheme is still at a very early stage. The first cell to be set up in
Scotland, a company making fasteners, had a turnover of only Pounds 40,000
in its first year, although it broke even. Its annualised sales rate after
three months this year could be Pounds 100,000, and it could start employing
extra people this year.
David Hall is also helping to set up cells as part of a European Union pilot
project in western Scotland that is looking at ways of regenerating the
economy.
The enterprise cells scheme is initially not cheap. Readman says Barnsley
and Doncaster Tec has allocated Pounds 200,000 to set up eight cells in its
area, including a contribution from Rechar, the EU fund that supports
regeneration in coalfield areas. But because the investment is in businesses
with potential to grow, Readman believes it may become a cost-effective way
to create jobs.
There are other concerns. What chance do Tecs and the research departments
of a consultancy have of finding business opportunities that existing
companies with capacity and marketing capability have not already looked at
and discarded? If there is imperfect information in the market, are Tecs and
consultants equipped to sniff new opportunities out? And will the enterprise
cell idea encourage people with limited knowledge of running a business to
try schemes that are not viable for them?
'We would not normally encourage people to go into a high volume market,'
says Cooke. 'We try to be careful we are not giving people false hope when
they will not be able to penetrate or service a market.' Supporters say it
is difficult to tell which ideas will succeed and that all ventures have to
pass the test of raising capital.
It is far too early to say whether the scheme will work. Cooke does not
expect to start thousands of businesses and accepts that much will depend on
the quality of ideas it can put forward. There will also be no way of
knowing whether those businesses that do start would have launched anyway
had taxpayers' money not been used to entice them into areas in need of
regeneration.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940927

