FT942-12670

FT  28 APR 94 / UK Company News: City sets sights on a less exciting future
 -Andrew Baxter examines the three-year plan which will give Babcock a new
look


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Nick Salmon had a special reason to feel relieved last week when Babcock
International announced a three-year plan which will give a new look to the
engineering contracting and materials handling group.
Mr Salmon, Babcock's managing director, had spent the last few days before
Thursday's announcement on a punishing schedule of 37 meetings with
institutions. Enthusiastic though he is for the plan, he was clearly looking
forward to running through the presentation for the last time.
Winning the City's approval is crucial, however, for a plan which hinges on
a larger than expected Pounds 78.6m rights issue, and a restructuring of the
company's energy division that - along with the division's losses - will
produce an estimated group pre-tax loss of Pounds 41.2m in the year ended
March 31.
Mr Salmon and Mr John Parker, chief executive, joined Babcock on October 4
and have been preparing the new strategy since then. They knew the City was
looking for a sign that the financial shocks and management upheaval of the
past year would not be repeated.
Also, they knew that the City believed Babcock did not have enough capital
to cope with the risks involved in sizeable contracts such as its Pounds
400m-plus flue gas desulphurisation contract at National Power's Drax power
station in North Yorkshire.
Analysts worried that, in an era where 'performance bonds' on substantial
contracts are the norm and advanced payments are not, Babcock was too
exposed to risk.
A sizeable rights issue seemed inevitable once the new team was fully
installed, but it is now clear that Mr Parker and Mr Salmon shared the
City's worries. Not only are they moving Babcock away from the kind of large
contracts which could individually break the company, but they are also
providing a platform for growth in the businesses that hitherto have been
overshadowed by Drax and other mishaps.
The vision of a less exciting future for Babcock, building bulk handling
installations, hydrochloric acid plants and sticking to medium-sized power
plant contracts up to about Pounds 150m - unless it is sharing the risk with
others - seems to be what the City is looking for.
'They have made it quite clear they will not be bidding for Pounds 450m
contracts a la Drax,' says Mr Jonathan Getz of Robert Fleming Securities. On
top of that, he says, pro forma shareholders' funds of Pounds 125m after the
rights issue does give Babcock sufficient capital to go forward with its new
strategy.
Mr Parker and Mr Salmon have clearly left no stone unturned in the past six
months. 'It's been pretty hectic, that's for sure, for us and for the
divisions' says Mr Parker.
With the help of the LEK Partnership, management consultants, the five
divisions were benchmarked against competitors and market prospects studied.
Divisional management has been strengthened, and all contracts and claims
risks that might undermine the recovery of future profits have been
assessed.
'We've said to managers, 'Don't surprise us,' says Mr Parker. 'If there is a
problem, get it out in the open.'
Now, with the problem-strewn energy division to be restructured and overall
risks reduced, the question is how much money Babcock can make from its new
strategy.
The remaining four divisions are profitable and cash generative, and Mr Erik
Porter, finance director, points out that materials handling, process,
facilities management and Africa have consistently produced a 'hard core' of
Pounds 20m-Pounds 30m a year in pre-tax profits. But growth prospects in
these divisions look to be more solid than spectacular.
According to the estimated results for fiscal 1994 the biggest profits
contribution - up from Pounds 6.8m to Pounds 10.6m - came from the
facilities management division, which is based around the Rosyth Royal
Dockyard in Scotland.
Babcock Thorn's contract for the management of the dockyard expires in April
1996 at the latest, and Babcock is talking to Thorn EMI about acquiring its
35 per cent stake in the joint company to maximise its options in pursuing
the privatisation of Rosyth.
Babcock says the division is well placed for either a contract extension or
a purchase of the yards. But given the uncertainty over how the Royal
Dockyards will be privatised, the group is probably wisely putting most
emphasis on developing its materials handling and process divisions.
Profits in materials handling fell to Pounds 7.4m (Pounds 12.1m) in fiscal
1994, due to reorganisation costs and lower than expected orders in the
first half.
But worldwide reorganisation, along with recent acquisitions, has
transformed 16 national product-based companies into 10 broadly-based
regional companies and orders have picked up strongly, reaching a record
Pounds 153m for the year.
Babcock wants to expand the division significantly, both organically and
through complementary acquisitions, to complete the transition to a
multinational supplier of material handling systems for cement, energy,
steel, pulp and paper and marine terminal markets.
In the process division, a leading supplier of process plant to the oil, gas
and petrochemical industries, profits jumped from Pounds 2.8m to Pounds 4.4m
last year, and the year-end order books jumped from Pounds 75m to more than
Pounds 120m.
Babcock now wants to build on the success achieved by the 1992 acquisition
of King Wilkinson through developing its strong relationships with customers
in the Middle East and Asia, continuing to develop new product areas such as
pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals, and making modest acquisitions or joint
ventures to expand the technology base.
Mr Getz believes that, if Babcock can fulfil the potential of its three-year
plan, turnover in fiscal 1997 could reach Pounds 950m, compared with Pounds
748m in fiscal 1993. Pre-tax profits could be 'something north of Pounds
45m' by fiscal 1997, he says.
That compares with profits of Pounds 21.3m in fiscal 1993, which included a
Pounds 13m provision for reorganisation. But, he says, there must be no more
'funnies' - provisions and other financial shocks. 'We just want turnover
and profits before tax - let's keep it simple.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940428

