FT942-15945

FT  13 APR 94 / Receivers audited failed company's subsidiary


   By ANDREW JACK


Grant Thornton, the accountancy firm from which partners are acting as
receivers to Lancer Boss, the fork lift-truck manufacturer, is also auditor
to one of the group's subsidiaries.
The appointment could be perceived as giving rise to a conflict of interest,
although the firm said it had received its professional body's blessing for
the action.
Mr Allan Griffiths and Mr Scott Barnes of Grant Thornton were appointed last
Friday as administrative receivers to Lancer Boss Group, the UK holding
company, after insolvency procedures were triggered by the withdrawal of
banking facilities to Steinbock Boss, its German subsidiary.
Accounts lodged with Companies House show that Grant Thornton is auditor to
Toddington Manor Farms, whose ultimate parent company is Lancer Boss Group.
Mr Griffiths said yesterday that the audit appointment had been discovered
'at the last minute'. To have appointed another firm would have meant delay.
Anticipating that the conflict 'might blow up' as a result of the
appointment, he had cleared it with the Institute of Chartered Accountants
in England and Wales. He said he was happy, adding that the subsidiary's
turnover of Pounds 200,000 was minor compared to the whole group.
Speaking about the principle of a receiver acting on a group when the firm
audits a subsidiary, Mr Jack Maurice, head of the professional ethics
department at the institute, said: 'It potentially raises an issue which a
firm could be asked to justify.' Professional insolvency ethical guidelines
state there may be - or may appear to be - a conflict of interest for a
receiver if there is already a 'material professional relationship' with the
client.
A material relationship includes existing audit work for the client company
during the past three years, or the audit by the firm of entities controlled
by the client.
According to the accounts, Grant Thornton's Bedford office charged Pounds
2,000 for the audit of the business, which made a loss of Pounds 25,000 in
the year to March 31 1992 on a turnover of Pounds 210,000.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940413

