FT943-13057

FT  21 JUL 94 / West 'leads regions in financial services'


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM, Wales and West Correspondent


Bristol and the west of England has a larger financial-services industry
than any other UK regional centre, Coopers & Lybrand, the accountancy firm,
said yesterday.
In a survey it estimates that the industry in the region employs 75,000
people, not including support services such as lawyers and accountants. This
compares with recent estimates of 35,000 to 40,000 people for the other main
regional centres based on Birmingham, Edinburgh, Leeds and Manchester.
It also says the findings contrast with a City perception, confirmed by a
telephone survey of 12 financial-services organisations in London, that the
Bristol and the west region ranked only fifth.
'The west of England is demonstrably the largest and most influential
financial base in the UK outside London,' the report says.
The report, Financial Services in the West, was prepared for the Western
Development Partnership, a regeneration agency. It says 55,000 of those
employed by the industry in the region are based in the immediate Bristol
area. The rest are in the surrounding counties of Avon, Gloucestershire,
Wiltshire and Somerset. The insurance industry is the leading employer,
accounting for 51 per cent of the workforce.
Coopers & Lybrand's survey covered 90 organisations, including all of the
region's top 20 companies in the sector.
The report states: 'The survey dispelled the popular image of modern
financial services, where the workforce is commonly believed to constitute
far more female than male staff and where part-time labour is the norm.'
In the west, male staff constitute 45 per cent of the workforce and there
were nine full-time workers for every one part-time. The report also says
respondents took a very bullish view of employment prospects for their own
businesses.
Financial Services in the West. Western Development Partnership, 100
Victoria, Victoria Street, Bristol BS1 6HZ. Pounds 20.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940721

