FT944-2981

FT  15 DEC 94 / Letters to the Editor: Monetary framework needs more clarity


   From Mr MALCOLM BRUCE MP


Sir, I very much welcome the call in your leader article (December 13) for a
new target range for UK inflation. Indeed I made a similar proposal in our
party's alternative Budget two weeks ago, suggesting that the inflation
target be reduced to 0-3 per cent.
The present inflation target is something of a muddle, with a target rage of
1-2.5 per cent within a broader target of 1-4 per cent. There is now a need
to reinforce the credibility of the monetary framework by making the
inflation target clearer and singular, and by addressing some of the other
defects which you identify. This includes the narrowness of the 1-2.5 per
cent range, which is in practical and operational terms far too restrictive.
Additionally, there is no explicit target beyond 1997, though the Bank of
England is apparently working on an assumption of 0-2 per cent. This is a
significant weakness given that monetary policy works with long lags, so
that it is vital to know well in advance where one is steering for. As you
note, it is also particularly important to make the inflation targets clear
beyond 1997, as this will cover the post-election period, possibly with a
non-Conservative government in office. This would be absolutely the wrong
time to have any confusion about the nature of the UK's commitment to low
inflation.
I believe that the introduction of inflation targets has been a promising
evolution in UK monetary policy. There is now a need, however, to make the
monetary framework clearer and less open to future abuse and confusion.
This should serve, as you suggest, to build a cross-party consensus around
low inflation, which could not only reduce the price of long-term British
government borrowing, but could lock the UK into permanently low levels of
inflation.
Malcolm Bruce,
Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesman,
House of Commons,
London SW1A 0AA

The Financial Times


London Page 24

941215

