FT942-15630

FT  14 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Advertisers see need for additional
TV channel


   From Mr KENNETH MILES


Sir, In the Broadcasting Act the government made it clear that a fifth TV
channel (and possibly a sixth), financed by advertising and sponsorship,
would be high on the agenda. Channel 5 will provide a 25 per cent increase
in terrestrial channel choice for all UK viewers, and added opportunity for
broadcasters, programme makers and advertisers.
Naturally, all issues have a number of different sides, and the letter from
Mr Richard Norman (April 8) quite clearly stated his interest - that of the
manufacturers of TV sets. He argued that the case for Channel 5 had now been
overtaken by technology, suggesting that digital technology 'offers the
prospect of extra channels within three to five years'.
However, there is another important side, and this is the case that I would
like to put. Advertisers throughout industry need an additional commercial
channel, particularly in the light of all the mergers and takeovers now
proceeding in ITV. We need Channel 5 without delay and the mere prospect of
something else within three or five years is simply not a good enough
argument to stand in its way. Viewers, too, need this additional viewing
opportunity - only a small minority of homes currently chooses to pay for
satellite or cable and, even by the year 2000, it will still be a minority -
a larger one, perhaps, but still a minority.
Consequently, my association believes strongly that the case for Channel 5
is still very powerful and we urge the government and all concerned to allow
this new opportunity, promised in the act, to proceed without delay. We
believe in competition, and we know that they will want competition too. The
technological opportunities will not disappear, but there is no reason why
they should be given first priority over a new terrestrial channel in the
immediate future.
Kenneth Miles,
director general,
Incorporated Society of
British Advertisers,
44 Hertford Street, London W1

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940414

