FT944-14415

FT  22 OCT 94 / How to sweat off the excesses of life: A look at the rigours
of 'the cure' in the Allgau


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


It is four in the morning and there is a strange woman in my hotel room. I
can make out only a pair of brawny shoulders framed against the light from
the corridor. 'Halli-Halloo]' she says, and whips off my duvet. 'Get up.
Undress and drink this.'
Nettle tea is a noxious brew at the best of times. And this is not the best
of times. Naked, dangling the teabag to protect my modesty, I sip queasily
while the night visitor deconstructs my bed.
'Lie down]' I edge forward into the light, and stretch out prone. The nerve
ends in my backside tell me I am lying in a puddle of lukewarm tripe.
Receptors on my front-side twitch in anticipation. Then, splash] My knees
jerk defensively upwards as I take a direct hit amidships from a cold, wet
sheet.
Within seconds the icy wrapping stretches from my breastbone to my big toes.
Now comes a layer of gelatinous hot water containers, strewn the length of
my quaking torso. I am rolled and wrapped in blankets and feather-beds.
'Footsies up. Armies so.' Loose ends are stuffed. Corners tucked. 'Good]'
Breathing heavily, she is suddenly gone; and I am immobilised in the
darkness, scarcely breathing at all.
A 100kg roly-poly meat pudding, I lie still as death, only my nose showing.
Then, unexpectedly, I am marinating in my own juices. The combination of wet
linen, hot water bottles fore and aft, and heavy external lagging central to
the implementation of the notorious Schrothkur is going to work, putting my
sweat glands through their paces.
In spite of - or maybe because of - years of overdosing on stress and
undesirable substances such as cigarettes and German sausages, I have
cajoled myself into believing that it might be possible to restore some of
the more desirable bodily functions impaired by 30 years as a journalist.
Accordingly, I have come to the sub-Alpine village of Steibis in the Allgau
to regain the ability to breathe, eat and sleep properly. The rest can wait.
Deep in cure-and-cowbell country, close to where the Bavarian, Schwabian,
Austrian and Swiss borders mingle on the shores of Lake Constance, I have
suspended my disbelief in natural remedies and thrown away my cigarettes.
Although the Schrothkur appeals mainly to slimmers, and I am told my 1.85m
frame is not over-burdened by the 99.6kg weight registered on my arrival, I
have decided that while XL T-shirts are fashionable, XL waistbands are for
fatties. At the same time I have convinced myself that if I can survive a
week of early-morning 'packing' and subsist on a diet entirely free of
fripperies such as protein, salt and fat, then I can certainly do without my
Dunhill Superior Milds.
It is only day one, but from within my tightening cocoon, the outlook does
not seem promising.
It is now six in the morning and I am sorry I bothered to unpack my suitcase
last night. Terminal claustrophobia is setting in, and there is an
irritating whiff of old cooking under my itching nose.
Only now, as the enveloping angel returns to unpack my puckered body and
allow me to drift back into sleep, do I realise that my own damp hide is the
source of the kitchen aroma. The promised Entschlackung (slag removal when
used for boilers and purification in bodily references) seems to be under
way. Detoxification and breakfast beckon. But first, I need a snooze.
It is now 9.30 in the breakfast room in Burtscher's Hotel. After straying
into a section where real people are eating real food, I have been
forcefully corralled where I belong, among the sad-sacks and the
gastronomically-deprived.
There, under my nose, sits a dish of weapons-grade muesli. I murmur that
humans need at least two stomachs, ruminant-fashion, if they are to extract
any nourishment from this gritty slurry of coarse-chopped raw grain.
But Frau Wunderlich, some 20 years my senior and 20 times as fit, has been
coming for years and knows better. She even thinks a big strong chap such as
Herr Parkes should have a bigger portion than the one she has just enjoyed.
She is wrong, thank God. The waitress, plump as a Weisswurst, shakes her
head and her Bavarian bustle. Everything is as it should be: small in volume
and lacking in flavour. As the Schrothkur litany says, seasoning arouses
appetites, and you do not need an appetite when you are not supposed to be
eating.
So it continues: lunch, then dinner and back to the breakfast grindstone.
The worst is a dish of sauerkraut soup. Far from being a junipery-peppery
brew covered with globules of floating fat and speckled with chunks of Speck
and sausage, it resembles nothing so much as a pair of undershorts boiled to
destruction in Persil Power.
But meal times are not without their high spots. I still recall triumphantly
counting 17 pumpkin seeds on my plate of lettuce, beet and cabbage salad one
evening.
By day two, bets are being wagered that the solitary Englander is not going
to make it, least of all with the cigarettes. Most have heard he is only
there for a week, when everyone knows three weeks is the minimum necessary.
They have also heard his descriptions of the preparation and consumption of
Irish stew and ceps a la Bordelaise. They have seen him sitting close to
smokers, inhaling deeply.
But what they do not know is that his modest expectations of this adventure
are being more than fulfilled. He is sleeping like a baby. He is enjoying
the morning physical jerks, even though most of the exercises are aimed at
perking up breasts rather than building washboard abdominal muscles.
He is enjoying the companiableness of it all and the pleasures of his
comfortable room. He is astounded by the limitless views afforded from the
nearby peaks and facilitated by relentlessly clear weather. It is
mid-October, and he is sunbathing and swimming outside, soothed by the
clonking of the cowbells.
The smell of old cooking has evaporated from his room and by Wednesday he
has ceased to feel hungry. The sauna and plunge bath are no longer torture.
They are necessary punctuation points in the day's rituals. After a rigorous
afternoon ramble, a three-course sauna session sets him up to face his
one-course supper and an evening's socialising in the bar.
Yes, in the bar.
This is the do-you-good cure where the pain can be eased with analgesic
booze. The drinks are limited to Wacholderschnapps, a diuretic derivative of
lamp-oil and juniper berries, and Steiner white wine, a tongue-peeler
reportedly related to the Riesling grape. But no one seems to care. Even on
the so-called 'dry' days, interspersed between 'little-drink' and
'big-drink' days, Schrothkur sufferers are entitled to two schnapps.
But the one to wait for is Thursday, when it is dance-night and big-drinks
on the house. Anticipatory tensions are building up as early as Tuesday,
when Georg, an outsize hotelier on a busman's holiday is eager to explain.
Cure clients, he says, slugging back his fifth vodka and grapefruit juice,
are easily switched into sexual overdrive. All it takes is a blend of
nil-food, fresh air, Steiner Riesling and a 1970s crooner, preferably the
late Roy Black, singing 'Ganz in weiss'.
Having sat in the sauna with most of our middle-and-more-aged fellow guests
or watched them wrestling with their wobbly bits on the gymnasium floor, I
am not much convinced.
But my other neighbour, Ferdi, is positively slavering. He is a
buckshot-for-brains huntsman. He knows where the chamois graze on the
mountains outside. He can guess the weight and friskiness of a woman from
100m, and checks his estimates using the Bavarian cowherd's method of a
whack on the rump.
But come the fateful soiree, and some of the more excitable gentlemen in the
company are clearly up to their scuppers in Steiner before the ancient DJ is
through his first session. More knees-up than leg-over, big-drinks Thursday
is a noisy, rather than a naughty, affair and signals the start of the
transition from asceticism to more normal existence.
On Friday, those about to depart are allowed a 'build-up' dinner of a trout,
unseasoned, cooked in foil. By Saturday night this departee is down the road
to nearby Oberstaufen in the Enzianhutte restaurant. Starting with a roe
deer fillet with Steinpilzen (boletus edulis), red cabbage, fried gnocchi, a
bottle of 1989 claret, he is chewing his way deliberately towards the
holy-of-holies: dessert
It is 11am on my last day. I have enjoyed my 'build-up' breakfast (but not
as much as last night's afters: pear bread overlaid with gorgonzola and
dribbled with honey). I have taken my last swim and paused to weigh myself
by the pool: 93.3kg wringing wet. That is a good 6kg lost in a week, and I
have not had a cigarette for eight days.
I am still smiling smugly as I step out of the hotel, blinded by the
dazzling autumn sunshine, and almost colliding with an indistinct figure
striding urgently past. 'Halli-Halloo,' she says. I turn, but she has gone
again.
Christopher Parkes stayed at his own expense in Burtscher's Kur und
Sporthotel, 8974 Oberstaufen-Steibis, Germany.
For reservations and details, ring 08386-8910, fax 891317.
Some of the names have been changed to protect the innocent (and the
guilty).

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

941022

