FT942-15611

FT  14 APR 94 / Lasmo rights to cut debt and fund new fields


   By TIM BURT


Lasmo, the loss-making oil exploration and production company, yesterday
announced a Pounds 219m rights issue to reduce its Pounds 794m debt and fund
low-cost oil and gas fields.
The company, regarded as the most vulnerable in the exploration and
production sector to low oil prices, said the proceeds would cut gearing
from 75 to 30 per cent and enable it to develop fields in Liverpool Bay, the
North Sea and Pakistan.
Mr Joe Darby, chief executive, predicted that exploration funded by the
issue - on a 2-for-7 basis at 105p a share - would help lift oil and gas
production by 25 per cent to 210,000 barrels a day by the late 1990s.
Although Lasmo had strong operating cashflow, he said its cost base rendered
it unprofitable at current oil prices. Prices of Dollars 13-Dollars 14 a
barrel last year led to losses attributable to shareholders, before
exceptional charges, of Pounds 59m.
Although the company has sold assets worth more than Pounds 1bn in the past
two years, Mr Darby said further large disposals were unlikely. Instead, he
signalled a strategy dominated by cost-cutting and restructuring. Such moves
have already seen an 18 per cent cut in unit operating costs to Pounds 4.10
a barrel and a 20 per cent cut in staff to 327.
The change of emphasis follows a boardroom clear-out at Lasmo, which began
last February with the removal of Mr Chris Greentree as chief executive. Mr
Michael Pavia, finance director, resigned late last year and Lord Rees,
non-executive chairman, is due to stand down next month.
'We're no longer driven by volume and production but by the need to improve
our financial performance,' Mr Darby said. His stance was echoed by Mr
Norman Davidson Kelly, director for corporate development, who added: 'We
had a structure of management which was inadequate in a low oil price
environment.'
They were speaking before flying to New York last night to brief US
institutions, which are expected to take up to 25 per cent of the rights
issue. The share offer is underwritten by Schroders and investors have until
May 6 to register acceptances.
Lasmo's shares fell 1p to 128p yesterday.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940414

