FT942-14910

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (7): Novel distribution methods - Shares
soar for Integrated Processors and Communications


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


At the entrance to IPC's blockhouse-like headquarters on a suburban
industrial estate stands a scarlet Ferrari Testarossa, owned by Mr Patrick
Ngiam, the company's chairman. It is, he says, his one extravagance in an
otherwise punishing regimen which keeps him working from 6am until 10pm,
five days a week.
If it were only a matter of money, Mr Ngiam could buy a boat-load of
Ferraris and still have plenty left over. Since IPC went public last year,
its shares have soared on the Singapore stock exchange, where it is
capitalised at about SDollars 1.8bn. Three quarters of the equity belongs to
Mr Ngiam and close relatives.
Investors' rapturous enthusiasm partly reflects the fact that Mr Ngiam, 39,
is one of a rare breed - a home-grown high-tech entrepreneur who thinks big
and, on his record to date, knows how to deliver.
Mr Ngiam, a Thai by birth who went to school in Singapore, of which he later
became a citizen, formed IPC three years ago with his brother Benjamin after
selling a printed circuit board manufacturer which he had set up 10 years
earlier.
Two other brothers and a sister have since joined IPC, as has Mr Ngiam's
wife, whom he met while they were both students at Essex University in
Britain.
The company - the initials stand for Integrated Processors and
Communications - began life making personal computers. Its range has since
expanded to include laptops, multi-media systems and electronic
point-of-sale terminals, and it will launch a notebook computer this summer.
Last year, it earned pre-tax profits of SDollars 41m on sales of SDollars
274m.
Mr Ngiam insists that IPC is not really a personal computer manufacturer,
but first and foremost a marketing-driven company which has thrived by
pioneering novel distribution methods and emphasising customer service.
'Technology is just a means, not an end,' he says.
Surprisingly, IPC launched its first products in Europe. 'The great thing is
that Europe is a big market, but because it's divided, you can develop at
your own pace,' says Mr Ngiam. 'In the US, it's taken for granted that you
will address the whole market at once. But that is very costly.'
Stranger still, the company made its debut in France, not usually considered
an easy market. Mr Ngiam said it was chosen because Bull, the country's
ailing state-owned computer group, offered such a soft target and because
IPC was the first company to sell personal computers there by mail order. By
last year, it had won 6 per cent of the French market.
It now sells in about 20 countries in Europe, Asia and the US, where it
acquired Austen, a distributor and manufacturer, last year. It plans soon to
establish a European plant, probably in Britain or Ireland, and possibly a
research centre as well.
The exact location will depend on the regional aid packages on offer.
After its dazzling start, IPC's biggest challenge now is to show it has
staying power in an industry notorious for its high casualty rate. Mr Ngiam
says part of his strategy is to complement its PC range with products, such
as point-of-sale terminals, which are made in smaller volumes but earn
higher margins.
This will involve increased investment in research and development to ensure
that the company remains technologically innovative. But the key to its
future success will be to keep a tight control on operating costs while
continuing to respond rapidly to market developments.
'We have to stay nimble. We have to offer the best service and the best
products. We have to be the fastest and the cheapest,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940418

