FT942-15607

FT  14 APR 94 / Tenneco may spin off JI Case


   By LAURIE MORSE


   CHICAGO


Tenneco, the Texas-based industrial company, is considering spinning off its
JI Case division, the Wisconsin-based subsidiary that is a leading
manufacturer of farm and construction equipment worldwide.
Mr John Stark, editor of a Chicago-based newsletter that follows the heavy
equipment industry, believes Tenneco will announce plans for a Case spin off
this month. 'We understand the announcement could come as early as next
week,' he added.
Mr Thomas Hayes, Tenneco spokesman, said the company could not comment on
rumours about possible strategic actions.
Few analysts believe Tenneco could find an outright buyer for JI Case,
citing a contraction worldwide in heavy equipment. However, a spin-off of
Case stock to Tenneco shareholders, with majority interest still held by
Tenneco, would follow successful spin-offs last year by Dresser Industries,
the energy resources equipment group, and Detroit Diesel.
However, earlier this year, Mr Dana Mead, Tenneco's president, said he would
not overlook any option that would enhance shareholder value.
Talk of a potential spin-off intensified this month, when Tenneco appointed
Mr Jean-Pierre Rosso, a former Honeywell executive, as Case's president.
'The appointment (of Mr Rosso) showed Case is becoming more serious about
dealing with losses in Europe,' said Mr Frank Manfredi, editor of
Illinois-based Machinery Outlook. 'Rosso looks good to the financial
community.'
Tenneco has been carrying out a big restructuring and cost-cutting effort
for two years, with its JI Case division delivering the most remarkable
turnround. Case last year reversed a Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) 1992 loss,
reporting operating income of Dollars 82m.
While sales were down slightly at Dollars 3.7bn, analysts say a slight
upturn in demand for construction equipment and the company's return to
profitability make it ripe for a spin-off.
'Case is debt-free and has no underfunded pension liabilities,' said Mr
Stark, 'This would be an ideal time to spin them off.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940414

