FT942-14837

FT  19 APR 94 / Watanabe wavers on bid to become prime minister


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Michio Watanabe, a faction chief in Japan's opposition Liberal Democratic
party, yesterday voiced second thoughts over his campaign for the prime
ministership.
A tired looking Mr Watanabe said he needed more time to consider. He
appeared on the brink of dropping out of the power struggle unleashed by the
recent resignation of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa as prime minister, so leaving the
way clear for the coalition's likely candidate - Mr Tsutomu Hata, foreign
minister.
The alliance hopes to stage a parliamentary vote on its prime ministerial
candidate tomorrow or later, said Diet officials. A parliamentary committee
is due to decide the timing today, a day later than planned because of
uncertainty created by Mr Watanabe's ambiguous bid for power. However,
coalition members want to finalise a policy accord before proposing Mr Hata
as prime minister, in an attempt, seen by many analysts as optimistic, to
avoid the unscheduled rows that dogged the previous government.
Party representatives were yesterday discussing a draft accord, prepared
over the weekend.
Mr Yohei Kono, LDP president, yesterday met Mr Watanabe in a second attempt
to persuade him to stay in the party, but failed to stop a trickle of
defections. Nearly 30 politicians have left both the government and
opposition camps over the past 10 days, mainly to stand as independents, in
the upheaval provoked by Mr Hosokawa's resignation.
By yesterday evening 11 of the LDP's 219 members of parliament had announced
their resignations. Of the total, five have formed a new party, the New
Future party, which says it might work with the coalition. Under new laws,
parties with a minimum of five members of parliament qualify for state
subsidies.
Another five LDP defectors are supporters of Mr Watanabe, who have not yet
declared their intentions, while one defector has said he will join one of
the coalition parties.
One member of Mr Watanabe's faction said Mr Watanabe could bring a total of
11 followers with him if he did leave the LDP. He likened Mr Watanabe to the
second world war battleship Yamato, a supposedly unsinkable vessel which was
sent to the bottom after it went to meet the US fleet in 1944 with a one-way
supply of fuel.
Separately, three members of the parliament left Mr Hosokawa's Japan New
party to stand as independents yesterday, in protest at his growing
closeness to Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the coalition's backroom power-broker. This
follows last week's decision by another group, the New Harbinger party, to
distance itself from the coalition.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940419

