FT941-5503

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: The birth of American song - Richard Fairman enjoys
Thomas Hampson's recital


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


Even France can see no threat from American classical music. While
legislation keeps a limit on American films in the cinema and television
programmes over the airwaves, there is little sign that the amount of
serious music from the US is likely to stake a significant place for itself
anywhere in Europe.
The Wigmore Hall has called its month's recital series 'Discover American
Song', which presupposes (no doubt rightly) that most people have heard very
little of it. Throughout March a group of top American singers looks set to
draw good audiences on the strength of their names, if not that of the
music. On Wednesday Thomas Hampson proved the ideal exponent for a series
like this - not just a fine recitalist, but adventurous and imaginative.
The history of American song tells of a slow severing of the umbilical cord
that formed the link to the country's cultural forebears in Europe. In the
early days some American composers thought that writing art-songs meant
trying to sound German, even sometimes setting German poetry. It took a
generation or two to develop a distinctive style, which could be popularist,
jazzy, bluesy, multi-cultural in the best American sense.
The programme devised by Hampson followed the birth of the all-American
song. As befits a singer who has become virtually an honorary German when it
comes to performing Lieder, he started with an American composer who wrote
German songs. Among Charles Griffes's early songs are settings of Heine and
Lenau, music from the high noon of romanticism for which Hampson's big and
beautiful baritone voice is perfectly suited.
Unlike some opera-singers, Hampson never misjudged the Wigmore's friendly
acoustics. A group of songs to poems by Walt Whitman gathered together
varied musical personalities, who showed what this luxurious voice can do.
Bridge's 'The last Invocation' was tenderly wafted, as the poem demands;
Neidlinger's 'Memories of Lincoln' spanned the sentimental and the heroic
with equal success. In Bernstein and Ives, composers who are American to the
core, he made every word count.
Is Hampson the all-American singer? Relaxed, open-hearted, supremely
self-confident, he stands on the recital platform proud and tall as the
Empire State Building. It is difficult to imagine many other singers who
would dare try to bring off Paul Bowles's Blue Mountain Ballads, a quartet
of Tennessee Williams' poems which blaze with the heat of the deep South,
but Hampson has no inhibitions. With Craig Rutenberg's help at the piano, he
made them a tour de force. An impressive evening.
Further recitals in the series on March 6, 15, 25 and 29

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940305

