FT942-12583

FT  29 APR 94 / Terrorism claims link Iran with IRA and Japan group


   By JIMMY BURNS and STEWART DALBY


Britain and the US joined yesterday in warning Iran over its alleged support
for international terrorism after obtaining intelligence information that
Tehran was stepping up its links with groups including the IRA and the
Japanese Red Army.
In London, Mr Gholamreza Ansari, the Iranian charge d'affaires, was summoned
to a meeting with Mr Douglas Hogg, a foreign office minister, and told that
the UK government had evidence of contacts between Iranian intelligence and
the IRA.
The US has long accused Iran of sponsoring international terrorism and
seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, and it has urged other countries not to
offer the Islamic regime economic assistance. The allegations will put
particular pressure on Japan, which has a relatively good relationship with
Tehran.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, emphasised Washington's
concern after contact with Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary,
Mr Ansari last night emphatically denied any involvement by Iran in the
supply of arms or money to the IRA. He said: 'Iran has always strongly
condemned any terrorist action in any place in any form or any time.'
Asked whether Mr Hogg had produced any evidence at the meeting that there
had been contacts between the IRA and the Iranian intelligence service, he
replied: 'There was no evidence.'
In the Commons, Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, told MPs the
government was 'quite satisfied' there had been contacts between Iran and
the IRA, while Ulster Unionist MPs demanded sanctions against Tehran.
The IRA is thought to have been drawing on financial support from Iran and
may have been on the verge of securing a large shipment of arms. According
to western diplomats, Iran has also been training Japanese terrorists to
conduct assassinations in Europe and the US.
The allegations, if proved to be true, may embarrass Japan, which has been
conducting an independent foreign policy with Iran. The Japanese foreign
ministry said yesterday it was aware of reports that the Japanese Red Army
was being assisted by Iran, but that it had seen no evidence.
Prickly relations, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940429

