FT944-14605

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (22): Best routes to
a cheaper deal - Discounts / Be sure what you want, because most discount
brokers don't give advice


   By STEPHEN LODGE


Price wars tend to be good for consumers - and in financial services, this
year has been no exception.
Among unit trusts, cheaper investment deals have been the result. Unit trust
managers have cut initial charges, particularly on unit trusts in tax-free
personal equity plan (Pep) wrappers. Discounts during the launch periods of
new unit trusts have been commonplace. And there has also been a growth in
the promotion and awareness of further non-standard discounting.
The obvious route for tapping the last-mentioned is to buy through one of
the discount brokers which advertise in the personal finance pages of the
weekend newspapers and magazines such as the Investors Chronicle.
In addition, many financial advisers and stockbrokers who don't advertise
themselves as discount specialists will be prepared to consider giving them.
And even some unit trust management companies will cut special deals for
investors who invest directly instead of through an adviser or stockbroker.
Deals quoted by the discount brokers vary a little: 2 to 3 per cent is
readily available; any higher discounts they quote normally mean they are
combining their own discount with a standard deal on offer from the unit
trust manager.
Discounts negotiated with advisers or stockbrokers who don't set themselves
up as discount houses are likely to be smaller, as are special deals offered
to investors dealing directly with a unit trust management company.
Unit trust discounts generally come in the form of a discount on the normal
price of units. Alternatively, they may be presented as a reduction in the
unit trust's initial charge, 'free' units through what is called a boosted
allocation rate, or a cheque rebating some of the broker's sales commission.
But they all add up to the same thing: cheaper investing.
At any one time, unit trusts quote two main prices - an offer price, which
you can buy units at, and a bid price at which you can sell them back. The
difference between these two prices - called the spread - is generally
around 6 per cent and is the immediate loss you incur when you invest. A
discount shrinks this immediate loss. That means your investment has to rise
less far for you to be in profit.
If you get your discount through a discount broker or other financial
adviser, typically what he is doing is sharing his sales commission with
you. Sales commissions are normally equivalent to 3 per cent of your
investment. Hence most discounts are below this level - the adviser wants to
keep some of his commission. But he may be able to offer a higher discount -
say, 3 per cent or more - because he is being paid a higher commission, or
because part is a standard discount on offer from the unit trust management
company. Or because he is also being paid an annual commission - called
renewal, and typically a further 0.5 per cent - which is paid for as long as
you hold your investment. Discounting renewal commission is as yet unheard
of.
But just because many discounts are commission-sharing arrangements does not
mean going direct to a unit trust company will mean you come away with that
commission - effectively buying at a 3 per cent discount. Normally the unit
trust company will just keep this commission it would otherwise pay out to
an adviser.
Very few companies have a formal policy to offer non-standard discounts to
investors dealing direct. They worry about upsetting the financial advisers
who provide them with most of their sales. Some, however, will give
discounts if you ask or threaten to take your money elsewhere, particularly
on large investments of, say, Pounds 10,000 or more.
So what are the catches with discounts? Most discount brokers do not give
advice with their discounts - they are offering what are known as
dealing-only, or execution-only, services. So they are more appropriate for
investors who know what they want. Chelsea Financial Services, however, says
it gives free advice whenever requested, and other brokers say they are
prepared to negotiate on their advertised discounts for those investors who
want some advice. Nevertheless, for those investors who feel more in need of
a full financial advice service, a discount broker may well not be the
answer.
In addition, your choice of funds can be restricted, although most discount
brokers will offer something of a discount on pretty much any unit trust
that allows them commission. (Many also offer discounts on new investment
trusts, offshore funds and other investment products). There is generally a
minimum investment level required to obtain a discount: Pounds 1,000 is not
untypical. Bigger discounts tend to be available on bigger investments, and
it is less common to find a broker prepared to offer a discount on Pounds
50-or-so regular or monthly savings.
Many discount brokers offer telephone dealing, so delays in dealing are less
of a concern. Likewise all discount brokers should be regulated by the
Financial Services Act - but do check. That means you are covered by
ombudsman-type complaints schemes and by the Investors Compensation Scheme
should you have any problems. In general, however, you should be making your
investment cheques out direct to the unit trust management company, and so
should have little to fear.
One catch to look out for is discounts that are only available if you
subscribe to a newsletter or join a 'club'. In contrast, the discount
brokers mentioned below offer good deals with no strings attached.
Finally, investors should remember that charges, and therefore discounts,
are not everything: first and foremost you should pick a unit trust because
you feel confident it will outperform. Discount brokers offer good deals on
some very well thought-of unit trusts, but they also discount the unproven
and the investment dogs.
Some of the more established discount brokers include: London-based Chelsea
Financial Services (telephone 071 351-6022); Guildford-based Premier
Investment Management Services (0483 67766); Scunthorpe-based Unitas (0724
849481); and - specialising in unit trust Peps - The Pep Shop (0602 825105)
in Nottingham.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

941021

