FT942-16023

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (4): Goal is efficiency - Privatisations
are beginning at last


   By PATRICK BLUM


After two years of prolonged and confusing debate, privatisations are
finally getting off the ground.
About 2,500 companies with a book value of Dollars 8.8bn are earmarked for
privatisation over the next two years. Many enterprises will be only
partially sold under a complicated set of rules which may yet be changed
because of enduring political opposition to selling enterprises to outsiders
 -people neither employed nor formerly employed by a company - and to
foreign takeovers. But for the time being, armed with a compromise set of
rules made more complicated by the need to appease critics, the government
is pushing ahead.
Unlike the Czech Republic (where the government opted for a relatively quick
transfer to private ownership of as many companies as possible - leaving
restructuring to the new owners) Slovene companies had to restructure first
because of the sudden loss of the bulk of their markets in the former
Yugoslavia. They had to make painful adjustments to survive, and
privatisation took second place.
In Slovenia, the objective and the methods chosen are also different.
Because of the country's unique self-management system, most property is not
directly owned by the state as in other communist countries. There are no
clear owners and responsibility is loosely divided among company managers
and workers.
This has given employees a greater say in the running of their company, but
it has also encouraged high wage rises and the maintenance of the status quo
 -which discourages change. For these reasons, establishing ownership is an
important element in the government's efforts to modernise the economy. The
idea is not so much to create a nation of shareholders as to raise
productivity.
'The ultimate goal of privatisation is not the distribution of shares, but
to raise the efficiency of companies, and you can't achieve that without
restructuring and an active owner,' says Ms Mira Puc, managing director of
the Agency for Restructuring and Privatisation.
The agency is one of two institutions dealing with privatisation. Its role
is to supervise and advise on methods of privatisation, but it cannot sell
companies, unlike the Development Fund, which is more like the Treuhand in
Germany. The Fund is currently responsible for restructuring about 100
companies to prepare them for privatisation. It has already sold about 30
companies, and another 50 companies are facing bankruptcy.
But the bulk of privatisations will fall under the supervision of the
privatisation agency. It is early days yet, and the agency has so far
received about 215 projects of which it has approved about 80, but the list
is growing every day, says Mr Joze Jaklin, the agency's deputy manager.
Companies have been given until the end of the year to prepare their
privatisation project. Failing that, the agency will decide on the method.
The process is unusually complex, but officials say that allowing each
company to decide was deemed the most politically acceptable and least
bureaucratic method.
Under the agency's guidelines, companies can choose among several methods of
privatisation. Part of the shares can be distributed to various state funds,
including the Development Fund, which can later sell the shares to private
investment funds. A company's shares can also be sold directly or through
public tender and public auctions.
Alternatively, managers and employees can opt for an internal buy-out, under
which they can acquire up to 60 per cent of their company's shares at
preferential terms. This includes the distribution of up to 20 per cent of
shares free of charge through ownership certificates - the Slovene
equivalent to privatisation vouchers - and up to 40 per cent through an
internal buy out, in which part of the shares are bought at a discount for
immediate cash and the rest bought over a four year period. The remaining 40
per cent of shares must be distributed among various state funds.
Depending on age, each Slovene citizen will receive ownership certificates
worth DM4,000-DM6,000 which can be exchanged for shares. Shares acquired
through free distribution or at a discount cannot be resold immediately.
Investment funds are being established; licences are likely to be issued by
May. Some 30 fund management companies have applied to establish about 70
investment funds. These will be similar to those in the Czech Republic but,
unlike the Czech funds, there are no limits on the size of the stake a fund
can have in any one company. Individual funds, however, can have no more
than 10 per cent of their portfolio in a single company.
So far only six companies have been privatised by internal buyout, most of
them small. Jub, the chemical company, is the largest of the group. The
agency has also approved public offers for a handful of companies, including
Lek, a large and successful drug manufacturer whose share offer was heavily
oversubscribed. Internal buyouts are more popular, as they give employees
the chance to take a stake in their own company, says Ms Puc.
'Conditions are different in each country. The political conditions here
would make it impossible to do it all through the state like in Germany,
because all managers here believe they already own the companies,' she says.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940412

