FT941-4009

FT  14 MAR 94 / Rome agrees retirement deal for workers in Ilva


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


The Italian government has agreed to fund an early retirement programme for
10,450 people working in Ilva, the state-controlled steel group ordered by
the EU to cut production.
According to trades union representatives the deal, finalised on Saturday,
will cost up to L1,800bn (Pounds 720m) over the next three years.
This is the second time in a fortnight that the government has brokered
costly early retirement packages to solve problems of industrial
restructuring. The previous agreement concerned 6,600 workers in Fiat's
automotive sector. Both have been pushed through in advance of the March 27
general elections.
'It is a costly but effective arrangement,' said Mr Luigi Portioli, a union
official. 'The cost to the public purse will be four times that of Fiat, and
at least L1,800bn will be needed over the next three years to cover all the
early retirements envisaged.'
Ilva, controlled by Iri, the state holding company, undertook last December,
as part of a EU-wide plan to slim steel capacity, to cut production by 1.2m
tonnes a year. The cuts affected 12,517 of its total workforce of 45,000,
the bulk coming from the Taranto steelworks, Europe's largest steel complex.
Under the weekend agreement, early retirement covers most job losses at
Taranto as well as at Ilva's Bagnoli plant, closed 18 months ago.
The deal limits job losses through solidarity contracts - work-sharing
arrangements on reduced pay and hours. Some 1,200 jobs are being saved
through 4,300 solidarity contracts. A further 1,500 will be transferred to
other companies within the group and 1,000 workers will be employed in
community work projects.
With the job aspect of Ilva's restructuring settled, the group's
privatisation will be accelerated. It is being split into two - flat
products and special steels - while a third company will preside over Ilva's
liquidation.
Last week the second phase of bidding for the two new steel companies
closed. Two groups are said to be interested in the flat products division
based around Taranto: a consortium of local Taranto interests, Falck the
Italian steel producer, and foreign investors; and a group led by Italy's
Lucchini steel group, reported to be backed by France's Usinor Sacilor.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940314

