FT942-14755

FT  19 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Confused thinking about Russian
'gradualism'


   From Professor PADMA DESAI


Sir, Professor Anders Aslund (Letters, April 12) recounts the well known
facts of the decline in Russia's inflation during the last several months to
the current 9 per cent per month to assert that Viktor Chernomyrdin, the
prime minister, is now opposed to 'gradualism' and has moved into the camp
of the discredited 'shock therapists'. Virtue has triumphed; the folly of my
longstanding support of gradualism has been exposed. But this claim is
confused in its economics and facile in its politics.
Shock therapy meant a drastic and swift slashing of the budget deficit with
a view to killing the inflation forthwith. Gradualism, in my view, does not
imply the lethargy of Oblomovism. It calls instead for a gradual but firm
and credible approach to cutting the deficit and the inflation. That is
certainly what the former finance minister, Boris Fyodorov, eventually
turned to, when shock therapy (begun in January 1992) had failed: the
results have been coming in.
The chief question, raised by Fyodorov in your columns ('Dangers of western
gullibility', March 28) and ignored by Aslund is whether the prime
minister's support of this gradualist programme is genuine, as the
International Monetary Fund has apparently concluded, or whether it is a
sham, as Fyodorov fears.
Political analysis and forecasts are always tricky, especially in Russia.
But the likelihood of the optimistic scenario being right is more
compelling.
The new Chernomyrdin administration is more cohesive and, so far, free from
the internecine political feuding in the earlier government. It is also a
cliche, but true, that Chernomyrdin, a 'manager' from the hinterland, is
more likely to carry the country (especially the large factories) with him
on the adjustment costs of even gradual stabilisation than hardline
'technocrats' from Moscow.
The IMF and the G-7 will have to monitor closely the situation and tailor
aid flows to the unfolding programme. But they cannot be faulted for
thinking that Russia deserves, not just needs, a chance.
Padma Desai
Department of Economics,
Columbia University,
New York, NY 10027,
US

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940419

