FT944-2809

FT  16 DEC 94 / The Lex Column: Warburg wounded


The failure of SG Warburg's merger talks with Morgan Stanley leaves the
former wounded. Warburg has signalled its need for a partner with strong US
securities distribution to achieve its ambition of becoming a global
investment bank. It may put on a brave face and say it can still pursue this
goal using its own resources. But it will be hard to convince shareholders,
customers and employees that it is possible or sensible to do so -
particularly with Morgan Stanley indicating that it considered Mercury Asset
Management rather than Warburg the crown jewel in any merger.
The snag is that Warburg has come so far down this road that it will be hard
to turn back. The concept of a global investment bank may be valid, given
the internationalisation of capital markets. But Warburg has invested much
money pursuing this goal without generating appropriate dividends. It has
accumulated a cost base attuned to its global ambitions but not the revenues
to match.
One alternative would be to abandon its global ambitions and retrench as a
niche operator. But this would require big restructuring charges, as well as
the management eating a large humble pie. Another alternative would be for
Warburg to sell itself to a larger commercial or investment bank. There
would be no shortage of suitors. The opportunity to buy a merchant bank with
Warburg's franchise rarely occurs. But a cash sale would not appeal to the
management and a hostile bid is unlikely.
Morgan Stanley comes out of the saga looking greedy. It hoped to acquire MAM
without paying its minority shareholders an appropriate premium. Warburg
looks naive in allowing Morgan Stanley to hold the belief that it could get
away with this.
Warburg's board is now under pressure to prove itself. It must restore
morale among its workforce while controlling its costs. It will also need to
demonstrate to shareholders that pouring more money into the global strategy
is a wise use of their funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941216

