FT944-14565

FT  22 OCT 94 / Japan calls for intervention to support dollar


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Japanese ministers and businessmen yesterday voiced anxiety over the
dollar's latest decline, to a post-war low against the yen. Mr Masayoshi
Takemura, the finance minister, called for joint intervention by members of
the Group of Seven to support the dollar.
The US currency briefly touched a record low of Y96.55 in Tokyo, before
closing at Y96.68, its lowest ever closing price in Japan. Share prices
reacted calmly with the Nikkei down only 92.82 points to 19,899.08 and
government bonds strengthened.
Business groups repeated earlier worries that the dollar's fall will inflict
another blow on the yen value of export sales just as they were beginning to
see signs of an export-driven profits recovery.
The current exchange rate is excessive and will hit business confidence,
said Mr Masaru Hayami, president of the Keizai Doyukai executives'
association. Small and medium-sized businesses, which have not yet benefited
from the economic recovery, will be especially hard hit, warned Mr Masafumi
Onishi, chairman of the Osaka chamber of commerce.
The Bank of Japan, which intervened heavily in Tokyo trading, warned in its
latest quarterly report that the yen's rise would intensify deflationary
pressures, but said that the economy would stay on a recovery track.
The currency market upheavals would ensure that the pace of economic
recovery would be moderate, said the report. Demand for Japanese exports,
companies' progress in running down stocks of unsold goods and materials and
the impact of income tax cuts were the main factors supporting growth, said
the bank. However, bank lending was stagnating in spite of moderate growth
in the money supply.
Among the main constraints on growth, the report cited the yen's rise, Asian
competition and the decline in Japanese prices, plus companies' continued
need to reduce debts.
Mr Kagehide Kaku, director of the bank's research and statistics department,
warned that the yen's rise, while less strong than last year, would limit
Japanese companies' domestic investment plans. It adds to the pressure on
manufacturers to shift production to cheaper sites in neighbouring Asian
countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941022

