FT942-16344

FT  11 APR 94 / Ambiguous signals in a volatile market: Robert Corzine finds
that low oil prices are provoking an ideological debate


   By ROBERT CORZINE


Arguments over the direction of oil prices have taken on the tone of an
almost philosophical debate on whether a symbolic barrel of oil is half full
or half empty.
Optimists, having taken heart at last week's price rally sparked off by the
entry of hedge and commodity funds into oil futures' markets, say current
price levels are too low. They point to the fact that, in real terms, oil
prices at the Dollars 13-Dollars 14 level for the benchmark Brent Blend are
about the same as before the first oil shock in 1973.
And current prices, they add, do not reflect oil's special status as a
scarce and strategic commodity. Low prices simply reflect a temporary glut
caused by a surge in production from countries such as the UK and Norway
which are outside the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
That view is one which both Opec oil ministers and the chairmen of western
oil companies like to hear. But it is one which the more thoughtful among
them may no longer believe.
As a recent report from brokers Societe Generale Strauss Turnball put it:
'Throughout the history of the world oil industry, one of the few constants
. . . is the tendency for producers in aggregate to supply more than the
market can bear . . . The underlying and inherent tendency is for oil prices
to decline over time.'
The present volatility in oil markets is as much a reflection of the
ideological divide within the industry, as the consequence of short-term
shifts in the supply/demand balance. And that volatility is likely to
increase in coming months as the implications of Opec's present policy and
the presence in the markets of the hedge funds become clearer.
The prospect of additional abrupt price swings is now a very real one
because of the market's uncertainty over the future strategy of the funds.
Mr Robert Mabro, of the Oxford Centre for Energy Research, says: 'They are a
new factor in the oil price picture,' and one which will make 'predicting
price movements even more difficult.'
The presence of the funds also means that oil prices in New York and London
will be influenced by events in other markets. Mr Mabro notes that the
withdrawal of the funds from oil markets late last year in search of
opportunities in rising stock and bond markets accelerated the fall in oil
prices.
'The question now,' according to Cambridge Energy Research Associates in
Paris, 'is whether fund managers will hold their positions until market
fundamentals improve . . . or whether they will sell off if near-term prices
weaken, thereby adding to market volatility.'
The volatility had already been enhanced by Opec's decision to maintain its
24.52m barrels a day production ceiling for the rest of the year.
The second quarter of the year is usually the time when Opec makes the
deepest cuts in output because of weak demand due to the end of the northern
hemisphere winter. Opec delegates at the meeting in Geneva last month
conceded that the strategy of rolling over the production ceiling could
weaken prices in the short-term, although they claimed that rising demand
would lead to a balanced market later in the year.
Mr Mabro points out, however, that 'balanced markets don't rise. If you want
a price rise, your strategy should be to unbalance the market.' He also
believes Opec's policy will lead to considerable price volatility well
beyond the second quarter. 'If you fix the volume for a long time you get
increased volatility with any changes in demand,' he says.
Another factor which could affect prices in the longer term is the apparent
willingness of oil markets to question the degree to which Opec producers
deserve the considerable 'rent' they earn even at today's prices. With
production costs of only a dollar or two per barrel in many of the Gulf
states, the profit margins from most Opec producers are substantial. The
entry of the funds into the oil futures' markets has been interpreted by
some as a sign that irrespective of long-term movements, short-term price
trends may now be upwards. But many traders warn against reading too much
into the timing of the funds' move.
'They (the funds) were just scrambling around for a market where the prices
were low,' and where they saw an opportunity to manipulate the market, said
one oil company trader in London. 'They just caught everyone unawares.'
Kashima resignation, Page 20
Neste reports loss, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940411

