FT942-12184

FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: BAT profits cheer - The week ahead


The first-quarter figures from BAT Industries on Wednesday are expected to
show a healthy rise from Pounds 354m pre-tax to about Pounds 385m. In spite
of the much-publicised war on smoking in the US - which BAT defied this week
by buying American Tobacco for Dollars 1bn - its tobacco profits may be
around the same as last year.
The real profits increase will come from insurance, through further recovery
by Eagle Star from its upsets in mortgage indemnity and through real
progress at Allied Dunbar in the UK and Farmers in the US.
Sugar and sweeteners group Tate & Lyle is expected to report a Pounds
10m-Pounds 20m rise in interim profits on Wednesday from Pounds 107.6m to
Pounds 120m-plus. Most of the rise will come from US and Australian
operations.
Improving markets for Staley, its US corn starch business, will have helped
profits, as will recovery in its US sugar businesses, hit last year by
teething troubles at a new desugarisation plant at its cane sugar operation,
and difficult trading conditions for its beet sugar business.
Exchange rates will also aid profits. A rise in the interim dividend is
expected in line with Tate's progressive policy.
Overseas growth, especially in the US, is expected to boost Body Shop
International's final results when they are revealed on Thursday. Pre-tax
profits are likely to rise from Pounds 21.5m to between Pounds 25m and
Pounds 27m, with UK operating profits a little ahead of last time's Pounds
11.2m.
The US should pitch in about Pounds 4.5m (Pounds 2m last year), though this
was affected by the move of the HQ to North Carolina). The dividend should
rise from 1.7p to at least 1.85p.
BP reports its first-quarter results on Thursday. The weak oil price -
Dollars 4 a barrel lower - is likely to be counteracted by benefits from
cost-savings, strong downstream margins in the US, lower interest charges
and a swing back to profits in chemicals. Pre-tax profits will be about
Pounds 250m, against Pounds 231m last time and Pounds 315m in the fourth
quarter.
Thursday should see the revival of Bank of Scotland, whose good reputation
slipped last year when it announced an 11 per cent fall in pre-tax profits.
Pre-tax profits are expected to rise from Pounds 125.3m to Pounds
250m-Pounds 270m, or even as high as Pounds 285m.
Last year's figures included a 45 per cent rise in provisions for bad debts
which, the bank said, reflected the downturn moving north into Scotland,
coupled with a further fall in asset values in the south.
The majority of its business is now in England rather than Scotland.
Apart from the drop in provisions, as a result of a fragile recovery in the
housing market, the bank has also had an opportunity to reap a full year's
benefits from being able to widen its margins in its sizeable mortgage
lending operation.
That widening of margins was an element in raising the bank's interim
pre-tax profits announced last October by 58 per cent to Pounds 117.6m.
In general, the bank has won the reputation of being both less
accident-prone than others, and of running operations efficiently.
The cost-income ratio it reported in the interim results fell to just below
50 per cent, and could fall slightly further, if it is able to expand its
mortgage business.
At the interim results, Bruce Pattullo, chief executive, made it clear that
he expected a further improvement in fee and income commission through
clearing bank branches.
The bank has been one of those identified as considering buying a building
society: this would be one way of accelerating its growth, but the bank will
not want an acquisition that would threaten its efficiency.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940430

