FT944-11033

FT  08 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Enhancing stock performance - Peter John
considers the increasing popularity of lending shares


   By PETER JOHN


The UK may have one of the world's most sophisticated stock markets but when
it comes to stock lending, it behaves like an emerging market with all the
barriers and opportunities that implies.
Now, however, stock lending is coming in from the cold and bankers consider
it has great potential.
Traditionally dogged by regulations and middlemen, it recently received a
fillip from the change to rolling settlement. And many fund managers hope
the chancellor of the exchequer will shortly liberate gilts lending to
provide a real impetus for change.
Stock lending is the lending of shares or bonds to meet the temporary needs
of other parties, typically dealers, who need securities to support their
trading.
Mr Roy Zimmerhansl, one of Nomura's global securities analysts, said: 'It is
a bit like a shopping trolley. If you decide to do your grocery shopping for
the next three months you could buy all the food. But without a trolley you
can't get it home. It oils the wheels of every part of equity business.'
Although there is a transfer of title, the lender retains the benefits of
ownership such as dividends and is secured with collateral and paid a fee.
Institutions which invest for the long term can squeeze an extra drop out of
their port-folios.
Wells Fargo Nikko Investment Advisers index funds, which are heavily
involved in stock lending, have often outperformed world markets, excluding
the US, with the help of this technique.
The UK, however, is hampered by a frisson of nervousness that goes back to
the Robert Maxwell debacle. Maxwell, the erstwhile media baron, had a habit
of borrowing stock from one part of his empire to prop up loans in another.
The exposure of his malpractices brought the concept into disrepute.
A more important limiting factor is the heavy regulatory system which the
Inland Revenue originally imposed to plug possible tax loopholes.
Only approved marketmakers can borrow stock and then only if they are
already dealing in that stock. If they want to borrow UK equities they have
to go through an approved money broker, who takes a cut.
In addition the collateral in the UK is only 102 per cent of the value of
the stock while internationally it is 105 per cent, giving the lender more
of a cushion.
Finally, convention has it that collateral is only represented by
certificates of deposit or short-term Talisman certificates, which are made
up of a basket of stocks.
Fund managers complain that because you do not know what makes up the basket
of stocks you could lend out quality stock and get questionable collateral.
In theory it would have been possible in 1990 to have lent ICI and received
Polly Peck as collateral, just before it collapsed.
Internationally, collateral is agreed between the two parties.
'In terms of UK and international lending we focus our activities on
international stocks because the security is better and the rates higher,'
said Mr Michael Robarts, director of Fleming Investment Management.
However, the UK picture is changing rapidly. Some estimate that stock
lending turnover has risen by 30 per cent over the past year. Previously the
returns were so small and the cost and workload involved so great that four
or five leading UK institutions withdrew from the activity.
The change is partly the result of the stock market's move, earlier this
year, to 10-day rolling settlement from two and three week dealing accounts.
The need for marketmakers to balance their books every day, rather than at
the end of the account, has caused demand for borrowed stock to rise.
The big change the market is awaiting is the ability to carry out gilt
repurchase agreements which many believe could be sanctioned in the
forthcoming Budget. At present, gilt repos are held between the Bank of
England and the clearing banks, who by law have to balance their books every
day.
It is suggested that traders may be able to repurchase from each other with
the probability that the need to go through money brokers would disappear.
Once money brokers become unnecessary for repos, the same would be true for
stock lending. The fees they charge would disappear, the margins for the
lenders would increase and investors in UK equities would be able to exploit
a technique that helps them maximise the value of their portfolios.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941108

