FT942-12782

FT  28 APR 94 / Bristol airport decision deferred: Councillors' opposition
centres on BAe plan for 20 flights a night


   By ROLAND ADBURGHAM, Wales and West Correspondent


A decision on British Aerospace's proposals for a civil airport at Bristol
was deferred yesterday by the local authority, leaving one of the most
contentious planning issues in south-west England hanging in the balance.
If British Aerospace had any doubts about the local hostility to its plans
for a commercial airport at Filton, north Bristol, they were dispelled last
week.
Nearly 1,000 people packed a school hall for a public meeting called by the
planning authority, Northavon District Council. Outside, a public address
system was rigged up for 500 more. For two hours, residents slated BAe's
proposals on grounds of noise and pollution.
In recent years, several thousand houses have been built at nearby Stoke
Gifford and Bradley Stoke. An Avon county councillor was applauded when she
said: 'I've calculated at least 15,000 people live under the flightpath.'
Only one person, a BAe worker, spoke in favour of the plans.
Since BAe lodged an application a year ago to convert its airfield at Filton
into an airport with scheduled European services, Northavon council has had
4,200 letters - 69 per cent opposing the plan.
Yesterday, in deciding to have more talks with BAe, councillors agreed that
the airport was unacceptable unless BAe abandoned plans for up to 20 air
traffic movements a night.
Yet the airport is strongly supported by the business community, which sees
it as vital to stimulate the regional economy. Unlike Bristol Airport at
Lulsgate, south of the city, it has excellent connections, being close to
the M4 and M5 motorways and railway. Much of Bristol's recent commercial
development has taken place in the area.
Mr John Savage, chief executive of Bristol Chamber of Commerce and
Initiative, said: 'The perception of Bristol as being on the travel map
would be increased dramatically by a Filton airport.'
The south-west Confederation of British Industry has told the Department of
the Environment: 'To fail to establish a principal regional airport in the
Bristol area would be to place the whole region into a second division
within Europe.' More backing comes from Rolls-Royce, with 5,500 workers at
its adjacent Patchway works.
Mr Chris Geoghegan, managing director of BAe Airbus, which employs 5,000 at
Filton, said: 'Once it gets going, it will be a real economic catalyst for
the region.' A new airline, Air Bristol, is running company flights for BAe
in anticipation of scheduled services.
The airfield is used for aircraft maintenance but the main contract, for
USAF F1-11s, has recently ended.
Mr Geoghegan said the airfield cost Pounds 2m a year to run. 'We have
started the transition from military to civilian contracts, but that is a
very competitive business. Scheduled flights can make the airfield viable in
its own right.' "
BAe believes the combination of aircraft maintenance and scheduled services
would help safeguard the Filton works. The workforce has been contracting,
with another 100 redundancies announced on Tuesday, but BAe claims the
airport could create 700 jobs.
The airport would be limited by BAe's planning application to 350,000
passengers a year.
Opposition to the airport is not only environmental. There is concern about
the impact on Cardiff-Wales airport, but the main threat is to Lulsgate,
owned by Bristol City Council. It made record pre-tax profits of Pounds 2.9m
in the year to March 1993 but believes the city could not support two
airports.
Lulsgate, which is seeking private capital for expansion, carried 1.18m
passengers in the past year and wants a new terminal which could handle
twice as many. After a public inquiry, it is awaiting the environment
secretary's decision.
BAe's application itself may yet be called in by the Department of the
Environment for an inquiry - which Bristol City Council and Avon County
Council want. If not, and Northavon does reach a compromise with BAe, as now
seems likely, opponents suspect that BAe will seek to develop a full-scale
regional airport in the future.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940428

