FT943-1009

FT  27 SEP 94 / Haiti plan by US for firmer control


   By JAMES HARDING


   PORT-AU-PRINCE


The US, settling into its second week of intervention in Haiti, yesterday
outlined a plan to secure political institutions for the transition from
military rule to the government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The plan - which includes buying civilian-held weapons from today, a
guarantee to ensure security at the parliament tomorrow, and the
reinstallation of the elected mayor of Port-au-Prince on Thursday - is an
indication of US confidence that, after a week of evolving operational
procedures, it is now in control.
The homecoming of 221 refugees, who had been at the US naval base of
Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, was also seen as an indication that the US presence
had allayed popular fears of political violence in Haiti.
A month-long purchasing of civilian-held weapons was expected to start
today, in an attempt to ensure public safety and to minimise the dangers of
recrimination in a divided society. The US was offering to buy handguns for
Dollars 50, semi-automatic rifles for Dollars 100, automatic rifles for
Dollars 200, machine-guns and artillery for Dollars 300 until October 25.
The US mission in Haiti has set as a priority the disarming of the many
self-appointed police auxiliaries, militia and nationalists who have styled
themselves on the ruthless Tonton Macoutes political force of the Duvalier
dictatorship. US army officials would not comment on whether the voluntary
sale of weapons would be followed by a campaign of force to disarm Haitian
citizens.
US officials yesterday pledged to protect the 24 pro-Aristide
parliamentarians who have been in exile in the US or in hiding in Haiti.
Parliament will reconvene tomorrow, following President Aristide's decision
to convene the assemby so that it mayx draw up and vote on an amnesty law
requested by the transition agreement.
The absence of pro-Aristide deputies, who have feared police violence if
they attend parliament in the capital, has meant the assembly has not
achieved a quorum for months.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940927

