FT941-13052

FT  27 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Public sector pay


Tough problems require tough but skilfully implemented solutions. The
government's freezing of the public sector wage bill for the next three
years is a suitably firm response to a gaping fiscal deficit and the
inefficiency which still infects many areas of the public sector. Yet the
government must avoid undermining the independent review bodies, which are
in the process of making recommendations on the next round of public sector
pay deals.
The three-year freeze on the public sector wage bill announced by the
chancellor last September never implied a freeze on wages. If costs can be
reduced and more efficient working practices devised then the savings made
can be used to fund higher wages.
It is not yet known what the pay review bodies will recommend. Their role is
to consider comparisons with the private sector, where pay is rising at an
annual rate of 3 per cent, and when headline inflation is running at 1.9 per
cent. It may be that some of the review bodies will see a case for increases
significantly ahead of this inflation rate, but there is also a reasonable
chance that they will call for rises which can be accommodated within a
static overall pay bill.
If this happens, it will further increase the chances of completing the pay
round without open conflict. Some public sector union leaders have talked of
a spring offensive on wages, but in reality their members show little sign
of wanting a fight. Union leaders would be wise to recognise this mood,
since the government cannot afford to see its restrictions on pay in the
public sector overturned at this stage in the deficit-reduction process. Any
challenge would be firmly resisted.
Ministers, however, should beware the hubris which might arise from an easy
victory this year. It is not in anyone's interest to see public sector wages
slip seriously out of line with those in the private sector as the labour
market tightens.
The widespread strikes and breakdowns in public service which led to the
creation of the independent review bodies a decade ago have not necessarily
been banished for ever. Before ministers risk undermining their advisers by
casually ignoring their work in good times, they should reflect upon the
long-term value of a mechanism that offers transparent analysis and an
alternative to confrontation.
It is difficult to make sensible productivity projections across the public
sector for the entire three-year period of the proposed pay freeze and
ministers will be wise to consider the matter with care before leaping to
convenient conclusions.
At the same time, ministers should recognise that their policies towards the
public sector involve an unreconciled contradiction: on the one hand they
favour decentralisation, contracting out and greater freedom for local
management; on the other, they are using a blunt and centralised instrument
on pay. It would be unwise to regard the three-year paybill freeze as beyond
further debate.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940127

