FT941-3354

FT  16 MAR 94 / International Bonds: Rarity value helps launch New Zealand's
FRN deal


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


New Zealand's rarity value in the international bond market, combined with
the likelihood that Moody's is about to raise the country's credit rating,
ensured a favourable reception for its widely-expected Dollars 1bn offering
of five-year floating-rate notes (FRNs) launched yesterday.
Mr Alex Jurshevski, head of portfolio management at New Zealand's debt
management office, said the proceeds of the transaction would be used to
refinance maturing debt, and would allow the sovereign borrower to call
outstanding floating-rate debt.
He said New Zealand planned to call its Dollars 250m FRN offering due 1996
next week, and that it had already called an old issue of
sterling-denominated FRNs, worth the equivalent of Dollars 200m.
Mr Jurshevski said although New Zealand actively used its Dollars 3bn Euro
medium-term note programme, the government's intention to reduce the
country's NZDollars 66.7bn foreign debt meant it would be depend even less
on the Eurobond market for its funding in the future.
Mr John Orange, senior portfolio manager at the New Zealand debt management
office, said the government's strategy reflected its desire to reduce the
risk associated with foreign currency borrowing and its success in
developing New Zealand's domestic bond market.
Joint lead managers Morgan Stanley and UBS said around 80 per cent of the
notes had been sold by late afternoon. In eastern Asia, central banks and
government agencies were strong buyers of the notes, attracted by their zero
risk weighting for capital adequacy purposes.
Sales into Japan were limited, possibly reflecting a reluctance among
investors to take on new commitments ahead of the close of the financial
year at the end of this month. European sales were mainly to funds in
Switzerland, Germany, the UK and Italy.
The coupon on the notes, of three-month Libor less  1/8 , was in line with
market expectations. When the notes were freed to trade, they were bid at
the issue price of 99.78.
Hydro-Quebec is expected to launch a Dollars 500m offering of five-year
notes today, via CS First Boston. The notes are likely to yield around 15 to
18 basis points over Libor.
Pemex, the Mexican oil company, raised Dollars 400m in the FRN market in two
three-year transactions as part of a refinancing of a Dollars 1.5bn bank
facility. One transaction was structured as a 'volatility floater', which
offered investors the chance to improve their yield.
Standard & Poor's has raised its ratings on Citicorp and units and removed
them from credit watch. S&P said the action reflected the progress the
company has made in improving its financial strength. S&P raised the senior
debt rating to A from A minus, and the subordinated debt rating to A minus
from triple B plus.
Moody's has placed the long-term ratings of Italy's seventh-largest banking
group, Banco di Napoli, under review for possible downgrading.
It said Italy's continuing recession made the bank vulnerable to further
impairment of its asset quality. Banco di Napoli's long-term ratings are A2
for senior bank deposits and A3 for subordinated bank deposits and
subordinated debt.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940316

