FT943-12854

FT  22 JUL 94 / Personal View: The great transition robbery


   By OLEH HAVRYLYSHYN


Of more than 30 countries in the Soviet-socialist bloc, few have made a good
start on stabilisation and transition to the market. Only eight - Poland,
the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the
surprise-case, Albania - have controlled inflation, stabilised their
currencies, liberalised prices and international trade, and privatised the
bulk of small retail and service outlets. Most of them are also seeing a
turnround from negative to positive economic growth.
So why have the others not done the same? The simple answer is that powerful
elites do not want reform. As central command disappeared, the old Soviet
'patriarchs' - directors of enterprises and state farms, and local political
bosses - gained autonomy. At first, the expected reform measures -
privatisation, opening up of markets to foreign competition and diminution
of subsidies - threatened their status. Where reform measures were
undertaken quickly, those members of the elite who survived were forced to
behave roughly like competitive capitalists. Elsewhere, delays in proceeding
with reforms gave them time to transform themselves into
monopolist-capitalists.
Under the in-between economic arrangements, the state provides subsidies and
cheap credits, allegedly to keep the economy going and people on the job.
This not only causes inflation. It also provides the directorate with
influence and with funds to engage in side operations, such as purchasing
titanium, magnesium or petroleum cheaply, obtaining licences from their old
colleagues, and then selling the commodities abroad at a tidy profit. This
causes materials shortages, corruption, capital flight, an inflow of
Mercedes-Benz cars and popular discontent.
The patriarchs partially assuage discontent by ensuring workers have jobs
and receive enough to survive. Nevertheless, the discontent finds an outlet,
with workers saying: 'You pretend to be paying us less even than in Soviet
times; and we pretend even less to be working.' The result is more
absenteeism, less effort and even less production. More worrisome,
investment in production capacity is not taking place, since commercial
operations are far more profitable.
Having been given the time to recover from the shock of communism's
overthrow, the old-new elites now find it in their interest to go neither
back to state command, nor forward to competitive markets. From a
socialist-patriarchal society, where the elite's promise was 'you have
entitlements, while we have privileges', the lagging countries have moved to
a rentier-patriarchal society, where the elite says 'you are still assured
of minimal entitlements, while we profit maximally from the new
opportunities'.
The frequent characterisations of the result as a corrupt society, with a
few wealthy robber-barons, express the moral indignation of the people. But
beyond moral judgments, a far more important conclusion emerges: the new
rentier-patriarchal elites are, in general, opposed to further reform. They
are unlikely to look kindly upon measures to break up monopolies, raise
rates of interest, curtail easy credits, or liberalise prices and trade, all
of which would undermine their privileged position.
Popular opposition to further reform is increased by two contradictory
perceptions. Since the elites share a small part of their gains with
workers, the latter support them in lobbying for preferential treatment. At
the same time, the monopolistic capitalism people observe and abhor is
mistaken for the competitive capitalism advocated by reformers.
Consequently, popular resentment is directed against market reforms.
Economies do not disintegrate overnight, so this limbo can continue for a
long time. Might the elites realise they are killing the goose that lays
golden eggs and so support reform? There is a chance, but only for partial
reform.
At some point, they will recognise that excessive cheap credit and subsidies
cause inflation, which hurts even the new capitalists in the long run, since
it eats away at the production potential of the economy. Soon - in some
cases already - privatisation, even of large-scale enterprises, will also be
in the interest of the new capitalists, since they can become large
shareholders.
If competition were allowed to sort out the efficient capitalists from the
inept, this would help the economy. But this is a big 'if'. The elites may
see stabilisation and privatisation as in their interest, but are unlikely
to consider liberalisation in the same way, since it would threaten their
cosy monopolies.
The best-case scenario is one of an economy that is privatised, monopolised
and highly regulated by government. As in many Latin American and African
examples, what is likely is not successful stabilisation, but a series of
failed attempts. It is natural to hope for something better. But wherever
the opportunity to move forward quickly has been lost, the reality may be
that the transition is frozen.
The author is alternate executive director for Ukraine at the International
Monetary Fund

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940722

