FT944-14437

FT  22 OCT 94 / Food and Drink: Fragrant and sweet - Cookery / The second
part of a rice treat


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


Last week, I talked about different types of rice with Margaret Shaida, an
Oxfordshire-born journalist and historian who married an Iranian and lived
in her husband's homeland for 25 years.
Here is the second rice dish that Shaida cooked for me, said to have
originated at court in Isfahan. Variations given in Shaida's book, The
Legendary Cuisine of Persia, due to be published by Penguin (Pounds 12) on
November 3, include lamb with dried apricots, and duck with barberries or
sour cherries.
BAKED SAFFRON RICE WITH CHICKEN AND SPINACH (serves 8)
A 4pt round ovenproof bowl is needed for cooking this dish. A Pyrex mixing
bowl is ideal as it enables you to check that the crust is turning golden
all over as it should. Iranians will wince at the unorthodoxy but two of the
people who sampled this dish when I made it liked it best with a gravy
spoonful or two of rich chicken broth poured over the white rice at table.
1lb dom siah or good quality basmati rice; 12oz chicken breast fillets
(skinned and boned weight); 1 1/2 lb fresh spinach; 1 fat garlic clove
crushed with a little salt; 7 fl oz plain yoghurt; 2 small eggs; a good
pinch of saffron, pounded and soaked in scant 2 tablespoons boiling water; 3
fl oz sunflower or other light tasting vegetable oil; 3oz butter.
Cook the chicken a day ahead using the following method: Wrap each fillet
separately in a double layer of food film, twisting the ends like a cracker
and tying them with string. Drop the parcels into a pan of boiling water and
cook at a bare simmer for 10 minutes. Lift the parcels out of the pan and
leave for five minutes before unwrapping. Drain off the juices, cut the meat
into large chunks and season with salt and pepper.
Beat the eggs with the yoghurt. Add the crushed garlic and cool saffron
liquid. Stir in the chicken. Cover and refrigerate overnight.
Next day, wash the rice under a cold running tap for several minutes. Then
leave it to soak for three hours in 4pts cold water with three tablespoons
salt.
Wash the spinach, strip off any tough stalks and cook the leaves until
tender in the water that clings to it. Squeeze well to drain off as much
liquid as possible, season lightly with salt and plenty of pepper and set
aside to cool.
Bring 4pt water and three tablespoons salt to a rolling boil. Add the
drained rice, bring back to the boil, cover and cook for no longer than two
minutes before testing the grain. It should be soft on the outside and still
firm (but not brittle) in the centre. It may need half a minute or so more
to reach this stage but probably not much longer. Remember the grain will
continue to soften as it steams.
Drain the parboiled rice, preferably in a rice colander to avoid compressing
it, and rinse it in cold water.
Now for the messy bit. Measure the oil into the 4pt ovenproof bowl and swirl
to coat the interior all over. Lift the chicken out of the yoghurt mixture
and reserve it. Gradually add one-third to at most a half of the parboiled
and drained rice to the yoghurt, mixing it in gently but thoroughly with one
hand.
Tip this creamy-textured, pale yellow mixture into the oiled bowl. The aim
now is to line the sides of the bowl entirely with yellow rice, and to pile
the dry white rice into the centre. Do it gradually. First work the yellow
rice just a little way up the sides of the bowl with one hand, then sprinkle
some dry white rice into the centre with the other hand. Repeat. With a
little encouragement, as the white rice is added the yellow rice will rise
up the sides.
When the bowl is about half full put the chicken in a layer over the rice
taking care to keep it within a perimeter of yellow rice. Spread the spinach
over the meat, again leaving a ribbon of yellow rice round the edge. Then
continue drawing the yellow rice up round the sides of the bowl and fill the
centre with the rest of the white rice. This gets easier with practice.
Level the top. Cover closely with well-oiled kitchen foil and bake on a
baking tray at 400`F, 200`C, gas mark 6 for two hours, turning the bowl as
necessary for an even tan.
When the rice is cooked remove the bowl from the oven. Lift the foil
briefly, dot the rice with flakes of butter and replace the foil. The
chilled fat will arrest cooking and, as it melts and seeps into the rice and
down the sides of the bowl, it will loosen the mould making it easier to
turn out.
After five to 10 minutes run a palette knife or other long flexible blade
between the rice and the edge of the bowl. Cover the bowl with a large
warmed plate (a completely flat flan plate is best), invert and the bowl
should lift off cleanly.
The beautiful layering will be revealed when the rice mould is cut like a
cake for serving. First the crunchy outer shell of golden crust, then the
lining of cakey textured pale saffron rice with yoghurt, and finally a
central core of fragrant, free-running pure white grains. All this with
layers of tender chicken and sweet green spinach running across it.
A good selection of Iranian produce is available from Super Bahar, 349A
Kensington High Street, London W8.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941022

