FT944-2640

FT  16 DEC 94 / ITC fines Granada Pounds 500,000 for rule breach


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


The Independent Television Commission yesterday issued a clear warning to
the ITV companies that programmes should not be vehicles for selling
products when it imposed a Pounds 500,000 fine on Granada Television.
The fine, the first to be imposed by the ITC under powers provided by the
1990 Broadcasting Act, was for repeated violations of the rules on 'undue
prominence' of products by This Morning, the daily magazine programme
presented by Richard Madeley and Judy Finnigan.
There were also breaches of rules over the sponsorship of viewer
competitions. Viewers were invited on the October 12 edition of This Morning
to enter a cookery competition, application forms for which could be
obtained only from branches of the Safeway supermarket chain or by buying
She magazine.
The ITC said yesterday that the rules on sponsorship and undue prominence
were designed to ensure a clear distinction between the editorial content of
programmes and paid advertising or sponsor messages.
'The effect of failure to observe these rules seriously damages the
editorial integrity of programmes,' said the ITC. It could have fined
Granada up to Pounds 4.69m.
Granada last night expressed surprise and disappointment that the ITC had
imposed a sanction 'which seems out of proportion to the nature of the
original offence'.
The company, which this week advertised for a compliance adviser to ensure
ITC rules were observed in all its programmes, said it would need to
consider the implications of the ITC decision carefully. Mr Graham Allen,
Labour broadcasting spokesman, last night congratulated the ITC for taking a
tough line against Granada. He said: 'Finally the ITC has bared its teeth
and sent a signal to the ITV companies that it is not prepared to tolerate
blatant breaches of its codes.'
The ITC identified eight code breaches by This Morning since the new
broadcasting licences began last year.
Granada was given a formal warning for an item transmitted on September 21
which featured Mr Victor Kiam discussing his Lady Remington range of
jewellery. Viewers were then invited to win pieces by devising an
advertising slogan for the range. Granada referred last night to isolated
lapses of editorial judgment which generated no viewer complaints and from
which Granada derived no commercial benefit.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, National Heritage secretary, yesterday prepared the way
for the BBC to launch two planned commercial services in continental Europe.
He laid an order exempting the BBC from getting broadcasting licences from
the Independent Television Commission.
The two satellite services - one dedicated to entertainment and the other
news - must not be directed at UK audiences and must operate as if they were
regulated by the ITC.
There must also be transparent accounts between the BBC's commercial
television services - which are operated in a joint venture with Pearson,
owner of the Financial Times - and their publicly funded services.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941216

