FT941-3305

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (24):
Interaction of created worlds - Virtual Reality / Optimists see virtual
reality as offering a richer form of communication, but pessimists see it as
a disturbing retreat from the grimness of real life. Here, Philip Manchester
looks at one of the likely growth markets of the next decade


   By PHILIP MANCHESTER


Many advances in computer software have their origins in play. From the
early chess programs, which were used to demonstrate the power of electronic
brains in the 1950s, to the multimedia shoot-'em-up video games of today,
programmers have used games to push the envelope of software technology.
Advances in high-resolution graphics, data compression, animation and user
interface design have often been pioneered in games software before making
the transition to business. Games and other leisure-based uses of computers
have also laid the ground rules for computer-generated, alternative worlds
or what has come to be called virtual reality (VR). This new strain of
software now promises to open exciting applications in business.
'One way to see VR is as a magical window on to other worlds from molecules
to minds. Another way to see VR is to recognise that in the closing decades
of the twentieth century, reality is disappearing behind a screen,' writes
Howard Rheingold in his book, Virtual Reality.
It could be argued that anyone who sits in front of a computer all day to do
their job, already spends much of their life in VR. Even a simple program
like a spreadsheet can be engrossing enough to its user to suspend physical
reality.
The convergence of computers and communications pushes this even further.
Bulletin board systems and networked chatlines are now well established in
the US and growing fast in Europe. Network services like the Internet, CIX
and Compuserve have created a multitude of widely-dispersed, electronic
communities, each with their own culture. The phenomenon has spawned a new
language, a literary sub-genre (cyberpunk) and the idea of an ultimate
virtual nirvana called cyberspace.
There is, of course, not just one virtual reality, but many. At one extreme,
it is possible to become immersed in VR by using an enclosed helmet with a
built-in display and sensor devices which can pick up body movements.
At the other end of the spectrum, a serious desktop flight simulator such as
Microsoft's package for the PC, can be just as convincing.
VR purists argue that immersion is the only genuine VR experience and there
is research into all-over body suits which can take this to its logical
conclusion. The aim is that such a suit should act both as sensing device to
transfer body movements to the computer and also to convey a sense of touch.
Sensor suits to transmit body movement are already available. At the Virtual
Reality Expo show in London in February, for example, the UK company Virtual
Presence launched a 750 gram, Lycra suit equipped with 96 sensors, and there
are others available in the US.
Work is also under way to build systems which can respond to objects in VR
and transmit this sensation back to the user. Researchers at the University
of North Carolina, for example, have built a device which can be used to
manipulate images of molecules with a full feedback system. The Argonne
remote manipulator (ARM) is used to explore possible combinations of
molecules for new anti-cancer drugs. If the properties of the molecules do
not allow them to fit together, the resistance is conveyed back to the user
as a physical force.
There is also some speculation in fringe literature about the possibility of
direct connections from the human brain to VR systems - thus eliminating the
need for a suit.
At a more mundane and practical level, less intrusive VR software is now
within the reach of the PC user - mainly for games - but increasingly for
other activities such as mail order shopping or travel planning. Desktop
computers are now powerful enough to handle high-quality, three-dimensional
graphics and convey an impression of space. It is now possible to walk
around buildings which do not exist, fly a jumbo jet through a thunderstorm
and visit places on the other side of the world without leaving your desk.
The concept of VR has, of course, been around for some time. The
well-established flight simulator, for example, has been used for training
pilots since the early days of flying. More recently, simulated environments
have been devised for other training activities - such as working in
hazardous environments.
What marks out the new generation of VR software is that it goes beyond
merely representing the physical world - like a flight simulator - or
creating a possible future with a spreadsheet. VR enables the creation of
worlds which do not exist and allows interaction with them.
This has spawned a generation of software tools which can help to visualise
data in new ways.
Superscape, a VR tool from the UK company Dimension, has been used, for
example, to show the effects of drugs on the human body. The software allows
a user to navigate around a representation of the body and see the effect of
a drug down at the molecular level.
'The market is only now becoming aware that VR products are available for
low-cost computing. Once their eyes are opened to it, the ideas come rushing
in. We have about 30 applications built with Superscape and most of them
have come from customers,' says Mr Ian Andrew, managing director of
Dimension.
In addition to the drug simulation VR, which is being used by SmithKline
Beecham, Superscape has been used to build VR environments as diverse as a
telecommunications network simulation for British Telecom and an exhibition
modelling system for Dragon Exhibitions.
Although Superscape can support the more exotic VR peripherals, such as
headsets and sensors, Mr Andrew says that the demand is for applications
which are non-immersive and based on the desktop: 'Immersive VR was what
caught people's imagination in the first place - but most people are
uncomfortable with it. I'd say 90 per cent of what we do is for the desktop.
But we have left room to support the other devices and can offer users an
upgrade path when they need it,' he explains.
Faberushi, another UK VR specialist has built a multimedia virtual
exhibition system (VES) which re-creates the sound, look and feel of an
exhibition floor. Virtual visitors to the show can walk up to a virtual
computer screen and see a demonstration of a product.
'The interaction between people and machines is what is important about VR.
It lets you create spatial relationships which is very appealing - people
understand the rules of space,' says Mr Perry Huber, a consultant with
Faberushi.
'Proper VR allows you to move around in free form - like surrogate travel.'
Mr Huber also sees VR changing the way we use computers and improving the
user interface: 'One of the obvious things in the business environment is
that you can get way from simple graphical user interfaces. The three
dimensionality lets you bring a context to data and visualise it better.'
Data visualisation in three dimensions might seem far fetched. But imagine
explaining what a spreadsheet program could be used for ten years' ago.
VR offers the same potential to change the way data is viewed and presented.
Software developers are already experimenting with the possibilities. Maxis,
a US software company, has built a VR package which simulates the Wall
Street Stock Exchange in the form of a casino. Prospective investors can
risk their funds and enjoy themselves at the same time.
The market for VR products like these is expected to grow quickly over the
next few years and an increasing percentage of revenues will come from
commercial applications. Market researcher Frost & Sullivan (F&S) forecasts
a growth rate of 65 per cent a year in the US market, with revenues
exceeding a billion dollars by 1997.
Leisure-based applications are expected to dominate throughout this period
and show the largest growth. Another US market researcher - 4th Wave -
estimates that 70 per cent of 1993 revenues for VR products came from the
entertainment sector and this will increase to 76 per cent by 1997.
But commercial applications of VR technology on the desktop are likely to be
the most profitable - with training, data visualisation and computer-aided
design leading the way. Specialised commercial applications which can
harness the power of VR software will sell at a premium.
The parallel growth of high bandwidth telecommunications and multimedia
technology - both of which provide the infrastructure for VR applications -
promises to make the market for VR software one of the most exciting growth
areas into the millennium.
VR could also precipitate change in wider context.
The pessimistic view is that it will lead to the disturbing future described
by Aldous Huxley where people hide from the grimness of the physical world
at the 'feelies'. The optimistic view is that VR will enable humans to find
a richer form of communication, unimpeded by the laws of the real world.
One thing is clear, an increasing amount of communication between humans
will be mediated by computer software and, even when this is not called VR,
that is exactly what it will be.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940316

