FT941-4044

FT  12 MAR 94 / How To Spend It: Kindred kitchen spirit - If you can't stand
the heat . . . delegate when decision-making in the home. Lucia van der Post
on two radical examples of refurbishing


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


Anthony Worrall Thompson, the chef behind those chic London eateries, dell'
Ugo and 190 Queensgate, asked Mark Wilkinson to update the kitchen in his
own house, an Edwardian cottage near the Thames in Oxfordshire.
Wilkinson is not only a provider of made-to-measure kitchens, but does most
of the cooking for his family. Therefore Worrall Thompson felt he might find
a kindred spirit who would understand his needs.
The inspiration for the kitchen came from a little house which was built for
Queen Victoria's children at Osborne on the Isle of Wight. He felt the
cottage inspired him to think of Edwardian shooting lodges, cellar kitchens
in Edwardian London, Elgar, the Malvern Hills and a host of other
traditional English images. From these images he designed a kitchen which
had the feel of an old kitchen in a country house, but was not strictly
traditional.
'As a professional chef,' says Wilkinson, 'I knew he was going to be very
demanding on the kitchen physically, lots of bashing and kneading, so I had
to give him something strong and unfussy.
'As the front door opens straight into the kitchen it is clearly the most
important and emphatic room in the house, more important than the
sitting-room, so it was vital that it was welcoming and attractive as well
as functional. We put a heavy working area around the sinks and appliances
down one side and the large-scale storage down the other.'
Catering-sized equipment - as with Simon Stocker's clients, Worrall Thompson
insisted on a giant Amana fridge/freezer and a Belfast sink and taps - had
to be housed, so plain sturdy doors and stainless steel working surfaces
were a solid balance for their bulk. The cupboards all look sturdy and solid
and have handsome curved ends. Adjoining and leading into the kitchen is the
dining area. From there the living room opens up. The whole feel is of a
well-loved, much lived-in room.
The range of cabinets, finished in eggshell cream and with heavy rosewood
handles, is from Mark Wilkinson's latest range, which he calls Cooks'
Kitchen. Having offered us more elaborate decorative options in the past,
ranging from 'A Taste of Provence' to the 'Santa Fe' look and any number of
painted finishes, Mark Wilkinson now felt in need of a simpler approach to
kitchen design.
Cooks' Kitchen has the solid feel of an old-fashioned Edwardian house, a
kitchen in a real country house. Its working kitchen atmosphere is
reinforced by the surfaces - some made from extra-thick maple, some from
stainless steel and a granite inset in Giallo Veneziano.
The floor is made of wide, stripped pine floorboards. On one wall,
reinforcing Wilkinson's imagery from Albion England, are some decorative
murals of English rural life (workers in the fields, by Samantha Allkins),
which are meant to convey the feeling of exuberance and joy in the
countryside.
On the other wall are some primitive animal paintings, as well as some
peppers and tomatoes, as perhaps befits a prime purveyor of Mediterranean
peasant dishes.
All Mark Wilkinson's kitchens are made-to-measure. This one cost about
Pounds 19,000, including the Amana Fridge/freezer but excluding the French
Morice cooker.
Mark Wilkinson has showrooms at: 126 Holland Park Avenue, London W11 (tel:
071-727 5814); 13 Holywell Hill, St Albans, Herts AL1 1EZ (0727-40975); and
a new one at 41 St John's Wood High Street, London NW8. His headquarters are
at Overton House, High Street, Bromham, Wilts SN15 2HA. (0380-850004).

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940312

