FT943-13010

FT  21 JUL 94 / Arts: The Miracle Worker - Theatre


   By MARTIN HOYLE


What an extraordinary play The Miracle Worker is. Such a standby for
provincial reps, such an easy option for tatty tours. Yet despite vague
memories of William Gibson's 1959 Broadway success as a well-tailored
tear-jerker, the piece works theatrically every time.
Of course, the plot is fool-proof: the true story of how the infant Helen
Keller, blind, deaf and dumb and reduced to the status of an imperfectly
domesticated animal, was rescued from this living death by an inspired
teacher, Annie Sullivan, half-blind herself and from a heart-rendingly
deprived background.
The moment of breakthrough towards the end of the play, when the wild and
speechless child makes the connection between the finger-language words
pressed out on her palm and the actual outside world, is tremendous theatre.
I defy any cynic to be unmoved.
The scene passes with flying colours in the production by Richard Olivier at
the Comedy Theatre, even cast with a shrewd-looking Helen, for whom
communication is patently only a matter of time, and an Annie whose cool
confidence is never really in doubt.
If juvenile memory serves me, London's original Annie was Anna Massey, whose
gawky, homely vulnerability marked her as potentially one of life's losers.
She had to fight to survive, let alone sustain the effort of will to drag
her pupil into the world. Here we have Jenny Seagrove, fine-boned, delicate,
beautiful, an obvious heroine figure despite all her anguished, haunted
recollections of the little brother who died in the workhouse.
Catherine Holman gives a technically remarkable performance as Helen,
convulsive, scenting strangers like an animal, switching from tantrums to
the pathetic demand for comfort and reassurance.
But she misses the frighteningly feral quality that some actresses have
brought to the role. There is no need to be brought up by wolves to be wild;
helplessly indulgent parents in well-to-do Alabama in the 1880s will do the
trick for you just as well.
The play is funnier than might be expected, the humour centring on the
blusteringly bewhiskered paterfamilias, Captain Keller. There are queasy
hints that he is meant to be a lovable old softy - and a wispy sub-plot
concerning tensions with his grown-up son steer dangerously near the
squelchy quicksands of pop'n'junior plays - but William Gaunt gives him
tough authority.
Judi Bowker's Mrs Keller is also a rounded character, understandably
inclined to indulge her maimed child. If, as with other aspects of the
production, Annie's struggle to tame her bristling, isolated pupil looks a
trifle contrived - one long, soundless physical scuffle is as elaborately
choreographed as any western saloon-bar brawl - the message emerges clearly.
For Annie Sullivan it was not enough to transform the untamed creature into
a clean, napkin-wielding household pet; Helen had to be made as aware of,
and as hungry for, the richness of life as any normal person. Here acting,
production and the play itself come into their own.
The Comedy Theatre.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940721

