FT943-13357

FT  20 JUL 94 / Management: The end of a tradition - Japan's jobs-for-life
culture is disappearing but where does that leave new graduates


   By ANDREW FISHER


Many of Japan's graduates are having a hard time these days as companies
respond to sagging export markets, soaring costs and dwindling productivity
by putting a brake on new hiring instead of laying off inefficient or
surplus managers.
In the days when implacable growth seemed to be the norm for the Japanese
economy, most were virtually assured of a job on leaving university or
college. But now, says Jason James, strategist at stockbrokers James Capel
Pacific in Tokyo, 'it's a vicious cyclical market for graduates'.
Since the boom, or 'bubble', economy of the late 1980s ended in recession,
more of Japan's graduates leave college, high school and university each
year with no jobs: this year, the figure was around 150,000. They are
sometimes called employment-seeking ronin after the name for wandering
samurai without a lord in the feudal past.
Eventually, Japan's industry - still clogged with regulations which make it
hard for foreign companies and domestic start-ups to enter the market -
could benefit if bright graduates are forced to join smaller firms. At
present, adds James, the squeezing out of graduates from the traditional job
market represents 'one of the unfairnesses of the way Japanese restructuring
is going on'.
Thus the virtues of the Japanese employment system - jobs for life in most
companies and a high degree of commitment - now tend to work against the
young, believes Haruo Shimada, economics professor at Keio University. 'Able
college graduates are without jobs, but the less able who were hired in the
'bubble' are in no danger.'
In a country heavily committed to lifetime employment, redundancies are
almost unknown. Unemployment is a mere 2.8 per cent. Even lowering the
retirement age can bring down a torrent of criticism. Okuma, the ailing
machine tool company, found this out a few months ago; its president had to
resign after planning to cut the retirement age from 60 to 55.
Okuma provoked so much publicity that it is likely to remain a rare example
of a company trying to edge out employees early. 'Some companies do try to
retire people early with incentives,' notes Kuniyoshi Sasaki, director of
the Japan Productivity Centre. 'But Okuma is the exception of exceptions.'
The adverse publicity it provoked is likely to deter other companies from
trying the same, although Pioneer and TDK in the electronics sector have
also put pressure on managers to retire early.
The problem with Okuma's action was, says James, that 'it got into the
newspapers. If you're going to do anything, you'd better do it quickly'. But
most Japanese companies are not geared up for quick action on the employment
front. 'Only a few companies have done enough,' believes Shintaro Hori,
managing director of the Japanese office of Bain, the consultancy.
Cutting down on recruits and not replacing employees who leave is the easy
part. Honda, the car company, hired 2,075 graduates and school leavers in
1990; this year's figure was 250 and next year's will be around 200.
Fujitsu, the computer concern, used to take on at least 2,000 graduates
every year. Last year, this was 300 and the 1995 figure is expected to be
some 400.
Both companies have, by Japanese standards, gone a long way down the road
towards restructuring their operations. This has involved an extensive
rethinking of the way they work. Under Nobuhiko Kawamoto, its president,
Honda has looked at every aspect of its business and sought to make managers
more responsive to the tougher conditions of the 1990s.
It has introduced a payment system based on merit rather than seniority for
its 4,500 managers in Japan, being among the first in industry to do this.
Goals are worked out for each manager and performance assessed a year later.
More radically for consensus-minded Japan, Honda has just introduced a
tenure system to speed up the progress of bright managers through the
promotion chain.
There is a three-year transition before the system starts to bite. 'This is
a long period,' admits Kawamoto, 'but the change is still drastic for the
Japanese. Most people thought they would be managers until they retired, but
now limits are being set.' Some with specialised functions in research,
legal, advertising or other areas may welcome being freed from the
administrative burden. 'But some people will be shocked.'
In the computer and electronics sectors, where competition is fierce and
product cycles ever shorter, companies tend to be more open to new ways of
doing business. Fujitsu has also moved to a merit-based salary system for
managers and will also encourage people with exciting new ideas to start up
their own businesses - with company backing - or develop projects
internally.
'This is an attempt to change the conventional system we have in Japan of
lifetime employment,' says Toru Katsurada, personnel director. But in trying
to shake up the system, companies are desperate not to demotivate staff and
weaken the loyalty ties that have helped Japan become the world's second
biggest economy. 'It is important for us to sustain the willingness and
interest of our workers, especially the skilled ones developing products,'
adds Katsurada.
That is the dilemma for Japanese companies: how to keep the old virtues
without stultifying creativity and enthusiasm. 'Japan has never really had
the test of downsizing,' says Shimada. 'It's never experienced a long-run
downturn since the second world war.' Thus the system has provided what he
calls an 'incumbents' paradise'. But for many managers, Japanese industry
looks like becoming more uncomfortable and less secure.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940720

