FT944-11175

FT  08 NOV 94 / Moscow debt fears resurface: Appointment of new negotiator
causes concern on markets


   By JOHN LLOYD


The future of Russia's negotiations on a debt which totals Dollars 90bn
(Pounds 55bn) are now causing concern on the world's financial markets
following the appointment over the weekend of Mr Oleg Davydov, the trade
minister, to the post of chief debt negotiator.
Mr Davydov, who has had little experience in the world of debt negotiations,
inherits a complex portfolio which had been commanded by Mr Alexander
Shokhin, the deputy premier for the economy who resigned on Friday. Mr
Shokhin had proposed that the negotiations be continued by Mr Andrei
Vavilov, the first deputy finance minister, but the latter is under a cloud
because of his alleged negligence on 'Black Tuesday' a month ago, when the
rouble lost more than 20 per cent of its value.
Mr Davydov, uninvolved in 'Black Tuesday', is on record as proposing that
Russia should be forgiven its debt - a move which sparked alarm at the time
in the Paris and London clubs of government and commercial bank creditors.
Mr Shokhin later denied that this was a serious option for Russia.
'Davydov is very much not a banker and will take time to come up the
learning curve on debt,' said one merchant banker yesterday. 'He may change
his views, but it's alarming.'
Deutsche Bank, the leading German bank which heads the negotiations on the
repayment of bank debt, is due to hold a further round of negotiations next
week.
Whether or not the Russian side agrees to keep to this schedule is now
regarded as an early test of the intentions of Mr Davydov.
Outline agreements were thrashed out in Madrid for both sets of talks -
agreements which Mr Shokhin expressed satisfaction with, although important
issues still have to be settled.
Both provisional deals involve restructuring the debts over 15-18 years,
with a five-year grace period for at least the repayment of principal.
In the case of the commercial bank debt, the agreement also includes a
repayment of interest over 10 years, possibly with a five-year grace period
 -and with a payment of Dollars 750,000 on the interest accruing this year
and last, to be made before the end of 1994. Talks were stalled by the crash
of the rouble a month ago - and are again in doubt because of the cabinet
changes still going on.
However, Mr Madhav Dhar, a managing director of Morgan Stanley in New York,
said last night: 'Russia is getting very hot now a lot of people see it as
the new frontier, but are prevented from buying equities because of legal
problems. The next best thing is debt - and that will sustain the market in
spite of the changes, which at present seem clearly negative.'
Russian debt slipped from around 35 cents to the dollar to 28 last week.
Ironically, it recovered yesterday to around 30 cents to the dollar as big
buyers, rumoured to be from within Russia itself, pushed up the price. One
London analyst of the market said last night: 'It is a very volatile market
with enormous flows going both ways right now. People are simply divided on
the issue of what the changes mean in the short and longer terms.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941108

