FT941-3424

FT  16 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Flotation values Maid at Pounds 89.1m


   By PAUL TAYLOR


Shares in Maid, the on-line business information supplier, were priced at
110p yesterday valuing the group at Pounds 89.1m - well below market
expectations fuelled by the company and its financial advisers.
Some 11.5m shares in the nine-year-old group have been placed firm with
institutional investors by Hoare Govett, stockbroker to the issue, on behalf
of the company.
The new shares represent a little more than 14 per cent of the shares in
issue following the placing.
Earlier the company had been confidently predicting that the issue,
underwritten by Hill Samuel, would place a minimum value of Pounds 100m on
the group and provide it with about Pounds 16m in net new funds. A placing
price of up to 150p a share had been mooted.
However the flotation has been dogged with controversy, with some analysts
and fund managers expressing concern and surprise at Maid's proposed stock
market valuation and lack of established track record.
As a result the company scaled down its expectations for the flotation price
and has abandoned plans to spend Pounds 4m on a building to consolidate the
group's UK operations.
In addition, a number of existing BES investors in the company who had been
expected to sell shares in the placing, have decided to wait.
Nevertheless, both the company and its advisers insisted that the placing
had been a success and defended the pricing while blaming competitors for
'the background noise' surrounding the issue.
Mr Stephen Aulsebrook of Hill Samuel, described the 110p price as 'very
attractive', and said the placing had been well received by most
institutional investors.
'We set out to raise enough money for the company to move forward and we
have done that,' he said, adding, 'it is a hell of an achievement for a
company which, as some people have pointed out, made only Pounds 600,000 in
profits last year.'
Mr Daniel Wagner, Maid's 30-year-old founder and chief executive, said he
was 'thrilled to bits' with the placing while acknowledging that market
conditions had resulted in the issue having to be priced 'more
competitively'.
He said the new funds, while somewhat less than anticipated, would enable
Maid to continue to develop its product portfolio, including a planned
version of Maid for Windows version of it's software.
He dismissed the company's critics who have questioned various aspects of
its operations, including its dependence on primary business information
providers.
'This is a brilliant business and we are going to prove it in the market,'
Mr Wagner said.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940316

