FT943-1000

FT  27 SEP 94 / HK 'needs to speed things up'


   By LOUISE LUCAS


   HONG KONG


China and the government that will take over Hong Kong after Beijing regains
sovereignty in 1997 would suffer if the work of the Joint Liaison Group
(JLG), set up to oversee the detail of the handover, was not speeded up, Mr
Chris Patten, the governor, said yesterday.
On the 10th anniversary of the signing of the Joint Declaration agreeing
terms for Hong Kong's transfer, he said: 'We are beginning to run out of
time; the last meeting registered little progress. We've got to do better.
The issues are complicated but mostly not political. But they are important.
China and the SAR (post-'97 Special Administrative Region) will suffer if
they are not resolved.'
Echoing the words of Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, who visited the
colony 12 days ago, Mr Patten urged an imaginative and patient approach,
suggesting some tinkering with the existing machinery might be needed to
attack the growing backlog of issues now with the JLG. 'Douglas Hurd will
want to discuss with China's Vice-Premier Qian Qichen whom he's meeting on
Thursday, how we can get around some of these obstacles, how we can get the
forward movement we need.'
Last week's JLG talks were muddied by a deadlock on Hong Kong's badly needed
ninth container terminal. China intends to veto the franchise. Other
pressing issues on the JLG table cited by Mr Patten yesterday are freedom of
travel and the local re-enactment and adaptation of some 800 laws and
ordinances. Mr Patten used the occasion to commend the Joint Declaration,
initialled on September 26, 1984, and to enumerate the milestones reached by
Hong Kong since then.
These were: a doubling of GDP in real terms every decade (Hong Kong is today
the world's eighth biggest trading economy and has a per capita GDP of
Dollars 20,000 (Pounds 12,667) and a 15-fold increase in the capitalisation
of the stock market.
'The Treaty sets a clear framework for Hong Kong's future up to and well
beyond 1997. No one pretends it is perfect, nor that it has dispelled every
uncertainty. But imagine what Hong Kong would have been like without the
Joint Declaration, as 1997 loomed ever larger and the uncertainties grew.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940927

