FT942-12182

FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: Invesco cuts unit charges -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu considers the reason for slicing initial costs


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Investors have almost become blase about unit trust discounts but, with the
traditional end-of-tax-year Pep rush over, they will be seeing far fewer of
them as most fund management groups have little reason to continue wooing
investors.
This makes Invesco's announcement that it is cutting the initial charge on
all its unit trusts and Peps to 3 per cent from 5.25 per cent from May 3 all
the more startling. The cut is not a special offer but is part of a new
pricing structure which is here to stay. The annual charge remains unchanged
at 1.5 per cent on most funds.
This is not the first time that a fund management group has cut its initial
charges but Invesco is by far the largest to do so. Lazard pioneered the
move in the UK in 1988 when it abolished the initial charge on all its unit
trusts.
Unfortunately, its initiative did not trigger an avalanche of competition
but instead a very slow trickle. In 1992, Murray Johnstone reduced the
initial charge across the board on its unit trusts to 1 per cent and
Gartmore announced that it was abolishing the charge on one of its unit
trusts - its UK index tracker.
The 'no-load' and 'low-load' fund, collective equity vehicles named with
reference to the size of their initial charge, are common in the US but
still rare in the UK, where the norm is an initial charge of 5 to 6 per
cent.
A low initial charge can make quite a difference to investors. The bid-offer
spread (the difference between buying and selling units) on Invesco's UK
income fund on Thursday was 6.3 per cent - the spread on Lazard's UK income
fund was 1.7 per cent.
That means an investor who put Pounds 100 into the Lazard trust had Pounds
98.30 of his money working for him but only Pounds 93.70 in Invesco's trust.
While the initial charge is important, the annual management fee can make a
larger dent in an investment. Fund management groups with reduced initial
charge make their money on the annual fee and on the increased volume of
business which they hope the move will engender. When Murray Johnstone
reduced its initial fee, it raised its annual management charge from 1 per
cent to 1.5 per cent.
In spite of the importance of charges, even the lowest of these will not
prove much solace to an investor unless the performance is there to deliver
the returns. A discounted initial charge can be a powerful marketing ploy,
so investors must still look at performance figures to see what how valuable
the reduction in charges is going to be.
Invesco is the first to admit that the performance of its funds is not as
good as it would have hoped. Its Japan Smaller companies fund has a very
good track record but most of its UK funds are to be found in the bottom
half rather than the top half of the performance tables.
The poor performance is linked with events in the past few years that the
company would like to put behind it. Last year, Invesco was fined Pounds
750,000 after a two-year investigation by Imro, the self-regulating body for
fund management organisations, for misconduct, including mismanagement of
the Mirror Group pension scheme.
However, earlier this month, Invesco reported sharply improved profits after
a year of worldwide restructuring. It is reducing its unit trusts from 32 to
21 funds, for which it is seeking unitholder approval. This should reduce
its costs.
Alan Wren, managing director of Invesco fund managers, says the company has
introduced a greater level of discipline to track risk and performance more
closely but it will take time before the effect of these is felt in the
performance tables.
These steps include creating an asset allocation group to work independently
of the fund managers; creating a risk control group to limit the volatility
of its funds and introducing tighter monitoring of stock selection.
Investors may prefer to wait to see the effect of these before rushing in
and to hope that Invesco's price move proves catching.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940430

