FT942-14808

FT  19 APR 94 / City seeks mediation work: London body aims to offer fast
arbitration of financial disputes


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


A City body to settle disputes among banks, brokers and large companies over
financial transactions was launched yesterday in an attempt to establish
London as the world centre for financial services arbitration.
The City Disputes Panel, founded by law firms, professional bodies and QCs
with the backing of several banks, aims to provide arbitration and mediation
services similar to those supplied in London to the world maritime industry.
The founding members said the panel, which will offer arbitration on
financial disputes involving share underwriting and over-the-counter
financial derivatives, would provide a counterpart to conciliation schemes
for small investors.
They said it would be able to settle disputes far more quickly than the
Commercial Court in England and the Court of Session in Scotland. Its
tribunals of three members would also be able to operate at a fraction of
the cost of courts.
The panel, which is being supported by the Corporation of London, will
attempt to establish a reputation for efficient arbitration with the aim of
attracting banks in other world financial centres to London to settle their
disputes.
Lord Kingsdown, the former governor of the Bank of England who is president
of the panel, said the specialist knowledge of panel members would allow
'the speedy dispatch of disputes'.
Mr Richard Freeman, the panel's chief executive, said the panel would try to
attract banks, fund managers, insurance companies and stockbrokers to join
at an annual cost of Pounds 400. Only members would be allowed to refer
disputes.
He said the panel would also like to recruit large companies, which are
involved with banks and investment banks in many transactions on wholesale
financial markets. 'We think that is a realistic aspiration,' he said.
Lord Ackner, a member of the working party that drew up a set of model
arbitration rules, said he expected banks to seek arbitration where the law
was well-established and the issues involved were not too financially
complex.
He added that he did not believe cases such as the dispute between local
authorities and banks over interest-rate swaps would have been suitable for
arbitration because they involved areas where law was uncertain.
Mr Freeman said he hoped the panel would arbitrate on disputes involving
developing areas of wholesale finance, including financial derivatives and
electronic banking for corporate customers.
Awards of the arbitration panel would be enforceable by law, although both
parties would have to agree to arbitration before its use. The panel hopes
to be able to examine issues within hours if required.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940419

