FT941-17024

FT  06 JAN 94 / International Company News: More job cuts possible, says
Digital's European president


   By ALAN CANE


Mr Vincenzo Damiani, Digital Equipment's newly appointed European president,
yesterday outlined a detailed plan to restore growth and profitability to
the US computer company's European operations.
Some 400 staff at the company's headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland,
yesterday heard him prescribe measures to regenerate growth, improve
efficiency and develop closer relationships with customers and business
partners.
He said it was a 'distinct possibility' that more jobs would be lost in
Europe than the 3,000 planned for this financial year. Digital employs some
30,000 people in Europe.
Yesterday's meeting was the first in a 60-day programme of visits throughout
Europe at which Mr Damiani, who was a senior manager with International
Business Machines before joining Digital last December, intends to explain
his plans to the European workforce.
Digital was at one time second only to IBM among computer manufacturers, but
it has been hit by falling prices and moves by customers to smaller,
industry-standard computer systems. European markets traditionally provide
Digital with half its revenue, but weakness in Italy and Germany contributed
to a 9 per cent fall in operating revenues in the first-quarter results.
Mr Damiani was with IBM for 29 years, His final appointment there was
general manager for marketing and services. A member of IBM's management
elite, his move to Digital was met with some surprise by former colleagues.
Mr Damiani's objectives for the company will be met, he says, by 10 'action
points'. He intends, for example, to focus Digital's resources on small and
medium-sized companies while identifying a number of niche markets in
specific industries and for specific products.
A major aim will be to increase marketing and selling competency while
forming new relationships with business partners - software houses and
systems integrators able to add value to Digital's hardware. The company has
pinned much of its hopes on its high powered 'Alpha' microprocessor chip,
but the market has proved slow to develop and Digital has found it difficult
to grow sales of its newly-introduced personal computer ranges beyond its
existing customers.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940106

