FT944-11098

FT  08 NOV 94 / Management (The Growing Business): From fat to lean
enterprises - How a leading Japanese consultant was impressed by production
techniques at Leyland Trucks


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


We are going to win and the industrial west is going to lose. For you, the
essence of management is getting the ideas out of the heads of the bosses
and into the hands of labour. For us the core of management is precisely the
art of mobilising and pulling together the intellectual resources of all
employees in the service of the firm.
 -Konosuke Matsushita, late founder of the Japanese electronics company, in
1982.
A high-tech building that houses 70 product designers stands in a corner of
Leyland Trucks' Lancashire assembly complex in the north-west of England.
To Masaaki Imai, who has been introducing Japanese manufacturing techniques
outside Japan for more than two decades, the location of these designers is
a sign of real progress.
'Normally designers in the west think they are geniuses,' says Imai,
president of the Kaizen Institute, a European consultancy. 'They want to
have nothing to do with shop floor even though they are serving the shop
floor.'
To test how far Leyland Trucks has changed, the Financial Times asked Imai,
author of a book on Kaizen, or continuous improvement, to cast an eye over
Leyland Trucks.
A short step away from the designers' building, Imai examines the clearly
delineated passage alongside the production line. There are almost no
obstacles preventing free flow of workers and fork lift trucks. 'I'm
impressed by the housekeeping,' he says. 'Anything not in the right place
suggests systems are not there.'
Turning to a stack of components beside the line, Imai is more critical.
'You could cut work in progress to one half and see what opportunities it
throws up.'
Leyland Trucks has had a chequered history, emerging in 1993 as a management
buy-out from the receivers of Leyland Daf. Once a sizeable force in truck
manufacture, lack of investment in new products and increased competition
from Continental manufacturers cut Leyland Trucks' share of Europe's 5-15
tonne market to only 7.5 per cent.
But over the past five years Leyland Trucks has been introducing what it
calls 'lean enterprise', based on lean production methods that have spread
from companies such as Toyota and encompass total quality management, total
productive maintenance and just in time.
The management believes it has overturned the rigid hierarchies of
traditional mass production techniques that have dominated more than 90
years of truck manufacture at Leyland. In its place, lean enterprise has
involved the workforce in a quest for quality to a degree that would have
been unimagineable a decade ago.
Suppliers and even organisations such as the Lancashire Police Force tour
the plant each week to view what Leyland Trucks says is a striking
transformation.
The arrival at Leyland is both impressive and inauspicious. Following heavy
investment at the start of the 1980s, Leyland Trucks has one of the most
modern facilities in Europe. But it is big. A factory that can manufacture
18,000 trucks a year on single-shift working is producing only 8,500
vehicles. Lean production theory says dead space will be filled with
unnecessary inventory or will lead to movement of parts and people that adds
no value.
Imai believes the same production could be achieved in half the space, a
change that would force a reduction in inventory beside the production line
and a reassessment of relations with suppliers.
John Oliver, Leyland Trucks managing director, accepts the point. He is
trying to find contract assembly work for one of the two production lines.
If unsuccessful, however, he may close part of the plant.
Even with this expansive factory set-up, Oliver says the impact of lean
engineering has been dramatic. Leyland Trucks first stepped on to the
treadmill of a continuous improvement in 1989 with a programme of training
and production process changes that cost Pounds 100,000. Within two years
Oliver says the company measured savings of Pounds 10m  - repeatable each
year. Some came from reducing head count. But much of it was the result of
lower inventory and improved quality.
'That was a 24 per cent reduction in annual operating costs and it took our
break even from 11,500 trucks a year to 5,000,' says Oliver. But this
approach came only after a decade in which Leyland Trucks tried more
traditional ways to crank up quality. First there was investment in new
plant in the early 1980s, followed by introduction of Material Resources
Planning (MRP II). But after three years of a total quality programme
starting in 1985, quality and productivity improvements plateaued.
'We were stagnating,' says Oliver. 'There was resistance in the organisation
to more change - the people were exhausted. On top of that the market was
turning down.
'We had thought the Japanese success was because of high technology and the
people working very hard,' he says. 'But Matsushita was saying what mattered
was not a physical manifestation of commitment but the intellectual
resources of all the employees. We were asking these people to hang up their
brains when they came in to work.'
The company set about educating its workforce about lean production; why
Leyland Trucks needed to build to order, rather than for stock as its
European competitors do, and the crucial role of employees in the search for
improved quality.
Imai is full of praise for the management's commitment to involving the
workforce. But he feels management could set more targets. 'Too many western
managers think TQM means just letting the lower level people form a quality
group to come up with ideas,' says Imai. 'But management should always be
challenging the workforce by setting targets.'
Oliver believes this is what management is doing but admits that 'in the
early days we were confused between delegation and abdication of
responsibility' to the workforce.
The changes the workforce has accepted are considerable. As recently as
1989, there were 50 job demarcations at Leyland Trucks. Now there are only
six descriptions, allowing more flexible deployment of the workforce.
Perhaps the most fundamental change has been the introduction of Additional
Vacation Days, where overtime is now 'paid' in extra holidays which are
taken when there is slack demand. Before this system the workforce might
have been paid overtime one month only to be laid off (with pay) the next
because demand had slackened.
The union has now accepted a system that more closely matches the supply of
labour with the unpredictable demand of its customers.
'Nobody liked AVDs and they still don't,' says Steve Southworth, union
convener at Leyland Trucks. 'But they understand why it has to be done after
going through lean enterprise training. It saves the company money and when
you are building to order you have to do it.'
Having introduced the idea of lean production at Leyland Trucks, the company
is now focusing on a programme of 'supply chain optimisation' - spreading
the word about lean enterprise to its 800 suppliers.
There are obvious areas of co-operation - new models are now discussed at
the design stage with suppliers rather than after design is completed. But
Leyland Trucks' small size remains a constraint. Much as John Dwyer,
operations manager, would like suppliers to deliver fewer parts more
frequently, he admits Leyland Trucks would be asking for uneconomic order
sizes.
To Imai, the assembly plant was a pleasant surprise. 'It is quite an
achievement to have reached a stage where they can start building their
trucks after they receive their orders.' But he says the Leyland assembly
plant still contains a mountain of opportunities for further improvement.
Oliver agrees the company is still some way behind the best Japanese
standards. The achievements to date have, however, allowed the company to
invest Pounds 25m on its new 55 series 11-15 tonne truck for continental
Europe, its first new product launch outside the UK.
Given Leyland Trucks' history, this could only be contemplated because the
company is making the transition from outmoded mass production techniques to
the lean production methods of the future.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941108

