FT942-14383

FT  20 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Equities lose ground after turbulent
session - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


London's stock market, in common with other international markets, suffered
numerous mood swings yesterday as dealers and institutions struggled to come
to terms with the latest shifts in US monetary policy.
At the end of a highly volatile, but curiously subdued session in terms of
customer business, the FT-SE 100 index settled a further 10.2 lower at
3,128.0.
The modest closing fall masked a series of big swings in sentiment in an
equity market influenced primarily by the performance of Wall Street, which
itself mirrored erratic movements in US bonds.
The scene was set for a highly charged opening session as dealers braced
themselves for a bout of expected selling in the wake of the 41-point slide
on the Dow Jones Average on Monday evening, following the 25 basis points
rise in the US Federal funds rate.
In the event, the 100 index kicked off with a modest six point fall,
encouraged by a better-than-expected opening by gilts which started trading
with losses in the region of only a quarter point.
With very few signs of substantial selling from the big institutions share
prices began to rally and the market moved into positive territory within an
hour of the official opening. The FT-SE 100 index reached what was to be the
day's highest level, up 7.3 at 3,145.5.
The rally soon ran out of steam, however, as weakness in equity and bond
markets across Europe, and especially in Germany and France, unnerved London
investors.
At its worst, shortly after midday, the 100 index was down 24.5 with dealers
shaken by the mid-morning slide in gilts where the long dated stocks were
down more than half a point.
Thereafter, it was the performance of Wall Street that called the tune
across Europe. The US market opened firmer and moved more than 20 points
higher after good corporate news from leading US stocks such as Philip
Morris and Chrysler, before running out of steam and displaying a
double-figure fall after London closed.
The day's turnover reached 769.5m shares, well above Monday's 683.5m and
last Friday's 698.8m, but dealers pointed out that daily figures had been
inflated by another big placing of shares in Clyde Petroleum, one of the
smaller UK oil exploration stocks. Clyde alone accounted for almost 60m of
the daily total.
Other features of the days's trading activity included the sale of a block
of 5m RTZ shares by Cazenove, the influential broking house.
Conflicting views by leading food retailing analysts led to heavy two-way
trading in Asda while the integrated oil stocks continued to attract keen
interest.
Trading got under way in shares of Ashanti, the Ghanaian gold mining group,
where Lonrho retains a 43 per cent stake, with London traders reporting
strong support for the stock which settled at a good premium to the Dollars
20 a share issue price.
The head of marketmaking at one big integrated securities firm said the
London market's performance was 'unimpressive; there is a feeling around
that London will go down if we get a rate change and go down if we don't'
Chart analysts pointed out, however, that the emergence of strong support
for the UK equity market as the FT-SE 100 hit the 3,115 was a big bull
point. 'As long as we keep bouncing off that level the market should be able
to make progress,' said one.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

940420

