FT943-12872

FT  22 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: A route to give more power to the
people


   From Mr PAAL MYHRVANG


Sir, In a representative democracy, individuals are elected by the will of
the people. This responsibility may often create dissatisfaction among the
very people the representatives have been elected to represent. In light of
this, Charles Leadbeater and Andrew Adonis, in their article 'Power to the
people' (July 15), put forward persuasive arguments for greater involvement
of the electorate in the decision-making process.
Appropriately, in a world where information flows freely, technology is
available to allow electronic voting and, most importantly, the voting
population are highly educated individuals very much capable of taking many
of the decisions, a case for stronger influence of direct democracy is
present. Leadbeater and Adonis' remedies, however, will not do much to
resolve the problems. True, voter vetoes in the form of referenda will
induce a greater degree of responsibility of the representatives, but this
suggestion, along with the two others, voter juries and voter feed-back, are
rather more likely to fuel the already destructive tendency of voters'
resentment of politicians. This will exacerbate further the efficiency of
decision-making. The first proposal will have this effect through leaving
decisions open to reversal as the veto will, by definition, be imposed
post-decision. The second one will let a body which is very likely to be
totally unrepresentative of the population advise on decision-making, only
to be 'overruled' by the representative body.
A better approach would be to introduce a clear division of powers between
the people and the representatives, and let the decisions be made
irreversibly by the people in those areas they are given the power to do so.
Ideally, these powers would cover areas where representatives today have the
power to prevent the transfer of, or even increase, their own powers. This
would, for example, be relevant in a transfer of a national parliament's
powers to a supranational body. The people should, furthermore, have a
strict procedure under which they can transfer more powers to or from their
own hands. Paal Myhrvang,
Postboks 163,
Nedre Torke,
2801 Gjorvik,
Norway

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940722

