FT942-12252

FT  30 APR 94 / Spin and tonics: French chefs are trying to whet appetites


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


Quite simply, there are too many restaurants in France.'
This observation comes not from a prospective visitor to France somewhat
perplexed by the 10,676 entries in the 1994 Michelin Guide, but from Michel
Roux, three-star Michelin chef.
Although Roux is based at the Waterside Inn, Bray, Berkshire, he keeps his
finger on the culinary pulse of France via Relais & Chateaux, the marketing
consortium of top hotels and restaurants, and the Maitre Patissiers de
France, an elite culinary group of which he is vice-president.
In Colmar, Alsace, recently for Festiga '94, a gastronomic fair, Roux heard
a collective groan of distress from French restaurateurs. Of immediate
concern is the oversupply of restaurants. But more worrying for a country
that considers itself custodian of the world's finest culinary traditions,
the youth of France, reared on 'le fast food', are no longer attracted to a
career in the kitchen.
Business has been in decline since 1991 but last year was for many
restaurants the worst on record, culminating in chefs' protests in
south-west France, led by local chef Andre Daguin. The French government's
'franc fort' policy has dented the tourist market and to survive several top
Parisian chefs, including Jacques Cagna, Michel Rostang and Guy Savoy, have
opened more relaxed, less expensive brasseries, such as La Butte Chaillot,
La Rotisserie d'en Face and La Rotisserie du Beaujolais, which have menus
priced about 40 per cent lower than at their main establishments.
A few top Parisian restaurants, such as those run by Joel Robuchon and
Bernard Pacaud, may be booked ahead but it is for weeks rather than months
as it was in the 1980s. Outside the big cities, business is quiet,
particularly at lunch. According to Roux, 1994 may be 'bloody'.
Part of the damage is self-inflicted. While French restaurateurs have priced
their food sensibly, via fixed-price menus, their wine pricing has been
rapacious. Normal practice is to take the wine's cost price and multiply it
by between 4.5 and 6 to arrive at a selling price inclusive of 18 per cent
tax and 15 per cent service. This policy has discouraged many US visitors,
used to lower mark-ups, and upset several French winemakers.
Twenty-one top champagne houses have given French restaurateurs a marketing
lesson by launching a campaign to boost consumption. They are offering a 20
per cent rebate on the cost price if restaurants agree not to charge more
than Fr300 for non-vintage champagne. More than 900 restaurants are taking
part.
But at Festiga '94, in the presence of Paul Bocuse, perhaps the world's most
renowned chef, the Maitres Cuisiniers de France launched a much grander
initiative, entitled 'Parcours du Professionalisme Gastronomique', to
overhaul the entire industry, stimulate demand for good food and inspire the
next generation of French chefs.
Put simply, the plan is to grab them when they are young. Chefs will now
visit primary schools throughout France to explain the importance of good
health and good food so that, as schooleavers, they will consider a career
in catering. Other measures were announced to upgrade the training for those
at college and to reward more positively trainee chefs and waiters in
restaurants. Each trainee chef will receive a 'Passport to Professionalism'
sponsored by the local branch of the bank Credit Mutuel.
On the fair's demonstration stands the policy was being put into practice.
As three-star chef, Michel Troisgros, was cooking barbary duck with turnips
in front of an audience of 500 French adults, another professional chef was
supervising 5-year-olds, dressed in white mini-chefs' jackets and hats, as
they cut strawberries and vegetables. Behind were their drawings of
butchers' and bakers' shops under the heading: 'If I do not eat meat, eggs
or fish, I will not grow up big and strong.'
Will French restaurants find it difficult to attract new customers or chefs?
Troisgros laughs. 'At the top end of the market we need extra customers,' he
says. 'Although business is good, we would like an extra 10 customers each
service to take it back to the level it was four years ago.'
For other less well-known French restaurants the competition for customers
and good staff is almost certain to intensify and may lead to a significant
restructuring.
One solution to an oversupply of restaurants and a shortage of good chefs
may lie in restaurants grouping together. Philippe Bohrer, 31, a one-star
Michelin chef at Rouffach, Alsace, has formed Syndicale Gourmande with three
other chefs because, he says: 'Chefs today have to sell themselves to their
customers and to their staff, and go where their customers want, even taking
restaurants into homes or offices.'
'Restauration a la domicile', Bohrer's vision of the future, may be the most
important change the industry has undergone since the French Revolution
broke up many of the great houses and transformed France's domestic cooks
and servants into the world's first restaurateurs.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940430

