FT941-3465

FT  16 MAR 94 / Business and the Environment: Big boys' game comes under
fire - Germany's national recycling scheme faces growing attack / Worldwide
Waste


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


Wuppertal, a smoky town in the recession-hit coal mining region of northern
Germany, is hardly inspiring. But for Ernst von Weizsacker, one of Germany's
most prominent environmentalists, this is just the place for an institute
devoted to the fight against pollution.
Von Weizsacker, of the Wuppertal Institute for Climatology, recently
announced that he was retiring as president of the advisory council of
Duales System Deutschland (DSD), Germany's three-year-old national recycling
scheme.
Von Weizsacker calls Germany's most ambitious environmental project a
'dangerous manipulation' which 'serves the throw-away society'. He has
joined the swelling chorus of critics who claim that the waste disposal
scheme is misconceived.
Von Weizsacker's criticism is directed at the monopolistic structure that
characterises DSD and makes the country's recycling industry increasingly
concentrated in the hands of a few utilities and energy groups.
DSD was created in 1991 by 600 companies in response to the packaging law
drawn up by Klaus Topfer, the environment minister. This makes manufacturers
and retailers responsible for collection and recycling of packaging waste.
It also sets collection and recycling quotas, which increase over time and
must be enforced nationally.
Industrial groups in Germany set up DSD as a national waste collection
scheme, which signed contracts with waste recyclers. To meet the cost of
collection, DSD imposes a fee, borne mostly by consumers through higher
prices and shown as a green dot on packaging.
Because the law insisted the system should be nationwide, DSD quickly spread
to nearly all German cities. Few German households are without the special
yellow bins for packaging waste with green dots.
Three years after its creation, DSD's quasi-monopoly has angered
middle-sized German recyclers and environmentalists who say the giant waste
collector is squeezing out of a profitable market the small players who
represent a pool of innovation for new environmentally friendly recycling
technologies.
The Federal Cartel Office has admitted there is a problem but argues that
DSD is only fulfilling the packaging law. Undaunted, the medium-sized
companies are intensifying their lobbying efforts within government circles.
They point out that in 1992, more than 140 waste management companies were
acquired by larger groups, compared with 60 in 1990.
The medium-sized companies are also protesting against 10-year contracts
signed by DSD with municipalities and with the large utilities and energy
groups. 'Innovation and market strategies for recycling specific waste
products no longer have a chance,' explains the federal association of
medium-sized companies (BVMW). The association is proposing continuous
tender processes and price negotiations, which would allow them to bid for
DSD contracts. They add that such measures would also open the market to
foreign competition.
Waste disposal companies created by municipalities now make up one in three
of DSD's clients. 'Municipalities immediately saw a tremendous source of
revenue in this business and made sure the contracts did not escape them,'
says Franz-Josef Fraundorfer, managing director in the German office of
Arthur D Little, the consultancy group.
Large utilities and energy groups have also moved into waste recycling. RWE
Entsorgung, the waste management subsidiary of RWE, Germany's biggest
utility group, has a turnover of more than DM2bn (Pounds 700m). Three years
old, it has acquired 100 companies in its expansion drive, and DSD accounts
for 15 per cent of its business.
Other German concerns have also stepped in, with Veba, the Dusseldorf-based
energy group, processing 120,000 tonnes of plastics in a recycling plant
linked to its oil refinery in Bottrop. And Thyssen Handelsunion, a
subsidiary of Thyssen, the big engineering and steel group, is involved in
building up recycling plants in eastern Germany.
These groups argue that the future of waste disposal in Germany lies with
those who can invest large sums in complicated recycling plants. High
investments also justify long-term contracts, DSD officials say.
According to the Environmental Council, an advisory body to the federal
states, four or five companies are likely to share some 40 per cent of the
domestic waste market in coming years.
DSD says the concentration process in the industry had started before it
came into being,
but medium-sized companies claim the DSD's structure favours large
companies. 'DSD is dominated by companies such as Unilever and Procter &
Gamble who have no interest in meddling with the small players. It is a big
boys' game,' says one entrepreneur.
Meanwhile, the government has ignored critics from the smaller companies.
Topfer says his packaging law achieved a 13 per cent drop in packaging waste
in Germany in 1993.
Next week: The US.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940316

