FT943-13285

FT  20 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Tests prove new soap powder safe, says
Unilever


   By DIANE SUMMERS and RONALD VAN DE KROL


Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch consumer products combine, is today releasing
detailed laboratory tests on its new-generation soap powder which it says
prove the detergent's safety and effectiveness.
Rival Procter & Gamble, which is soon to launch its own new detergent, has
criticised Unilever's product, claiming test results show that it can damage
clothes after repeated washing.
The latest battery of tests from Unilever, conducted by six independent
institutes in the Netherlands, France, the UK, Switzerland and Austria, were
on Persil Power, which is also sold as Omo Power and Skip Power. They are
all the same product sold under different names in different countries, and
all contain a new manganese-based ingredient that has been at the centre of
the dispute between Unilever and Procter.
The latest tests were on the 'rebalanced' version of the detergent, which
contains less manganese, - reformulated after the Procter criticism.
Persil Power was tested against Procter's Ariel Ultra.
Unilever quotes CTTN, the French institute, as saying that effectiveness 'is
superior to that of Ariel Ultra, and is so with a dosage that is 21 per cent
lower'. The Fabric Care Research Association in the UK is said to have found
that 'a visual assessment showed no evidence of physical damage on any of
the articles, and minimal differences in colour loss between the test
products'.
In the Netherlands, the Consumers' Union, the largest consumer protection
group which had earlier cautioned its members to hold off buying Unilever's
new detergent, said it would await the results of its own tests before
deciding what to say. These tests are expected to be completed in the next
two weeks.
The consumer protection group's tests are being carried out by TNO of the
Netherlands, one of the six independent test institutes used by Unilever.
The Consumers' Union noted that, although the test institute was the same in
both cases, the testing programmes themselves may not be similar because
these are drawn up by the client commissioning the study.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940720

