FT943-740

FT  28 SEP 94 / Resurgent Republicans eye the polls


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


Congressman Newt Gingrich of Georgia yesterday paraded over 300 Republican
candidates for Congress on the steps of the Capitol to sign the party's
'contract with America.'
The publicity stunt, though in the works for several weeks, stood in sharp
contrast with the sense of depression settling on the Democratic Party in
the wake of the death sentence on healthcare reform legislation pronounced
by Senator George Mitchell, the majority leader, on Monday afternoon.
Mr Gingrich, currently the Republican whip in the House, is virtually
certain to succeed Mr Bob Michel, who is retiring, as minority leader after
the November 8 elections. Were the Republicans, as he harbours hopes, to win
control of the House he would stand in line to become Speaker.
His 'contract,' designed to galvanise the party in the upcoming campaign by
offering clear policy alternatives, commits the party to bring to the floor
of Congress within 100 days of the start of the next session in January a
fistful of measures long on the Republican wishlist but never enacted by
Congress.
They include a constitutional amendment to balance the federal budget, the
line item veto empowering a president to eliminate any specific item of
spending of which he disapproves, lower taxes, term limits for members of
congress, and more spending on defence. It will be accompanied by a large
advertising campaign.
The Democratic response has been sharp in advance. Congressman Vic Fazio of
California dismissed it as 'a blood oath for the rich.' Mr David Wilhelm,
national committee chairman, called it 'voodoo part two, the son of
Reagonomics.'
The White House has also questioned the contract's economics. Mr Leon
Panetta, the chief of staff, called it 'a fraud' that would require Dollars
1,000bn in budget cuts. Ms Alice Rivlin, director of the budget office,
could not see how the budget could be balanced under the contract.
But Mr Panetta did not rule out middle class income tax cuts next year. He
said that while continuing to reduce the budget deficit was an overriding
concern there might be room for some reductions in taxes.
Mr Gingrich's counter was delivered in a weekend TV interview. 'What the
White House is telling the American people is that they have no intention of
getting a balanced budget. What we're saying is that over the next eight
years we're prepared to change the federal government as much as necessary
to get a balanced budget.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940928

