FT942-14896

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (14): Now most
manufacturers are at it - At 25 per cent of UK sales, diesels may have
reached saturation point


   By RICHARD FEAST


Demand for diesel passenger cars in the UK has been rising continually since
1990. The helter-skelter ride may now be slowing, but it has irreversibly
changed the shape of the country's car market.
A decade ago, when diesels were bought by eccentric afficionados compelled
to count every penny, they barely rose above l per cent of the UK market.
Now they account for a quarter of all new cars sold.
That, though, is roughly where they will remain, according to market leader
Ford. 'The potential is there for a little more, but to some extent it will
be restricted by availability,' says Ford.
The dramatic overall trend in favour of diesels is accurately mirrored in
fleet sales - those classified by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and
Traders as over 25 units. Both fleet and retail diesel sales were up by
around 70 per cent in the opening two months of this year, compared with a
total market gain of just under 18 per cent.
Indeed, the early movement to diesel was largely led by fleets, whose
hard-nosed managers were under pressure to cut costs. 'We used to make a
saving of Pounds 1,000 per car per year,' reports one fleet manager
responsible for 1,100 cars. 'It's not as much as that now, because residuals
(trade jargon for re-sale values) are not as good, but we still make a
saving of Pounds 400 on each car on fuel alone.'
In round terms, a diesel engine is 25 to 30 per cent more economical than an
equivalent petrol-engined model. Diesels tend to be more reliable and
long-lived too, according to Hertz Leasing.
As a result, resale values are higher, though the sheer numbers coming on to
the used car market as a result of the boom have softened prices. Supply and
demand probably means the end of really high resale values for diesels,
though few expect the advantage to be eroded completely.
But the UK spurt was not entirely driven by costs. Other important factors
spurred the growth. The latest crop of high speed car diesel engines is very
much more refined. They are quiet, smooth and powerful compared with older
technology diesels. Citroen has a turbo diesel ZX which it would pit against
any hot hatchback with petrol power.
Increasing the sophistication of engines was accompanied by a trend to make
the cars in which they are installed much more appealing to customers. The
days are long gone when diesel power was used only in no-frills economy
models like taxis. Trim and equipment levels on offer today are similar to
those of petrol cars. Now, for example, there are top level Ford Mondeo
Ghias and Range Rover Vogues with turbo diesel power.
At the same time, diesel models no longer carry such large price premiums
over petrol, although Audi's advanced direct injection turbo diesel is
considerably more than its petrol equivalent. The moves by Citroen and Ford
are much more representative. Those companies have opted for price parity
between diesel and petrol for their Xantia and Mondeo models.
These developments so broadened the appeal of diesels that they have
resulted in enormous changes to the UK car market.
While overall new car demand plunged from the 2.3m peak in 1989 to 1.59m in
1992, diesel sales grew in each of those three years by an average of about
19 per cent. When total demand picked up last year by 9 per cent, diesel
sales shot ahead by almost 70 per cent. More diesels were sold last year
than in the previous two years combined.
Even so, car makers were somewhat surprised by the strength of the
development in the UK, where, unlike in many European countries, there is
little difference between the pump prices of diesel and unleaded petrol.
But with UK diesel demand solid, and Europe's faltering sales recovery under
way, car companies are going to need all the diesel engines they can
manufacture in order to hold on to market share. Companies without a strong
diesel line-up are bound to lose out.
That is why Ford is investing Pounds 90m at its Dagenham factory to lift
output of its latest 1.8-litre turbo diesel from the present capacity of
1,350 a day to 1,650. The unit, introduced in the second half of last year,
is crucial to Ford.
Fitted to Mondeo and Escort, it has taken the company from fourth in the
diesel car pecking order to No. l.
General Motors, Vauxhall's parent company, is putting Pounds 200m into a new
diesel unit at its manufacturing complex at Kaiserslautern, Germany. It will
start production late next year, and be capable of producing 250,600 units a
year.
Meanwhile, GM is buying diesel engines for its European cars from its
Japanese affiliate, Isuzu. In addition, it has just started sourcing larger
diesels from BMW for the new Vauxhall Omega which goes on sale this month.
Not that the diesel phenomenon is restricted to the large volume
manufacturers. Even leading prestige car makers, whose wealthy customers are
less influenced by the economics of diesels, are reporting good demand.
One in every eight new Mercedes-Benz sold in the UK last year was a diesel.
Practically one in five BMWs sold in the country so far this year is a
diesel.
The trend puts certain competitors at a disadvantage. Jaguar and Saab, for
example, have traditionally eschewed diesel power, and are thus unable to
take advantage of the present boom. But ignoring a quarter of the market
cannot be done over the long term.
Similarly, Japanese companies in the past have put little effort into car
diesel technology. Those policies were influenced by the absence of any
diesel customers in Japan and the US, where Japan does far more business.
But with Britain and the rest of Europe demanding diesels, that is having to
change.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940418

