FT942-16215

FT  12 APR 94 / Rand hit by poll uncertainty: Failure of Natal peace talks
sends currency to record low


   By MARK SUZMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


The South African rand plunged yesterday after the failure of last Friday's
peace summit between the government, the African National Congress and Zulu
leaders over the strife in Natal province which threatens to disrupt the
country's first all-race elections, a fortnight away.
The volatile financial rand, a currency used in non-resident investment or
disinvestment and designed to protect the country's foreign reserves,
crashed to a record low of R5.6435 to the dollar in London, down 61.85 cents
on the day. Dealers reported heavy selling all day from both Europe and
America. 'It was one-way traffic,' said Mr Willie Potgieter, assistant
general manager for foreign exchange at Standard Bank in Johannesburg. 'Once
the fall started, panic selling set in.'
Because the financial rand is thinly traded, relatively small movements can
cause large swings in its value. It is regarded as the best barometer of
international business sentiment. Given the political climate, most analysts
believe that the currency will remain highly volatile until after the
election. 'I can't see the situation stabilising for a while,' said Mr Ray
Davies, director of Smith New Court Securities.
The commercial rand, the country's trading currency, also hit a new low,
closing 3.6 cents down at R3.5925 to the dollar after falling for most of
last week. Figures released over the weekend by the South African Reserve
Bank show that this has been caused in part by heavy capital flight from the
country, which resumed in March after having slowed significantly over the
first two months of the year. According to the bank, the country's foreign
reserves declined by R867m to R7.9bn.
Mr Nick Barnard, economist at stockbroker Ed Hern Rudolph, said there was no
sign that the reserve bank was intervening in the markets to protect the
rand. 'There is unlikely to be significant reserve bank involvement until
after the election, when the political situation becomes clearer,' he noted.
Although share prices on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange were stronger
yesterday, the currency's collapse followed a bearish trend in international
investor sentiment in South African bond and equity markets.
Prisoner's dilemma, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940412

