FT942-16309

FT  11 APR 94 / Emerging Investor: News Round-up


   By KERIN HOPE


   ATHENS


GREECE
The market will react this week to expectations that the socialist
government will reverse its decision to impose a 15 per cent tax on
dividends of mutual funds that invest in Greek government securities, writes
Kerin Hope in Athens.
The move, included in a fiscal reform package announced last week, took
brokers by surprise as the finance ministry had stressed that interest on
government paper would remain entirely tax-free. Confidence was also
affected by the European Commission's decision to take legal action against
Greece for imposing a trade embargo against Macedonia. The general index
fell by 2.1 per cent last week.
However, the index is still 4.7 per cent up on last year. Trading volume
averaged Dr8.7bn (Dollars 35m) daily for the first quarter, three times the
1993 average. The flow of new listings and rights issues, led by
construction companies in search of fresh capital to finance infrastructure
projects included in a new European Union asistance package, shows no sign
of abating.
Listed companies have raised Dr51bn in fresh capital so far this year.
CHINA
Shanghai Automation Instrumentation has said that it plans a B share listing
on the Shanghai stock market with an issue of 70m shares for foreign
investors at 24.8 US cents each. The shares will go on offer on April 29.
The company is also offering some 32m shares to domestic investors. The
group said that it planned to use the proceeds to build construction
facilities for automatic control instruments in power stations. Trading in
the B shares is expected to start on May 12. Four of the largest state-owned
Chinese companies selected for listing outside China are seeking a listing
on the New York Stock Exchange. Two power supply companies and two regional
airlines, expected to raise between Dollars 250m and Dollars 500m each, have
signed up with US investment banks, according to industry executives.
Further coverage of emerging markets appears daily on the World Stock
Markets page.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940411

