FT941-5647

FT  05 MAR 94 / Middle East peace process on the rack: The Hebron massacre
has left PLO leaders enfeebled and put the talks with Israel in jeopardy


   By MARK NICHOLSON


In public the leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organisation in Tunis this
week have expressed deep anxiety over the prospects of salvaging the peace
process in the aftermath of the Hebron massacre. In private Mr Yassir
Arafat, the PLO chairman, and his close lieutenants are near to desperation.
Not since Mr Arafat's famous White House handshake with Mr Yitzhak Rabin,
the Israeli prime minister, to seal the outline accord on Palestinian
self-rule and Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho, has the credibility
of that deal looked in greater jeopardy. Neither, in the eyes of Mr Arafat's
rioting constituency in the occupied territories, has that of the
Tunis-based PLO leadership who negotiated that deal in secret Oslo talks.
Mr Arafat will not have needed the television pictures of Palestinian
militants burning his effigy last week to impress on him the gravity of the
threat to his already waning authority within the territories. Several PLO
leaders in Tunis also received threats to their lives from Palestinian
groups this week.
But the uncomfortable truth for Mr Arafat and his colleagues is that, from
their distant villas in suburban Tunis, they see little they can do to
inject any impetus to the peace process.
The Palestinian negotiators of the Oslo accord say they cannot hope for the
minimum popular support for resumed talks without, at the very least, more
substantial guarantees for the protection of Palestinians from militant
settlers than Israel has so far offered. For this, they are depending upon
the unlikely prospect of these being volunteered by the Rabin government, or
perhaps forced upon it by international and, specifically, US pressure.
Palestinian support for the Oslo accord, and for Mr Arafat himself, were
diminishing fast enough in the territories before the Hebron massacre.
Twelve weeks have passed since the supposed deadline for the start of an
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho without the PLO leadership having
anything to show for it on the ground.
Even the ever-optimistic Mr Nabil Shaath, the chief PLO negotiator in the
Gaza-Jericho talks, felt that three more painstaking weeks of talks were in
prospect to complete the deal before the Hebron killings landmined the
process.
Since Hebron, PLO leaders now speak of the situation in the territories as
'explosive' and 'volcanic'. According to Mr Ahmad Quorieh (Abu Ala), one of
the negotiators and most ardent proponents of the Oslo deal, 'the seeds of a
real conflict have been sown'. The PLO leadership in Tunis is watching with
horror the potential for a renewed, full-blooded  - and for them
uncontrollable - intifada (uprising), and one largely founded on frustration
with their efforts.
Senior PLO officials see no way out of the crisis other than by politically
acceptable measures from Israel, a return to negotiations on the
Gaza-Jericho accord, and its swift implementation. 'That accord will be
enough if the Israelis begin to take real measures that people can see,'
says Mr Quorieh, who also warns that the whole process may be at stake if
the original April 13 deadline for withdrawal is missed.
And although some PLO leaders said this week that these talks can only
resume if Israel begins to discuss the future of the settlements in the
occupied territories - which is unlikely - they have in fact set far more
modest 'requirements' for returning to the peace table. These are an
'international presence' to ensure security for Palestinians and 'further'
disarming of militant settlers than Mr Rabin has offered.
PLO officials say they cannot believe these gestures are beyond the Israeli
cabinet's ability to deliver. 'Both we and the Israelis took a risk when we
entered into this process,' says Mr Abed Rabbo. 'We have to take a risk
now.'
In fact, the PLO is also taking a risk with what it considers the modesty of
its 'requirements'. PLO leaders express the hope, rather than any firm
conviction, that if they are met and talks resumed, this might be enough to
quell the anger in the territories. But as one Tunis-based diplomat puts it:
'How much cheer will the people in the territories get from seeing the
resumption of talks, when all they've seen from them is delays?'
If the Gaza-Jericho talks can somehow be hauled back on track, the premium
will be upon concluding them rapidly. But this will be difficult. Not only
is there much to resolve in the security talks - Israeli officials have not
been as optimistic as Mr Shaath in this respect - but parallel talks in
Paris on the economic aspects of self-rule are much further from resolution.
In addition, diplomats in Tunis seriously doubt whether the PLO would be
ready by April 13 to assume their responsibilities after an Israeli
withdrawal. A Palestinian police force is far from readiness, committees and
administrators remain to be named. And while the post-Hebron crisis commands
the full attention of Mr Arafat and his small coterie of trusted leaders,
decisions on these and a host of other matters are being further delayed.
In the meantime, the PLO leadership can only lobby and hope that the
political mood in the occupied territories does not spin irrecoverably out
of their control. For the moment, neither Mr Arafat nor the other executive
committee members of the PLO sound optimistic.
Three weeks ago the PLO chairman said he thought the peace process was
losing credibility. This week, asked whether Palestinians would back him if
he simply decided to resume the peace talks in the absence of further
concessions, he replied: 'No, frankly. No. Because the peace process has
lost credibility.'
Mr Arafat knows his own credibility in the territories is also now in the
gravest doubt. And barely anyone believes the present fragile peace process
could survive the final loss of that.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940305

