FT943-12746

FT  23 JUL 94 / Ukraine decree to crack down on crime


   By JILL BARSHAY


   KIEV


Mr Leonid Kuchma,the new Ukrainian president, signed a tough anti-crime
decree as his first act in office, local newspapers reported yesterday.
Mr Kuchma's decree, signed on Thursday, was nearly identical to Russian
President Boris Yeltsin's anti-crime decree last month. In Russia, the
decree has raised concerns that new democratic freedoms are threatened, and
that the decree could usher in a return of the old totalitarian,
KGB-controlled state.
Mr Kuchma, who promised to crack down on government and business crime in
his election campaign, said the broad expansion of police powers was
necessary to 'strengthen law and order in connection with the extraordinary,
complicated criminal situation'.
The Ukrainian decree permits police to hold suspected criminals for up to 30
days. Hotels, dormitories and other places where the government believes
criminals gather may be raided without search warrants. Police and Security
Service agents are granted the right to seize commercial documents from
private companies. Half of the proceeds of raids on illegally-obtained
property would go into law enforcement budgets.
Crime has risen sharply in Ukraine in recent years. In the first six months
of 1994 alone, authorities say there have been 1,500 murders and 1,065 drug
raids yielding about 11 tonnes of narcotics.
A US FBI official, in Kiev earlier this month, voiced concern that Ukraine
was becoming a transit zone from Asia to western Europe in the international
drugs trade. He noted that Russian criminal groups exerted a strong
influence in Ukraine and often colluded with smaller Ukrainian rackets where
profits were to be made.
For Mr Kuchma, the decree serves to launch his presidency on a strong note
and to make good on his popular anti-corruption campaign promise.
In a further anti-crime move Mr Kuchma replaced the head of the Ministry of
Internal Affairs with a 46-year-old organised crime and corruption
specialist who has 22 years of experience in the Soviet KGB. Observers are
asking if this is an indirect attempt to merge the police and security
ministries into a single, powerful authority, as Mr Yeltsin unsuccessfully
tried to accomplish in Russia.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940723

