FT943-12685

FT  23 JUL 94 / UK Company News: From price war to bid battle? - The
likelihood of J Sainsbury entering a fight for control of Wm Low


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


A counter-bid next week by J Sainsbury to Tesco's agreed bid for Wm Low, the
Scottish supermarket group, is widely expected by the City, but some
analysts remain doubtful that the UK's biggest food retailer will enter the
fray.
Ever since Tesco, the UK number two, unveiled a recommended bid worth a
total of Pounds 200m for the Scottish chain nine days ago, speculation has
been rife about a bidding war.
Tesco's 225p a share bid values Wm Low at Pounds 154m, and it would assume
debt of just over Pounds 50m. Low's shares closed up 3p at 265p yesterday,
in the clear expectation that either Sainsbury would enter the game, or
Tesco would be forced to raise what is now being seen as a low offer.
Wm Low, which has 57 stores and 6 per cent of the Scottish market, confirmed
on Monday that it had responded to a request for information from Sainsbury.
Sainsbury might have been taking advantage of UK company regulations during
takeover bids to gain information about a competitor. But the City has
interpreted its silence this week as a sign it was weighing up a bid.
There are, however, two main reasons why Sainsbury might not make such a
move.
One is corporate culture. A hostile bid would be out of character for a
company that retains some of the ethos of a family business.
But while such a move might have been unthinkable for Lord Sainsbury of
Preston Candover, the patrician former chairman, many analysts believe Mr
David Sainsbury, his cousin and successor, would have few qualms - provided
he thought it made commercial sense.
That is the second, and more likely, reason why Sainsbury might hold back.
The group indicated strongly when announcing its results in May that the US
was the likely venue for expansion. Rumours have been circulating this week
that Sainsbury may be closer to making a US buy than previously thought, and
may wish to save its money.
Set against that are strong commercial arguments for expanding into Scotland
which, unlike much of England, is under-provided with superstores.
Only Argyll, whose Safeway and Presto chains have 16.6 per cent of the
Scottish market according to research group AGB, and Asda with 12.2 per
cent, have a significant presence. Co-operative societies have 8.9 per cent,
but small independent grocers dominate many areas.
Sainsbury, which has 4.6 per cent and until last year had only one
superstore in Scotland, has firm intentions to expand there. Its first
superstore in Edinburgh last year was one of its most successful openings in
years.
But expansion has been difficult. It has been outbid by Safeway for two
prime sites, and fought battles with Glasgow city council and Strathclyde
regional council over planning permission for others.
Buying Wm Low would be a quick way of more than doubling Sainsbury's
Scottish market share. The same logic, of course, attracted Tesco, which has
a 7.1 per cent market share in Scotland.
Analysts believe either group could enhance the performance of Wm Low stores
by cutting overheads and absorbing them into their business, and the
purchase could add about 5 per cent to their pre-tax profits.
Many believe Sainsbury has nothing to lose by bidding. Tesco's offer is seen
to price Wm Low cheaply, with Bell Lawrie White, the Scottish broker,
valuing its assets at 248p a share.
If Sainsbury were to be successful with a bid at 260p or 270p, the market
would still consider that a good price.
If Tesco responded by raising its bid to 290p or 300p, Sainsbury would have
the satisfaction of having forced its rival to pay an extra Pounds 60m.
Alternatively, Sainsbury could launch a 'knock-out' blow of 300p or more, to
try to ensure victory.
'I can't see the downside for them in bidding,' said one analyst. 'They
won't want to see Tesco get it on the cheap.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940723

