FT942-15960

FT  13 APR 94 / Latin America counts cost of infrastructure neglect:
Implications of Inter-American Development Bank's changed approach to
lending


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


Government officials took a small step this week towards addressing a big
problem: financing Latin America's huge infrastructure needs.
Yet that step - a mandate for the Inter-American Development Bank to lend up
to 5 per cent of its capital to private borrowers without government
guarantee - has emphasised the size of the problem rather than offered any
expectation of a rapid solution.
The run-down of Latin America's infrastructure came during the 1980s as
governments squeezed spending, and now represents a severe obstacle to
growth. According to World Bank estimates, fulfilling demand for
infrastructure capital in Latin America will require more than Dollars 1bn
(Pounds 778m) a week. Of the annual requirement of Dollars 60bn, Dollars
24bn is needed for power projects, Dollars 12bn for water and sewerage
systems, Dollars 10bn for telecommunications and Dollars 14bn for transport.
After a wave of privatisation, much of the region's infrastructure is in the
hands of the private sector and continued budget stringency severely limits
governments' ability to build infrastructure alone. Yet the World Bank
itself cannot lend without government guarantee and the IADB's new mandate
only implies direct lending capacity of Dollars 350m a year. 'It's a drop in
the bucket,' agreed Ms Nancy Birdsall, the bank's executive vice-president.
Even lending at this level was controversial among some of the IADB's
government shareholders, who feared losses on such lending might put the
bank's top credit rating at risk. Their concerns were accommodated by the
strict limits on the bank's lending: it is limited to a maximum of either
Dollars 75m or a quarter of the total cost of a project, whichever is the
smaller. The rest will have to be raised either from private markets,
commercial banks or from government development banks such as Mexico's
Banobras.
The worries were driven by the IADB's experience in the past with direct
lending to the private sector. The bank lost most of what it lent direct to
the private sector in the 1960s (it totalled Dollars 70m) and the bank's
private sector financing arm, the Inter-American Investment Corporation is
viewed by some shareholders as being a failure.
The IIC's future will be decided at a meeting of its board in June, but
those familiar with the US government's position say Washington sees it as
lacking in vision, performing poorly and being inefficient, and would like
to see it privatised. The institution, with assets of Dollars 365m, lost
Dollars 7.4m last year.
Ms Birdsall claims the IIC's 1960s losses were too long ago to be relevant,
and that the organisation has been plagued by high administration costs -
its small projects often require as much administration as much larger ones
 -rather than losses on loans.
The IADB would also probably make more use of its guarantee authority -
providing warranties for the non-commercial risk associated with projects -
and provide contingency guarantees, she said. For example, it would offer to
extend loan maturities beyond that which would normally be acceptable to the
private market.
The World Bank is also looking at the infrastructure question. Mr Javed
Burki, the bank's new vice-president for the region, said a new initiative
would be launched by the bank in the region later in the year.
It would focus on four issues:
Aiming to establish a partnership between public and private sector finance.
Encouraging development of the region's domestic capital markets so funds
for infrastructure could be raised locally.
Trying to ensure projects were not developed in isolation but with
governments playing a role in establishing an overall framework.
Looking at infrastructure development in a regional context so as to
ameliorate the growing pains of economic integration.
Mr William Rhodes, vice-chairman of Citibank, the US commercial bank with
the biggest involvement in Latin America, said he expected 'organisations
such as the World Bank and IADB to involve themselves more with commercial
banks in co-financings of infrastructure'. In doing so, they would be able
to encourage private lending of four to five times the sum they themselves
committed, he said.
Government export credit agencies may also play a larger role. Mr Kenneth
Brody, head of the US Export-Import Bank, said in Guadalajara last week:
'Until now, Ex-Im would be classified together with many of the other credit
agencies as relatively passive in the financing of projects. . . Now, in
place of being passive, we are going to be aggressive; instead of being a
follower, we are going to be a leader.'
There is also, some financiers believe, an important role for domestic
development banks. However, history again provides depressing reading. Most
multilateral lending to the private sector in the past has been channeled
through development banks, which in many countries were corrupt, inefficient
and, eventually, bankrupt.
The new development banks should, at least in theory, operate differently.
Mr Jacques Rogozinski, head of Mexico's Banobras, which has assets of some
Dollars 7bn, says he has no intention of lending for projects where the
money is not going to be repaid.
Where projects required a government subsidy, those subsidies should be
transparent. Private sector finance would be important in freeing government
funds for other areas where private finance was less viable, he said.
Private finance thus remains essential to squaring the infrastructure
circle. While some bankers emphasise that the securities markets can play an
important role along with banks in infrastructure finance, most experts in
the field remain pessimistic that anywhere near the kind of funds needed can
be generated. 'If you're asking whether the Dollars 60bn is going to be
found, I don't think it will be found,' Mr Rogozinski said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940413

