FT944-2954

FT  15 DEC 94 / Trafalgar House Stalks Northern Electric: Suspicions on both
sides about the motives of Hongkong Land - The institutions react


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


Trafalgar House could face an uphill struggle if it decides to bid for
Northern Electric. The resistance is not, as one might expect, only going to
come from Northern's shareholders, but from its own investors.
They are deeply suspicious of the motives behind Trafalgar's interest, in
spite of the obvious tax benefits the company would derive from a UK
earnings stream.
Some fear Trafalgar could become a pawn in the political games being played
by its major shareholder, Hongkong Land, the property arm of Jardine
Matheson. Jardine has been anxious to invest its funds internationally in
advance of the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
'One has to ask if one is acquiring a stream of earnings and cash flow which
is beneficial to Trafalgar House or to Hongkong Land,' said one investor.
The dilemma is intensified for shareholders who have been in Trafalgar for
some time. 'Trafalgar has been a poor investment,' said one institution.
'Yet Hongkong came in and rescued the company. Perhaps this is the price we
have to pay for Trafalgar not going bust.'
Some feared that any arrangement to fund a bid could allow Hongkong Land to
acquire outright control without making a full offer.
'I am positive that Hongkong Land will end up owning the majority of
Trafalgar,' said an institution. 'And they will have bought the company on
the cheap.'
However, he was resigned to such an outcome. 'If a Trafalgar without
Hongkong Land were still solvent, and were bid for, it is unlikely the
bidder would have to pay a premium.'
For Northern's shareholders, any approach from a company with Trafalgar's
track record would probably be unwelcome.
A paper offer appears out of the question. 'That would in effect be a
disguised rights for Trafalgar and we would not support that,' said a
Northern Electric investor.
A cash bid would have to take account of the long-term value offered by
utilities, and the high quality of earnings they provide. This means that a
cash offer would have to be substantially in excess of last night's 1010p
closing share price.
There is a further complication in that most of the institutions are not
even sure themselves what the right value should be for Northern shares.
For example, there is substantial value yet to be realised from the
flotation of the National Grid, which is estimated to be valued at more than
Pounds 4bn. Northern's share could be worth more than Pounds 260m, of which
a substantial proportion would find its way to investors.
Most of the electricity companies have been in an extended closed period,
due to discussions on the National Grid and the results season. 'They have
not really been able to talk freely with shareholders,' said one investor.
'So it is difficult for institutions to be sure of the value to be given to
such issues.'
Value might not be such an insurmountable obstacle, however. 'It is possible
that in its efforts to move funds out of Hong Kong, the Jardine empire might
be willing to pay more for Northern, on the basis of strategic reasons, than
other companies might for industrial reasons,' one shareholder said.
But most investors might find an approach from a fellow utility - such as
Scottish Power - easier to take. 'One could stay in the sector and reap the
obvious operational benefits,' an institution said.
Another investor thought this was the most likely scenario and said he
expected 'a third party to enter the frame.'
This is perhaps the most significant effect of yesterday's announcement.
'The company has been put into play, there is no doubt about that,' Mr Kevin
Lapwood, of brokers Smith New Court said. 'The chances of it being
independent in six months' time are very slim.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941215

