FT942-16042

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (7): Two-pronged strategy - Foreign
policy has its back to the Balkans


   By LAURA SILBER


Describing Slovenia's foreign policy, Mr Lojze Peterle, the foreign
minister, outlines a two-pronged strategy aimed at reinforcing regional
integration within the post-communist central European states and the
European Union. 'Slovenia will become an associated member of the EU by the
end of 1994,' he predicts, noting that the EU accounts for 70 per cent of
Slovene trade.
In an effort to enhance regional co-operation, Slovenia has joined the
Central European Initiative and the Visegrad group, which includes the Czech
Republic, Hungary, Slovakia and Poland. Following their lead, Slovenia
joined Nato's 'partnership for peace' in March, described by Mr Peterle as a
'very important step in easing our worries about security' after nearly
three years of war in former Yugoslavia.
It is not clear how membership will work if Slovenia remains subject to the
UN's arms embargo, applied to all former Yugoslav republics. Mr Janez Jansa,
the defence minister, has insisted that the embargo be lifted, so that
Slovenia can co-operate with the Nato programme. 'During this last year we
accomplished everything we wished. The only problems were the embargo and
the question of succession in former Yugoslavia,' explains Mr Peterle.
Slovene politicians say that the question of succession - dividing up the
former federal republic's assets and liabilities - may take time to resolve,
amid a host of claims.
While succession talks continue in Geneva, Slovenia will not grant
diplomatic recognition to the rump Yugoslavia, says Mr Peterle. But he hopes
for the rapid stabilisation of the region - especially for an end to the war
in Bosnia.
Slovenia has denounced Serbian aggression. Last autumn, senior Slovene
officials were implicated in arms smuggling operations to Bosnia. Officials
(speaking anonymously) claim that the operations were a bid to help Croatia
and Bosnia against the Serbs, but sceptics says the motive was profit. Mr
Peterle dismisses the scandal as a 'transitional period' in Slovenia's short
history as an independent state.
Convinced that European integration depends on resolving disputes with its
neighbours, Slovenia has concentrated on improving its relations with
Croatia. Once united against domination by Belgrade, they are locked in a
quarrel over a tiny stretch of frontier.
Over the past few months Slovenia and Croatia have signed six agreements
(including trade and fishing) and convened working groups to deal with
remaining points of difference. 'They have a hot-cold relationship. But now
it seems, after a year, that they are trying to get it on a reasonable
footing,' says a western diplomat. However, according to recent newspaper
polls conducted in both capitals, there remains a high degree of mutual
suspicion.
Ahead lies the question of financing Krsko, the jointly-owned nuclear power
plant which supplies energy-starved Croatia. Zagreb has agreed to pay
one-third of the Dollars 25m owed to the plant, and the rest by August.
The Bay of Piran, in the Adriatic, is another problem. Croatia wants to
divide the bay in half; Slovenia insists that the waters were under Slovene
police jurisdiction when the two countries broke away from Yugoslavia three
years ago.
Relations with Italy, on the other hand, have improved considerably. Italy
has riled Slovenia from time to time, by demanding the restitution of
property rights to Italians who, after the second world war, were displaced
from Istria, a stretch of the Adriatic coast which belongs mostly to
Croatia.
Slovenia has called for reciprocal representation for its minority across
the frontier in Italy. 'Some 3,000 Italians have their legal representative
in the Slovene parliament,' says Mr Peterle, 'Slovenes should have the same
rights.'
Like most Slovenes, Mr Peterle has adopted a pragmatic approach. Slovenia,
he explains, must push forward with European integration. 'We will start
negotiations this spring. We have a lot to do. Hundreds of laws must be
changed - and in the meantime we will forge closer co-operation with central
Europe.'

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940412

