FT942-15720

FT  14 APR 94 / Hamas bombers see violent deaths as a way to heaven


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


The Islamic extremist who yesterday blew up a crowded Israeli bus in the
town of Hadera, killing five Israelis and wounding 30, knew he was going to
die. Like Raed Zakarneh, the 19-year-old suicide bomber who last week drove
a car packed with 385lb of explosives into a bus in the town of Afula, he
died thinking his violent act would guarantee him a special place in heaven
as a martyr to Islam.
'As Islamists we know that life is everything we have but we also have the
belief that if you sacrifice your life for your people, for your land, for
your cause, you are a martyr,' said Dr Omar Farwana, one of the 415
Palestinians deported to Lebanon by Israel in December 1992 for Hamas
activities. 'Violence is the only language the Israelis understand and these
attacks are very painful for them.'
The Islamic resistance movement Hamas, responsible for both attacks, has
emerged as the best organised and most devastating threat to the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Yesterday's attack was the second in what
Hamas claims are five planned operations to revenge the February 25 Hebron
mosque massacre of 29 Palestinians by a fanatical Jewish settler. Its strike
was intended to show Israel that Hamas can still strike despite the closure
of the occupied territories by Israel after last week's suicide bombing and
despite widespread Israeli precautions.
In leaflets Hamas has threatened to turn Israel's Independence day
celebrations today into a 'hell' and make 'Zionists and settlers cry blood
on their dead'.
The six-year underground movement, originally funded by Israel to challenge
PLO political dominance in the occupied territories, is opposed to the peace
process, committed to the annihilation of the Jewish state by armed struggle
and wants to create an Islamic state in all of the land of Israel, the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip based on Sharia Koranic law.
Hamas, an acronym which means zeal, has become the main opposition group to
the PLO and is particularly strong in the Gaza Strip, where it has won a
bedrock support among the poor and the young fed up with the corruption in
the PLO. It also has active cells in Hebron, Jenin, Nablus and Jericho in
the West Bank.
While Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, is entangled in lengthy peace
negotiations with Israel, Hamas has been building its underground military
wing, Izz el-Deen al-Qassam, and parading itself as the only player in the
armed struggle against continued Israeli occupation.
'All Palestinians support resistance, the right of all occupied people,'
said Dr Farwana in Gaza City. 'Arafat is afraid to condemn the attacks
because he knows the Palestinian people will spit on him.'
Apart from stepping up violent pressure on Israel, Hamas is preparing for
the return of Mr Arafat to the occupied territories and the possibility of
conflict with the incoming 9,000-strong PLO police force.
'Hamas has kept the option of staying powerful by remaining underground,'
said Dr Farwana. 'Hamas is against civil war but is ready to protect itself
by force if attacked by Arafat. Hamas will continue attacks on Israelis and
the Palestinian police will not be able to stop them. Then the Israeli army
might come back into the territories and every Palestinian will know they
are still under Israeli occupation.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940414

