FT941-3368

FT  16 MAR 94 / International Company News: Brazilian mining group prospects
for joint ventures - Companhia Vale do Rio Doce is seeking international
partners through its ADR programme


   By PATRICK MCCURRY


A new American Depositary Receipt programme launched by Companhia Vale do
Rio Doce (CVRD), the world's largest iron ore exporter, is meant to be a
first step in a plan to finance new joint ventures with foreign companies.
The basic programme, under which the company's ADRs will be traded in the US
over-the-counter market, is likely to lead to a new equity offering in the
US next year.
This should help fund joint ventures with foreign companies, particularly in
the pulp sector. The projects will need heavy capital investment in their
early stages.
Mr Anastacio Fernandes Filho, financial director, says the company embarked
on the ADR programme, launched last week, to attract foreign investors, and
to increase its international profile and share liquidity. Currently
foreigners own about 3 per cent of the capital.
'It will be easier to issue bonds or other securities with a wider investor
base,' he says.
Created during the second world war by Brazil, the US and the UK to supply
the Allies with iron ore, and later taken over by the government, CVRD has
always been regarded as an exception to Brazil's other federally-controlled
giants.
While Brazilian governments considered areas such as telecommunications and
oil production as strategically important, and took charge of key
appointments, CVRD was given greater autonomy so that it could compete in
international markets. As a result, its management has generally been more
independent of political pressures.
Its strategy has been to exploit its huge landholdings and deposits by
diversifying into other minerals, such as copper and gold. It has also moved
into areas such as pulp and infrastructure.
The company's policy has usually been to grow through joint ventures with
Brazilian and foreign companies, often offering exploitation rights towards
the cost of the project.
These joint ventures, mainly in pulp, copper, kaolin and aluminium, have
planned capital investment of about Dollars 1.5bn over the next five years.
'CVRD has not neglected its iron ore business, and has taken minority shares
in areas where it lacks experience,' says Ms Lika Takahashi, a research
director with brokers Baring Securities Brasil.
Despite the company's strong natural advantages and efficient management, it
has been hit by the world slump in commodity prices.
Net profits for the year to the end of December 1993 fell 12 per cent to
Dollars 262m, while net sales were down slightly at Dollars 2.15bn. The
company was also affected by increased interest costs on a yen loan at its
Albras aluminium joint venture. The appreciation of the yen against the
dollar contributed to a loss of nearly Dollars 100m.
CVRD's rail and port network has now been developed to generate profits from
outside users. The transport sector was its second-largest revenue source in
1993, providing 16 per cent of net sales. Iron ore and pellets still provide
the majority of sales, accounting for 57 per cent last year.
Excluding the results of the yen appreciation and government tax credits,
profits were about Dollars 200m, according to Ms Takahashi, who expects this
figure to reach about Dollars 450m by 1996 if commodities prices recover.
Partly because of the price slump, CVRD's shares appreciated by only 44 per
cent in dollar terms last year, compared with an index gain of more than 100
per cent for the Sao Paulo stock exchange.
Following the launch of a restructuring programme in 1990, CVRD's workforce
has been cut by a quarter to less than 18,000. Analysts expect continued
improvements in efficiency, especially since the company won increased
operational independence from the federal government, which still owns 51
per cent of shares, in 1992.
CVRD's restructuring followed a worrying pile up of debt in the late 1980s.
It switched 25 per cent of its debt from the expensive and short-term local
market to longer-term paper in international markets. Its current
outstanding debt is about Dollars 1.5bn, a debt-to-equity ratio of 25 per
cent, according to the company. However, very large debts in joint ventures
such as the Albras aluminium project are not consolidated.
According to analysts, the company will be open to criticism while it
remains government-controlled. Although CVRD's management believes
privatisation is inevitable, it is beset by political difficulties and has
fallen off the agenda ahead of October's presidential elections.
Sao Paulo-based mining consultant Mr Juarez Fontana dos Santos praises CVRD
as an efficient and low-cost producer.
Nevertheless he says the company remains over-centralised and bound by
government-imposed restrictive legislation on public tenders that slow down
decisions and purchases.
However, he maintains the company is attempting to become more flexible, and
that more independence may be achieved if changes are approved under a
congressional review of the constitution. This is under way, but may not be
completed this year.
He says the company's priorities for this year are to develop its rail
transport network by forming a group to bid for the privatisation of part of
the federal railway system.
It also intends to be more aggressive in its main iron ore market. Last
month, CVRD cut its ore prices to Japan, its largest market, in response to
discounts offered by Australian competitors. 'This year we'll be more
aggressive, offering quicker delivery and better quality for certain kinds
of ore,' says Mr Fernandes.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940316

