FT942-15888

FT  13 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Suggested route a competitive
cul-de-sac for cable operations


   From Mr E P O MERCER


Sir, I rather think the route suggested in your leader 'Superhighways for
Britain' (April 7) will lead to the UK going up a competitive cul-de-sac
rather than to the establishment of choice of open roads for the consumer.
As the director general of telecommunications has clearly decided, the
future benefit of the consumer lies in having a choice of a local loop
competitor. The way to achieve this is through competition and that will not
be encouraged to grow sufficiently to be of impact soon enough, or at all,
if one begins now to rock the regulatory boat by letting BT carry
entertainment.
There are a number of public offerings under preparation which will, if they
are successful, generate considerable equity funds for the building by cable
operators of alternative local loop infrastructure in the UK.
The considerable investment already encouraged into UK cable has partly been
the function of a stable regulatory regime since 1991. Meddle with that
certainty now and you risk losing the speed with which competition will be
able to take root by making the outcome of the proposed offerings more
uncertain.
There is quite a lot BT can do before the planned 1988 review on its
carrying broadcasting. From the beginning of this month it can apply for
cable franchises in its own right, and there is a large part of the UK not
yet franchised. In any event, video-on-demand does not need the same kind of
broadcasting licence as a cable operator - at least according to the
Independent Television Commission. Certainly, home banking, shopping or
business services do not require an entertainment services licence, so what
is preventing BT developing its networks in urban areas if it thinks there
is a market for those?
There is no evidence at all that the present policies will lead to the
subsidisation by BT of new entrants; rather the opposite. New entrants may
end up subsidising BT through the access deficit contribution system.
As, increasingly, the new entrants go on to put fibre in the ground in the
UK, Mr Heseltine need not worry about Britain losing its competitive edge -
he should be more concerned about the competition being strangled at birth
than of BT losing the odd appendage.
Edward Mercer,
Allison & Humphreys,
40, Artillery Lane,
Bishopsgate,
London E1 7LS

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940413

