FT942-15933

FT  13 APR 94 / Merseyside hit by regatta costs


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


At least Pounds 695,000 of public funds has been spent so far as subsidies
for the visit in 1992 of the Columbus Grand Regatta tall ships to Merseyside
and an associated operatic concert. The conert was attended by King Juan
Carlos and Queen Sofia of Spain as patrons.
A critical report by the National Audit Office published today blames poor
management, lack of financial controls, and over-optimism.
The events led to only marginal inward investment.
They were supposed to break even. Most of the blame falls on Merseyside
Development Corporation, the government agency in charge of economic
regeneration of the area, which led support for both events under its
chairman Sir Desmond Pitcher, former chief executive of Littlewoods, now
chairman of North West Water.
The NAO says the corporation and its local authority partners failed to
recognise financial risks from the outset.
Both events had to be rescued by public funds. Advance ticket sales failed
to materialise and contractors working on the concert threatened to leave
work incomplete if they were not paid immediately.
The visit by the regatta - secured after a successful Tall Ships Race to the
Liverpool International Garden Festival in the summer of 1984 - was meant to
attract potential inward investors.
The concert was meant to complement it culturally. The corporation let the
concert to the single tenderer - Carroll Promotions, a company with no
relevant experience formed for Pounds 2 by Mr Brendan Carroll, a public
relations consultant.
Latest figures show the regatta's costs of Pounds 962,000 had exceeded
income by Pounds 426,000 last December. The concert's losses are still
unknown because the company is in liquidation. The corporation's costs are
estimated at Pounds 419,000.
The corporation commissioned a report by KPMG Peat Marwick, the accountacy
firm, on the events which concluded that several million visitors had spent
a total of Pounds 17.6m.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

