FT942-16275

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (15): Question mark over
debt remains - Does the region have a current account problem? Stephen
Fidler discusses the issues


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


The fall, when it came, was quick. The rapid plunge in the price of
sovereign debt and Brady bonds in February and March has raised questions in
the minds of some economists about the sustainability of the region's
current account deficits. Put another away, the question posed was whether
Latin America had truly escaped its debt problem.
'If the present disruption in the market results in more than a temporary
slowdown in capital flows to Latin America, concerns could re-emerge about
the sustainability of the region's current account imbalance,' said Mr Peter
West, economic adviser to the London-based West Merchant Bank last month.
Those most vulnerable to such worries would be Argentina and Mexico, given
the size of their current account deficits, he said.
The sharp drop in secondary market prices implied a sharp rise in the cost
of finance for Latin American borrowers. Although the price collapse was
less devastating in the Eurobond market where new finance is raised, that
market appeared likely to remain all but closed for some time to new Latin
borrowers.
Yet, some economists say the market uncertainty - at least until the
assassination of the Mexican presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio on
March 23 - had more to do with the heavy inventories being carried by
sovereign debt dealers ahead of the rise in US interest rates in February
than with worries about rising US interest rates.
Mr Paul Luke, research head at Morgan Grenfell's debt trading arm, said the
rise in US interest rates should not be a source of concern. Inasmuch as it
reflected the strength of the US economy, Latin America would benefit. And
if it reflected the US Federal Reserve's concern about the strength in
commodity prices - up 8 per cent since October - the region would also be a
prime beneficiary.
Moreover, much of government debt is at fixed rates, particularly in those
countries that have secured Brady restructurings. In addition, equity
inflows of portfolio and foreign direct investment have been more important
than in the 1970s and early 1980s.
Most countries also have a significant cushion in foreign exchange reserves.
'I don't think there is any particular concern about funding the current
account deficits,' said Mr Lawrence Brainard of Bankers Trust. 'Foreign
direct investment is increasing in Mexico, for example, where if anything
they have too many inflows. It's why the exchange rate is so volatile - but
reserves went past Dollars 30bn towards the end of February.'
In Argentina, too, reserves rose from Dollars 10bn at the year end to around
Dollars 13.6bn - it appears that funds have returned to the country to take
advantage of the interest rate premium of Argentine pesos over dollars.
Meanwhile, Brazil's reserves have risen to Dollars 35bn, and it should soon
be able to reduce its debt service bill through a Brady bank debt
restructuring.
Ms Marilyn Skiles, economist at JP Morgan, argued in a February research
report that other factors had significantly lessened the vulnerability of
the region to debt problems. The investor base was more diversified than in
the early 1980s and may not move in unison as banks did then.
Unlike in the earlier period, private sector entities rather than the public
sector have been the main borrowers, reflecting the improved fiscal
discipline in some countries.
However, this fiscal discipline is not universal. In Venezuela, there are
worries about the government's budget deficit - reflected in the price of
that country's Brady bonds, yielding at the time of writing more than 19 per
cent. Brazil may make significant strides with its current economic plan
towards fiscal balance - but that has not been achieved yet. Furthermore,
other public entities - such as the states in Brazil - are making demands on
the capital markets.
But the main fear is the sustainability of the current account deficits,
given there is little evidence so far that capital inflows have expanded the
export base of Latin countries. Ultimately, only through increased exports
will increased debt be serviced.
Ms Skiles pointed out that most Latin countries' capacity to pay their debts
had improved by some measures - such as the ratios of debt to GDP and
interest payments to exports. But one important measure - debt to exports -
had not improved except in Chile and to a lesser extent Mexico. 'The limited
improvements in Latin America's debt-to-export ratios are due in large part
to the relatively poor performance of exports from the region, particularly
in the past few years,' she said. 'While current account deficits are
readily financed, because of the availability of external capital, the
deterioration in their external balances suggest some Latin American
countries may find themselves unable to generate sufficient foreign exchange
earnings at some point in future.'
Mr John Clark, an economist at the New York Federal Reserve Bank, argued in
the bank's latest quarterly review that results of the Brady debt
restructurings had been impressive, largely because it established a more
stable long-run financial framework than did the previous approach.
But he also concluded that the Brady approach 'did not achieve significantly
more near-term cash flow relief for debtors than the previous approach' and
that 'debt service obligations remain heavy for the Brady countries'.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940411

