FT941-5726

FT  04 MAR 94 / International Company News: Microsoft, TCI to test
interactive TV


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


Microsoft and Tele-Communications (TCI) have agreed to test interactive
cable television technology jointly in Seattle, Washington. The tests could
establish software standards for TCI's networks which reach more than 10m
cable television customers throughout the US.
The agreement is the first move into interactive television by Microsoft,
the world's largest computer software company, and the first deployment of
'information superhighway' technology by TCI, the largest US cable
television company.
The companies said that the I-TV trials will occur in two phases. Starting
in the fourth quarter of 1994, the companies will test the technology by
delivering services to 'a few hundred' TCI and Microsoft employees in and
around Seattle, close to Microsoft's headquarters. Next year, the trial will
be expanded to include 'tens of thousands' of TCI cable television customers
in the Seattle area.
'We are taking a deliberate, considered approach by making a long-term
investment in the development of system software that can actually be
deployed to deliver interactive television and broadband networks,' said Mr
Bill Gates, chairman and chief executive officer of Microsoft.
'These tests represent our first step in the process of developing and
deploying actual equipment and software in our networks to build the
information superhighway,' said Mr John Malone, TCI's president and chief
executive.
'We will be working together with Microsoft to refine the technology and to
learn what our customers want from interactive television - what types of
services they prefer, how they use them, and what features they find
helpful.'
Last month TCI called off its planned merger with Bell Atlantic, a regional
telephone company, and said it would suspend Dollars 500m, or half its
planned spending this year, on upgrading cable television networks. The
announcement of the I-TV trial demonstrates, however, that TCI is moving
ahead with plans for deployment of advanced technology.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940304

