FT942-12526

FT  29 APR 94 / Call to freeze hospital cuts in London


   By IVOR OWEN and STEWART DALBY


A freeze on all bed and hospital closures in London was demanded by Labour
leaders yesterday as they sought to make dissatisfaction with the National
Health Service a central issue in next week's local government elections.
In the Commons Mr John Major, the prime minister, accused Mr John Smith, the
Labour leader, of turning the NHS into a 'political foot-ball'.
The prime minister's charges were reinforced by Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the
health secretary, who gave an 'absolute commitment' that health services in
London would only change for the better.
Mr Smith insisted that the Tomlinson report, on which Mrs Bottomley is
basing her policy of closures and amalgamations of medical institutions in
London, was now 'wholly discredited'.
Mr Frank Dobson, Labour spokesman on London, insisted that 'the cuts must
stop before it is too late' when he launched an attack which accused the
government of undermining the capacity of the health services in the
capital.
He denied that his call for a 'genuine review' of what needed to be done was
a repudiation of the 'status quo is not an option' statement by Mr David
Blunkett, the shadow health secretary, when giving Labour's initial reaction
to the Tomlinson report.
Mr Blunkett was absent from the Labour front bench when Mr Dobson opened the
debate, and Mrs Bottomley suggested he had been 'binned in order to give Mr
Dobson a bit of pre-election Lebensraum'.
Earlier, Mr Smith had claimed that he had only been allowed to visit St
Bartholomew's hospital before the debate began after the prime minister had
overruled a ban imposed by Mrs Bottomley.
The prime minister's intervention swelled the media circus which accompanied
Mr Smith and gave an unexpected fillip to the campaign to avert the closure
of Barts' accident and emergency department.
Mr Smith said: 'This is one more example of the government's ability to
mismanage just about everything. The net result is that my visit has
received far more media coverage than it would have done.'
The hospital's 'magnificent' accident and emergency facilities served not
only the local community but the thousands who worked in the City.
Mrs Bottomley told MPs during the debate that the accident and emergency
unit at Barts was small and, as the local population fell, was becoming
'ever less viable'.
Mrs Bottomley said health spending per head in inner London was Pounds 553 -
46 per cent above the national average.
Inner London had more acute beds per person than the rest of the country and
twice as many consultants, she said.
Observer, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940429

