FT942-12790

FT  28 APR 94 / Last push for Palestinian agreement: Principal participants
in the peace process gather for talks in Egyptian capital


   By JULIAN OZANNE and SHAHIRA IDRISS


   CAIRO


Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO chairman, arrived in Cairo early today to help
give a final push to Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on Palestinian
self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho. Mr
Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, flew in to the Egyptian capital
last night.
Mr Shimon Peres and Mr Yossi Sarid, Israel's foreign and environment
ministers, are expected to join Mr Christopher, Mr Arafat and Egypt's
President Hosni Mubarak for talks this morning aimed at wrapping up the
agreement next week.
Palestinian negotiators said they hoped Mr Christopher would put pressure on
Israel to ease some of its security demands and grant more authority to the
incoming Palestinian National Authority.
'We hope (Christopher) can do something as representative of one of the
sponsors of this peace process, and do whatever is needed to persuade the
Israelis to change some of their polices,' said Mr Faisal al-Husseini, PLO
boss in the occupied territories. 'If our control is incomplete and our
authority is incomplete, then security will be incomplete. We hope the
Israelis understand this.'
After he flew in from Saudi Arabia, Mr Christopher inspected some of the 200
vehicles being donated by the US to the new Palestinian police force. A
batch of vehicles rolled off a C-5 Galaxy transport aircraft at Cairo
airport.
More than 20 of the vehicles so far have been flown to Cairo and the rest of
the vehicles will arrive by ship at Egypt's Port Said in days.
Israel and the PLO said yesterday they still hoped to conclude self-rule
talks within days to prepare for a signing ceremony between Mr Arafat and Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, in Cairo next week.
Mr Nabil Shaath, chief PLO negotiator, said the talks were 'going fast.
Everybody is working day and night'.
The negotiations were at the 'stage of final drafting and redrafting', he
said, but had still not resolved the serious obstacle - the legal
jurisdiction of Palestinian law and courts in Gaza-Jericho. Mr Shaath said
both sides were aiming to resolve all issues except the size of the Jericho
enclave and the stationing of a Palestinian policemen on the Allenby bridge
border-crossing before a Rabin-Arafat meeting. These include sensitive
matters that touch on sovereignty, such as the ability of the Palestinians
to issue their own stamps, passports and currency and to have their own
international dialling code.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940428

