FT942-15691

FT  14 APR 94 / New rule outlaws 'creative' accounts


   By ANDREW JACK


Companies will be forced to include substantial concealed liabilities in
their accounts under a new accounting standard published yesterday.
FRS 5, the fifth financial reporting standard from the Accounting Standards
Board, clamps down on 'off-balance-sheet' finance, one of the most important
elements of 'creative' accounting employed during the 1980s.
Under the standard, companies' transactions must reflect their substance and
not simply be recorded in accordance with their legal form.
The document is 140 pages long, although Mr David Tweedie, chairman,
stressed that the standard itself was just a few pages. The rest is detailed
notes specifying the treatment of a number of off-balance-sheet vehicles.
He said that he would have preferred to keep simply to the 'spirit' of the
standard, but that pressure from accounting firms had forced inclusion of
more detailed guidelines.
He also warned that the Accounting Standards Board would clamp down on any
attempts by companies to evade the new standard by devising new vehicles
which attempted to avoid the spirit of the rules.
He said it would raise any such transactions with its urgent issues
taskforce, consider reissuing an amended standard and would refer any
companies introducing such schemes to the Financial Reporting Review Panel,
the accounts watchdog.
Among the transactions discussed in detail are consignment stock, sale and
repurchase agreements, factoring, securitised assets and loan transfers.
At the heart of the standard is the need to recognise on the balance sheet
any assets or liabilities of the company as defined in the board's statement
of principles.
Assets are defined as rights to future economic benefits controlled by an
entity; and liabilities as an entity's obligations to transfer economic
benefits.
Mr Tweedie said: 'Off-balance-sheet schemes often involve complex
arrangements that can obscure the true extent of a company's borrowings and
the assets and activities they finance. Such schemes can also be used to
generate a false profit on the so-called sale that is in reality a
financing.'
FRS 5 broadly follows the proposals made the financial reporting exposure
draft on the subject issued last year.
One difference, however, is that companies will be permitted to offset the
debtor or creditor amounts outstanding with a counterparty if they are
denominated in different hard currencies or interest rates calculated on
different bases.
Strict criteria previously proposed for when assets cease to be recognised
in the accounts have also been relaxed.
FRS 5: Reporting the substance of transactions. ASB Publications, PO Box
939, Central Milton Keynes. MK9 2HT. Pounds 9

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940414

