FT944-14367

FT  24 OCT 94 / Civil servants' vote ousted Astra chief: How satellite TV
pioneer Pierre Meyrat lost a boardroom battle


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


The search begins in earnest this week for a new director general of Societe
Europeenne des Satellites, the organisation that operates the Astra
satellite system, after last week's unceremonious ousting of Dr Pierre
Meyrat.
Dr Meyrat was removed after a tense boardroom battle on Thursday lasting
more than four hours and 'released from his duties', even though he had the
support of the main users and would-be users of the Astra system such as
British Sky Broadcasting, Mr Leo Kirch, the German broadcasting entrepreneur
and Deutsche Bundespost Telekom.
The departure of one of the pioneers of European satellite television and
director general of SES for the past nine years will upset many of the
company's main customers, increase uncertainty about the imminent move to
digital satellite television and put large question marks over SES's plan to
float on the London Stock Exchange and the other major exchanges of Europe
possibly as early as next year.
Dr Meyrat is the first to admit he is no diplomat. As an executive from an
entrepreneurial background in the Swiss cable television industry he placed
more emphasis on getting decisions taken and plans implemented than
discussing details with the 24-strong board.
The board includes a large number of representatives of German and
Luxembourg financial institutions and eight Luxembourg civil servants. 'He
is dogged, determined and Swiss and sometimes difficult to work with,' said
one SES director yesterday. It is equally obvious that he has presided over
one of the most successful satellite television operations in the world.
SES already broadcasts 48 channels of television across Europe from three
satellites with a fourth 16-channel satellite due up in the next few weeks.
A fifth and sixth satellite, which could be devoted to the provision of a
150-channel digital television service for Europe, are due to be launched in
1995 and 1996.
There have been several previous attempts to remove Dr Meyrat but the most
determined came in July from a group of directors and shareholders including
the two SES vice-chairmen Mr Romain Bausch, chairman of the SNCI bank of
Luxembourg, and Count Roland Kergorlay, a private SES investor. When news of
the coup attempt leaked letters arrived in support of Dr Meyrat from most of
the main SES users.
Mr Frank Barlow, chairman of BSkyB, and also managing director of Pearson,
owners of the Financial Times, sent an unambiguous appeal that Dr Meyrat,
aged 57, should stay for the next 12-24 months until a suitable successor
could be found. The issue was never put to the vote at the July board
meeting and it appeared the director general had received overwhelming board
support.
The chairman, Mr Pierre Werner, even wrote to one worried Astra user
reassuring him that Dr Meyrat had the confidence of the board and would
continue to chair the management committee of the organisation until a
successor was identified in 'a measured time frame'.
Since then support seems to have ebbed away from Dr Meyrat, not because of
anything he has done since July, but because the splits within the
organisation were so deep that the decision-making process was being
disrupted and progress delayed. It appears that the three executive
directors who will now run the management committee - Mr Celso Azevedo, the
technical director who will be acting chairman of the committee, Mr Yves
Elsen, secretary general, and Mr Jurgen Schulte, the director of finance -
reluctantly came to the view that change would have to be speeded up to end
paralysis.
But it was the votes of the eight Luxembourg civil servants on the board
which was crucial. To remove the director-general a two-thirds majority was
needed. At the meeting which was attended throughout by Dr Meyrat he was
supported by an Anglo-German alliance of Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, which
earlier this year spent around Pounds 80m to buy a 16.6 per cent stake in
SES, Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank and Thames Television, a Pearson
subsidiary. There was a large majority against Meyrat but it was the votes
of the eight Luxembourg civil servants who all voted against him that
created the two-thirds majority for removal.
Dr Meyrat has told friends that he is astonished by the outcome which he
ascribes to the plotting of individuals who did not like him. He has also
stressed he has never formally been accused of anything.
'It's a spectacular free kick for the opposition. It also shows that who
runs SES is determined by Luxembourg civil servants,' a very angry SES user
said yesterday.
The row, and what it says about the way SES is run, will provide a
considerable boost to Eutelsat, the Paris-based rival European satellite
organisation. All main Astra users are believed to be talking to Eutelsat
about the future, and the introduction of digital television in a much more
serious way than ever before.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941024

