FT942-14617

FT  19 APR 94 / World Trade News: German anger over Indian child labour -
The protest over use of young people in the tea industry


   By KUNAL BOSE


Germany has expressed strong reservation about the use of child labour in
Indian tea plantations.
The warning follows Germany's recent threat to discontinue the import of tea
grown in the hills of Darjeeling unless the level of chemical residues,
particularly pesticides, is brought down.
The German Tea Council (GTC) has told the Indian Tea Board (ITB) that some
powerful social organisations in Germany have started a campaign against the
Indian tea industry for using child labour.
Tea producers fear that child labour will become a highly emotive issue in
the whole of Europe, and that the German campaign may spread to other
European countries.
They are aware that many developed countries will not buy woollen carpets
from India unless it is guaranteed that children have not woven them.
However, they say child labour constitutes only a small percentage of the
tea labour force.
Earlier, the International Labour Organisation drew the attention of the
Indian authorities to child labour in plantation industries. To take the
wind out of the sails of the social organisations campaigning against Indian
tea, producers will give assurances that in future they will not employ
anyone under 16.
In the past, 'local socio-economic conditions, including the high level of
general unemployment' had forced many tea companies to employ children, most
of whom had now reached the age of 16, industry officials said.
In the meantime, ITB has kept GTC informed about its initiative to bring
down the level of chemical residues in Darjeeling tea. According to ITB, the
residues in brewed Darjeeling tea are much less than in black tea.
Darjeeling planters use more pesticides than other Indian tea-growing areas
because the area is more vulnerable to pest attack.
Industry officials say the effective implementation of the spraying
schedule, recommended by tea research organisations, will reduce chemical
residues in Darjeeling tea.

The Financial Times


International Page 6

940419

