FT944-2978

FT  15 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Beyond the Troubles


There is a danger that the success of this week's investment conference in
Northern Ireland will be measured in pounds and pence. The long list of aid
pledges recorded over the past few days are welcome injections to the
region, that will be easily spent. Yet the biggest obstacle to economic
success in Ulster has never been a shortage of public funds. Rather, it has
been a lack of confidence in the future, born of the Troubles, and shared by
residents and foreign investors alike. Overcoming that lack of faith would
be the true peace dividend. On that score alone, the conference may have
made a lasting contribution to the region's future.
Delegates heard much of the tax and other incentives aimed at attracting
inward investors to the province. But there are more fundamental attractions
to a peaceful Northern Ireland. Property prices are the lowest in the UK, as
are labour costs, and the workforce is well-educated. A few investors have
already begun to exploit these benefits. But there will need to be many more
if the economy is to rid itself of the distortions created by the last 25
years.
Economic activity is heavily skewed towards agriculture, declining
industries and the public sector. None of these offers a very promising
launch pad for peacetime growth. The prime minister, Mr John Major, has
rightly promised that security expenditure savings will not be lost to the
region altogether, but ploughed back into health and education spending.
Altering the composition of public spending to favour teachers and doctors
over policeman may create more public jobs than it destroys. Yet the
long-term aim of subsidies from the centre - currently around half of the
region's budget, or a quarter of GDP - must now be to give people a better
opportunity to fend for themselves in the private sector.
Over a third of the workforce is currently employed by the government. Even
this degree of public job creation has not prevented the region from having
the highest unemployment rate in the UK, with more than half of the total
being long-term unemployment. Joblessness afflicts Catholics particularly.
Some 43 per cent of 20- to 60-year-old Catholic men are currently without
work, compared with a 26 per cent non-employment rate among Protestants.
Mr Major announced further measures to tackle the problem in yesterday's
speech. But there is a strong case for doing more. Those at the periphery of
the UK have long resented being used as guinea pigs for potentially
unpopular new government policies. Using Northern Ireland as a testing
ground for ambitious employment policies which went beyond the timid
measures announced in last month's budget would make a welcome change. With
luck, enhanced inward investment flows, tighter transport and other links
with the south, and a better tourism trade will eventually provide jobs for
the unemployed to go to. This week's conference may make employers take a
look. The trick will be giving them the confidence to stay.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941215

