FT942-12367

FT  29 APR 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries collapse as demand for auction
falters


   By FRANK MCGURTY and SARA WEBB


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US bond prices collapsed yesterday afternoon after a Treasury supply auction
drew poor demand in a market already shaken by preliminary data on the
economy's first-quarter performance.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was 1 27/32 lower
at 87 21/32 , with the yield rising nearly 17 basis points to 7.267 per
cent. At the short end, the two-year note dropped  7/32 to 99 9/16 , to
yield 5.719 per cent.
The session started on a positive note. The initial reaction to the Commerce
Department's preliminary estimate of gross domestic product was rousing.
Prices jumped on the news that the economy grew by 2.6 per cent, well below
the level forecast by most economists.
However, the market quickly reversed course after delving deeper into the
report. Though the economy slowed markedly from the 7 per cent rate of
growth in the fourth quarter, traders were particularly concerned by a 2.9
per cent increase in the fixed-weight deflator measure of inflation, which
slightly exceeded a median forecast of 2.6 per cent.
In another worrying development, private-sector demand remained robust,
offsetting a sharp decline in government spending which was unlikely to be
repeated in the second quarter.
Traders seized on these undercurrents as an excuse to sell after a powerful
upturn over the past week. They virtually ignored a soft 0.4 per cent
increase in March durable goods orders. The data, which compared with
expectations of a 1 per cent gain, suggested tame conditions going into the
second quarter.
The morning selling was led by dealers hoping to push prices lower ahead of
an afternoon Treasury auction of Dollars 11bn in five-year notes. Their
strategy was to buy the newly-issued securities cheaply and sell them on to
retail customers at a profit.
In the event, the issue was badly-received, and follow-through buying failed
to develop. Prices, especially at the long end, went into a tail-spin before
steadying toward the close.
European government bonds took their cue from the US again yesterday
afternoon, imitating the Treasury bond sell-off. There were declines of a
quarter point in Germany and a point in the UK.
The European bond markets opened on a relatively-stable note, and the
decision by the Bank of France to shave another 10 basis points off its
intervention in the morning gave a welcome - if short-lived - lift to French
government bond prices. However, the sell-off in the US Treasury bond market
in the afternoon pulled French prices lower.
The French central bank lowered its intervention rate, from 5.8 per cent to
5.7 per cent at the securities repurchase tender yesterday, in line with
market expectations. The notional bond futures contract quoted on the Matif
exchange opened at 121.92 and reached a high of 121.98 before falling to a
low of 121.18 and then settling at 121.24.
The initial focus in the German government bond market was the Bundesbank's
council meeting, where members decided to leave the key discount and Lombard
rates unchanged, as expected.
The announcement of the west German inflation data provided a minor
disappointment. Bavaria was the last of the German states to report its
consumer prices data, announcing yesterday a rise of 0.3 per cent in the
month to mid-April for a year-on-year increase of 2.9 per cent. Meanwhile,
the west German figure rose 0.3 per cent to give a year-on-year rise of 3.2
per cent.
'Obviously, the market will be watching the Bundesbank's repo next week,'
said Mr Kit Juckes, economist at SG Warburg Securities. 'And while the 3.2
per cent inflation figure is disappointing, it should get down to 3 per cent
in the summer.'
The bund futures contract opened at 95.12 and reached a high of 95.47, then
dropped to a low of 94.55 in the wake of the US sell-off. The contract
settled at 94.67, down a quarter of a point on the previous close.
Elsewhere in Europe, the sell-off in Spanish government bonds was partly
triggered by domestic factors. At the Treasury's auction of three-, five-,
and 10-year paper yesterday, the accepted yields were significantly higher
than at the previous bond auction, reflecting the secondary market levels.
While the amounts sold were relatively small, there was disappointment that
the Treasury accepted such high yields.
The Spanish three-year note yield rose to 8.376 per cent at the auction,
from 7.296 per cent previously. The five-year note yield was set at 8.761
per cent from 7.388 per cent, and the 10-year bond yield rose to 9.242 per
cent from 7.811 per cent.
UK government bonds fell nearly a point, under the influence of the US
decline and new supply in the Eurosterling sector. Dealers noted switching
out of long-dated gilts into the new Cable & Wireless Eurosterling issue, as
well as shortening trades.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940429

