FT942-16362

FT  11 APR 94 / Leading Article: Supersonic subsidies


Europe's three largest aerospace manufacturers have a problem. All are
suffering from a weak civil aircraft market and cuts in spending on defence,
which has long provided much of their most lucrative business. Despite heavy
restructuring, two of the companies, Aerospatiale of France and Dasa of
Germany, made losses last year. The third, British Aerospace, is only just
profitable.
Apparently in quest of a solution, the companies have fallen back on a
well-tried industry ploy - a costly prestige project calculated to set
politicians' pulses racing. This time, it is a joint feasibility study for a
long-haul supersonic airliner. The companies argue that the scheme would
give Europe a head start in the race to build the next generation of
commercial aircraft.
The mere fact that the project has been dubbed 'Son of Concorde' should
cause taxpayers to shudder. The Anglo-French programme, subsidised to the
tune of more than Pounds 7bn in today's money, produced only 14 operational
aircraft. The sole customers were the two countries' state-owned, flagship
air lines, which acquired their Concordes at knockdown prices. Though BA has
turned its fleet into a cash-spinner, Air France has not even managed that.
Untested market
The dangers of the fiasco being repeated seem all too clear. In contrast to
the European Airbus, which has thrived by focusing on established airline
needs, the project aims at an untested market. Recent experience also
suggests the premium prices which airlines would need to charge to make a
supersonic service viable are acutely vulnerable to recession. The
manufacturers' talk of making as many as 1,000 aircraft and of big potential
demand on Pacific Rim routes sounds highly spec-ulative.
So, too are estimates of the pro gramme's cost, which has been put as high
as Pounds 10bn - much of which governments would be expected to finance. In
one sense, the exact figure is almost irrelevant. As the sponsors of
Concorde discovered, beyond a certain point it can be as expensive to cancel
a white elephant project as to see it through to completion.
The manufacturers say the costs would be shared through wider international
collaboration. That is debatable. The European Airbus consortium, for all
its technical achievements, is far from a model of manufacturing efficiency
or corporate transparency. Furthermore, for all the industry's talk of big
global partnerships, none attempted to date has survived beyond the design
stage - and some have not got off the ground at all.
Driving seat
One reason is that manufacturers have often been unable to agree on which
should be in the driving seat. The bigger problem is that their engineering
and technological prowess, their roles as defence contractors and the
glamour of their business have made them potent symbols of national
sovereignty. Invested in their fortunes are the pride and ambition of
governments.
The result has been policies which have too often preserved excess capacity
and, in the case of Airbus, thwarted commercially desirable restructuring.
Indeed, the consortium has, in practice, enabled Britain, France and Germany
each to maintain a civil aircraft manufacturing industry which none could
otherwise afford. The price in reduced efficiency and scale economies can
only be guessed at.
In these circumstances, international competition can easily become a battle
between political power and national treasuries. That danger has been
highlighted by the Clinton administration's central role in the recent sale
of Boeings to Saudi Arabia, and its apparent about-turn on civil aircraft
subsidies. After years of pressing to have them subjected to stricter
international curbs, the US now seems to favour stepping up aid to its own
industry.
The longer such political attitudes persist, the more manufacturers will be
encouraged to plead for special treatment. The harder, too, will be the task
of applying normal commercial and financial disciplines to an industry which
has too often identified its own welfare with the national interest. 'Son of
Concorde' offers an excellent opportunity for governments to demonstrate
that they understand the force of this point.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940411

