FT942-12716

FT  28 APR 94 / Book Review: Maverick mogul's art of cultivation


   By MARTIN DICKSON


MASTER OF THE GAME
By Connie Bruck
Simon & Schuster, Dollars 25, 395 pages
Steve Ross, whose deal-making genius created Time Warner, the world's
largest media conglomerate, used to say he learnt the art of handling people
when he ran the Riverside Chapel, a Manhattan funeral business owned by the
father of his first wife, at the start of his extraordinary career.
'It's a service business,' Ross would explain. 'You service people in an
emotional time - you learn about their needs, their feelings . . . If you
say to people who are grieving, 'Can I help you?' they will say, 'No one can
help me'. So I would say, 'Can I be of service to you?' ' It is a telling
anecdote. For as Connie Bruck points out in this fine biography, Ross's
almost visceral ability to cultivate people, and win their favour, was a key
ingredient in the transformation of that modest funeral business into Time
Warner, with interests ranging from Hollywood's Warner Brothers film studios
to the Time magazine publishing empire.
In attending to the needs of Hollywood stars - the ultimate service industry
 -'the professional empathiser par excellence of Riverside Chapel had found
his rarefied home'.
Yet the handsome, charming Ross, who died of cancer two years ago, also
stirred up immense controversy, most notably over a succession of shady
business deals and the lavish lifestyle he and his top executives enjoyed at
the company's expense. His attorney, Arthur Liman, once described him as
'the last great pasha of American business'.
Having created the company himself, Ross found it hard to draw the line
between what was his and what belonged to his shareholders. He thought
nothing of despatching a jet from the Caribbean to New York to collect some
genuine Nathan's hot dogs. An epigram framed in his office said: 'More is
not an illusion.'
Ms Bruck, a writer for New Yorker magazine, is clearly drawn to such
maverick, larger-than-life risk-takers. She made her name in the 1980s with
The Predators Ball, one of the best books on the rise of Michael Milken, the
junk bond king of Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Ross sprang from the kind of impoverished lower middle- class background
which has propelled upwards many a workaholic high-achiever. He was the son
of a Brooklyn builder who had lost his money and a socially ambitious,
doting mother. From an early age he displayed great skills in mental
arithmetic and an entrepreneurial drive, rising at 4am to sweep the snow
from neighbours' drives.
He started his business career at the Riverside Chapel, which he merged with
Kinney System, a New York car park company with underworld links, and took
the new entity on an acquisition binge which culminated in the 1969 takeover
of Warner Brothers-Seven Artists, the film and record company.
That company, much enlarged and renamed Warner Communications (WCI), merged
in turn with Time Inc in 1989. And while Time, a blue-blooded member of the
US business establishment, ostensibly took over the raffish Warner, Ross
emerged on top of the combined group. It was his finest negotiating hour.
Bruck may not reveal any great secrets about Ross's career, but her book
fleshes his life out with a mass of fascinating new detail, held together by
a strong narrative line and a crisp, lucid prose style.
The tale drags only once, when she presents the tortuous evidence in the
Westchester Premier scandal, where Warner was accused of making illegal
investments in a Mafia-run theatre. Ross escaped prosecution, leaving his
best friend and company colleague, Jay Emmett, to plead guilty.
The lesson of the book is that great - if flawed - individuals make great
companies. One of Ross's great strengths - apart from a gambler's bravado -
was strategic vision. He was one of the first US businessmen to appreciate
the importance of cable television and the increasingly global nature of the
entertainment industry.
Another was his deal-making prowess. He prepared carefully for every
negotiating session, memorising personal details about his opponents, which
he could throw into the conversation and catch them off-guard.
But he was no manager. Instead, he devolved power to his divisional heads
and bound what he called the 'Warner family' together by acting as a kind of
father figure, showering his favourites with lavish gifts and acts of
personal kindness. His favourite question was: 'Are you having fun?'
Yet this paid dividends too. Says Bruck: 'His apparent psychological need
(to be the provider of good news, good fortune, good food, good times)
meshed almost sublimely with business strategy. For by engendering such
unusually strong loyalty within WCI, Ross was able to protect his company
from the rapid turnover that was so endemic and destructive in other
entertainment companies.'
However, luck seemed to desert him after the Time Warner deal. The merger
has been marked by squabbling between the two corporate cultures and over
the strategy, pursued by Ross and his successor, Gerald Levin, of selling
off minority stakes in the 'crown jewel' entertainment business to pay down
the heavy debt burden resulting from the takeover.
Bruck suggests that Levin, while being a persuasive and far-sighted manager,
cannot adequately fill Ross's shoes and she concludes that the Time Warner
merger was probably not worth while, given its legacy of debt and
personality clashes, and the lack of genuine synergy between most of the
businesses.
It may yet be undone. Seagram, the large Canadian drinks company, has built
up a 14 per cent stake in the group and could be preparing to launch a bid,
though it denies this.
Perhaps Steve Ross is smiling from the grave: after all, he was Time Warner.
How can it possibly survive without him?

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940428

