FT944-11068

FT  08 NOV 94 / Twisting and turning: The fitful progress of Russian
economic reform


   By JOHN LLOYD


The Russian government and its economic reform programme are swinging on a
rope: the fate of neither can be pronounced with certainty.
For the past year, Yeltsin administration policy has resembled a collection
of 'this way' signs pointing in all directions. It is not simply the
president who is to blame for this, as he thrashes this way and that seeking
stability and support. Also to blame are the senior state officials, who
oscillate between moves towards the market and concessions to those who fear
reform.
Coping with these two contradictory imperatives is the essence of Russian
governance, but it makes for a disjointed progress, always threatened with
reversal.
Yet much of this past year had been trumpeted as a success. The exit from
the Chernomyrdin cabinet in January of Mr Yegor Gaidar and Mr Boris
Fyodorov, the two men most associated with reform, suggested something was
amiss. But Mr Chernomyrdin managed to hold to a policy that brought
inflation down from over 20 per cent a month at the beginning of the year to
4 per cent in August.
However, some Rbs13,000bn were pumped into the system over the summer to
allay the demands of the former state industries and agricultural lobbies.
This brought the inevitable rise in inflation, up to 15 per cent last month
(though now said to be falling). It also weakened the rouble. On 'Black
Tuesday' - October 11 - heavy selling drove the rouble down by more than 20
per cent, to Rbs4,000 to the dollar. It only recovered with central bank
intervention.
This appears to have shocked not just the markets and the population, but
also President Boris Yeltsin. A rift - denied, but evident - opened up
between him and his prime minister. The president ordered a commission of
Russia's security council, made up of intelligence chiefs and generals, to
look into the crash. Its conclusions have not been published but have been
leaked.
Not surprisingly, such a committee named guilty men. They included the head
of the central bank, Mr Victor Gerashchenko, and the acting minister of
finance, Mr Sergei Dubinin, both pushed into resignation by Mr Yeltsin. They
included Mr Alexander Shokhin, deputy prime minister and minister for the
economy, who failed to 'co-ordinate' the work of the departments under his
nominal charge.
They included a group of large banks, including Most, Menatep, Inkombank,
Imperial, Alfa, International Moscow Bank and others, mostly in the top 20
of the new finance houses and all desperate for respectability. They were
charged, according to the daily Sevodnya, with 'profiteering' on the money
markets.
Last week, Mr Shokhin, the longest-serving cabinet member and a solid if not
radical reformer, felt a cold wind. The most senior minister blamed, he
learned that the nomination of the new finance minister - Mr Vladimir
Panskov - was being discussed without his participation. He went, on
Thursday, to Mr Chernomyrdin to demand a say. Mr Chernomyrdin said he did
not know Mr Panskov either.
On Friday, Mr Panskov was appointed. Mr Shokhin's resignation was accepted
by the president on Sunday.
This humiliation for Mr Shokhin was also a blow for Mr Chernomyrdin. Last
month, a conservative agriculture minister, Alexander Nazarchuk, was foisted
on the prime minister. He also lost a close ally in Mr Gerashchenko, the
central bank governor, and a respected colleague in Mr Dubinin, the acting
finance minister.
On Saturday, Mr Victor Ilyushin, the president's closest aide, said his boss
was 'seriously concerned over the work of the government', but denied a rift
between head of state and government.
The constitution underpins a strong presidency, and makes the government
dependent on its pleasure. Mr Chernomyrdin, unlike Mr Shokhin, has decided
to march on. But how much longer can his government survive this kind of
treatment?
That will depend on the progress of economic reform.
The cabinet's credibility and the future of reform are wholly intertwined.
Mr Chernomyrdin's government has committed itself to a rigorous budget,
which eschews the taking of any credits from the central bank. Instead, the
government will depend on the sale of Treasury Bills and on finance of up to
Dollars 16bn from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
This will give the IMF a much larger say than hitherto in the budget's
design. The target inflation rate - 1 per cent a month in a year's time  -
is already agreed. The size of the budget deficit is not. The IMF target is
6 per cent of GNP, the Russian government's 8 per cent. The rate at which
the rouble should be pegged to the dollar, if it can be stabilised, has
still to be decided. But these are tactical matters. The principles are
accepted.
But such austerity is bitterly opposed by the president's officials, led by
Mr Alexander Livshits, one of his economic advisers. Significantly the
deputy head of Mr Yeltsin's budget department, also opposed to the
government's budget proposals, was Mr Panskov, now at Finance.
Mr Panskov was quoted by the government press service as saying on Friday
that he supported the government's course. But, according to ministry
officials, he also said that 'much work remains to be done' on the budget.
Mr Panskov may have been signalling an intention to rethink the basic
strategy of the budget, as parliament continues to rage against it.
But reform, staggering on Friday, was walking tall again on Saturday, when
Mr Anatoly Chubais was named as a first deputy premier in charge of economy
and finance.
Mr Chubais is Mr Privatisation: a stubborn, clever man of only 39. Brought
into government by Mr Gaidar, he has in the past two years overseen the
largest and most rapid privatisation programme in the world. Of his reform
credentials there is no doubt. He said on Saturday that he - he, not Mr
Yeltsin - would soon be naming a new economics minister and a new
privatisation chief.
If there is an unambiguous sign from this mix of events, it is that Mr
Yeltsin, still able to pull the levers of state, is leaning heavily over Mr
Chernomyrdin's crucial budget, but is not yet prepared to squash it.
A 'softer' variant would starve the government of international financial
aid and leave it caught in the toils of high-to-hyper inflation.
Mr Yeltsin may be fretful, and even threatening, over the budget, but he has
yet to come up with a better idea.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

941108

