FT941-4207

FT  12 MAR 94 / Mixed reaction to rescue plan for Air France


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


Unions representing the 40,000 staff of Air France were mixed in their
reaction yesterday to the rescue plan providing for FFr20bn (Pounds 2.29bn)
of state aid in return for a three-year wage freeze and 5,000 voluntary
redundancies.
Mr Christian Blanc, Air France's president, has asked for the unions' formal
reaction on March 28, but said that if he cannot get agreement from the
airline's 14 unions, he might organise a referendum.
Force Ouvriere, representing a majority of ground staff, reacted favourably,
while the communist-leaning CGT federation, complained that the government
is blackmailing it by tying the state aid to unions' approval of the plan.
The outcome may be decided by small groups, like the mechanics union which
said yesterday it wanted promotions, if not pay increases, to go ahead over
the 1994-97 period.
The government yesterday kept studiously silent in contrast to its erratic
tactics last October when it backed a more stringent plan for forced pay and
jobs cuts by Mr Bernard Attali, then the Air France president, and then
suddenly abandoned both the man and the plan.
Mr Attali yesterday published his book 'Sky Wars: Five Years at the Controls
of Air France', in which he says that if the government had just kept its
sang froid 'for a few more days', it would have beaten the Air France strike
and saved itself money. Instead, he was disavowed by the transport minister
on television on October 24, and immediately resigned.
In his book, Mr Attali defends his decision to buy Air Inter and increase
control over Air Inter, decisions which are implicitly criticised in the
Blanc plan as helping plunge the airline deeper into the red.
Rejecting the premise of the Attali rescue plan, Mr Blanc has said that
staffing and pay levels 'are not the problem at Air France, which is one of
organisation and structure'. 'I want to do away with this myth that the
productivity difference between Air France and BA is based on the number of
personnel and level of pay.'
Recalculating BA's workforce to include work that the UK carrier has
contracted out but which the French airline still does in-house, Mr Blanc
said that in 1992 BA effectively had staff of 49,000 and Air France 44,000.
BA thus had a workforce 11 per cent larger than Air France, but turnover
which was 21 per cent bigger. The planned 10 per cent cut in Air France
staff from 40,000 now to 44,000 by 1997 would give Air France the same ratio
of staff to turnover as BA.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940312

