FT942-14864

FT  19 APR 94 / EU tries to patch up its Bosnia policy


   By LIONEL BARBER


   LUXEMBOURG


The European Union tried to pick up the pieces of its Bosnia policy
yesterday with an Anglo-French appeal for a new united diplomatic front
against the Bosnian Serbs.
The initiative aims to co-ordinate US, Russian, European and United Nations
efforts to achieve a peace settlement in Bosnia after the humiliating
weekend reversal in the Moslem enclave of Gorazde.
EU foreign ministers discussed the proposal at a meeting in Luxembourg
yesterday, amid much hand-wringing in the face of the Serbian assault on
Gorazde, which had been declared a UN-protected safe area.
However, there were signs of reservations within the Clinton administration
about the wisdom of streamlining western and Russian diplomatic efforts
through a new UN Security Council resolution.
Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, failed to persuade Mr Warren
Christopher, US secretary of state, to agree to the plan during a telephone
conversation yesterday, though he said Mr Christopher supported the
principle of streamlined diplomacy.
Mr Hurd, who described the Serb assault on Goradze as a 'serious setback',
said it made no sense to have three separate diplomatic efforts. Mr Alain
Juppe, French foreign minister, said the separate European, Russian and US
diplomatic tracks had made it easier for the Bosnian Serbs to play a 'double
game'.
Despite evidence of disarray in UN and Nato policy toward Bosnia, Mr Hurd
said ministers were not inclined to despair.
He pointed to recent 'successes' such as the ceasefire in Sarajevo, the
takeover of Tuzla airport, and the relief mission in Vitez.
Ministers agreed that it would be wrong to withdraw UN forces at this stage,
or to lift the UN arms embargo so that Bosnian Moslems could defend
themselves. It was not possible to impose a solution by force, Mr Hurd
insisted.
Instead, ministers were working on a declaration calling for a ceasefire in
Gorazde, to be followed up with deployment of extra UN forces in Bosnia.
Britain was prepared to contribute, while not increasing its present
contingent in former Yugoslavia.
The aim would be to achieve a general ceasefire, coupled with a stepped-up
effort to achieve a territorial settlement between Bosnian Moslems, Serbs
and Croats.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940419

