FT944-14598

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (29): What's it
worth to part with Teddy? - Alternative Investments / TV has prompted the
reasonably affluent to collect items that have no artistic value but are
rare and evoke the past - even their own childhood


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Television programmes such as The Antiques Roadshow have much to answer for.
Battered Teddies valued for Pounds 20,000 or more; Dinky toys for upwards of
Pounds 5,000; old comics worth Pounds 15,000 - now everyone thinks that the
rubbish in their lofts is worth a fortune.
It is true that there has been an extraordinary change in what people
collect. Astronomic prices, and the demise of connoisseurship, has reduced
the importance of serious collectors of Old Masters, Renaissance bronzes,
early furniture and the like. These days, the new rich - and the reasonably
affluent - often set their sights on collectables, which carry no intrinsic
artistic value but are rare and evoke the past, often their own childhoods.
A sexy corset worn by Madonna on her last European tour two years ago can
now sell for Pounds 12,000 in the auction rooms. Christie's South Kensington
recently offered 10,000 computer games. Phillips is selling pre-war
television sets, estimating the 1937 HMV 902 at Pounds 2,000. A rare Leica
camera of 1931 has sold for Pounds 39,600. If there is a market for it, sell
it, seems to be the rule of the salerooms, who are always searching for new
areas.
Many of the most successful items in recent years, like vintage cars and
wine, were badly hit by the recession (although wine has recovered well),
but anyone who can suggest sectors capable of generating a turnover of
Pounds 1m-plus a year will receive a warm welcome. These days anything goes
 -there are already serious collectors of colourful telephone cards.
Of course, anything which suddenly rockets upwards in price can fall just as
quickly. Five years ago, rare models of Swatch watches approached Pounds
20,000; now, few people are interested in such items. Many will own examples
of objects which seem to sell well at auction, but which are actually
worthless. Take Dinky toys. Christie's recently set a new record of Pounds
14,300 for a set of eight pre-war Dinky cars. But not only were they in
their original box; they were also wrapped in the original purple cardboard
insert which supported their display in the shops. A similar set without the
cardboard sold for Pounds 7,000. Anyone with Dinky cars of the period which
have been played with, and show wear, possess nothing but a battered
childhood toy, unless the object is a one-off.
In teddy bears, the name that attracts the international buyers is Steiff,
the German maker, which started producing soft toys in the 1870s. But not
all Steiff teddys are valuable. One sold recently for Pounds 49,500, but
only because it was blue, made for Harrods, and exceptionally rare. However,
the bear market is fanatical, and growing; and English bears, produced from
1912 on by Farnell, can now make Pounds 4,000. Even 1930s bears from Chad
Valley and Merrythought are worth holding on to, even though their current
market price is probably only Pounds 200.
Toys seem to be a market likely to last: already Magic Roundabout sets of
the mid-1970s are appearing at fairs, priced at Pounds 300 or so. But they
must be complete and in perfect condition. Comics, too, have their fanatics.
A rare copy of the first 1939 edition of Superman sold for Pounds 14,300
recently, but in the same auction a Batman Number One failed to sell.
British comics are much cheaper, but like the similar market of football
programmes, prices are rising steadily. As in all such markets, condition
and rarity are paramount. The attraction is that very few items cost more
than Pounds 500, and most examples go for well under Pounds 50. Top price to
date is the Pounds 4,000 paid for the 1948 Beano which marked the debut of
Biffo the Bear. The appeal was that accompanying the comic was the original
art work for the strip. There is also strong demand for the bold graphic
design which characterised the art work of the Dan Dare comic, and for the
covers of cheap pulp fiction.
On November 25, Christie's in South Kensington introduces a new area -
street fashion. Clothes of the 1960s, carrying the labels of Biba, Mary
Quant and Ossie Clark come under the hammer, with a typical tunic and dress
of 1967 carrying an estimate of Pounds 150. There must be many wardrobes
heaving with such items, but to have any value they should be by the top
designers of the period, bear the original label, and remain in excellent
condition.
Bonhams has been successful with auctions of fountain pens; and a Watermans
'snake' pen of around 1900, one of only five known, recently sold for a
record Pounds 15,100. Phillips has just added to the well established and
strong market in sporting paraphernalia by holding a rugby auction in
Cardiff which was a great success.
All the main auction houses have a golfing memorabilia auction at least once
a year. A very early pre-1800 golf club can top Pounds 100,000, while a
feathery golf ball of the 1930s might make Pounds 30,000. But you can still
build up a collection of post-1880 clubs and not spend more than Pounds 50
on any item. Cricket is always popular, but soccer and tennis are building
up keen groups of collectors. There is nothing to suggest that sports
accessories will ever lose their appeal.
The same goes for pop memorabilia. Sotheby's held its first Pounds
1m-topping auction in this field in August. The Beatles naturally dominate
the sales, and original lyrics written by John or Paul usually make over
Pounds 30,000 - I am the Walrus soared to Pounds 45,800. Authenticated
guitars also do well: a Fender guitar played by Jimi Hendrix went to a pop
museum for Pounds 198,000. But beware of fakes in this febrile sector.
Of course, by their very nature, collectables are at the whim of fashion and
can fall in price even more quickly than they rise. A trip to a vast
antiques market, like the periodic gatherings at Newark, will indicate the
new collecting fields. There are always clubs of enthusiasts who swop
examples and spread the word.
Fairs also offer the opportunity to acquire more traditional antiques with
the potential to appreciate. The most obvious example is furniture  -
essential, practical and ubiquitous - and while modern and repro loses
value, good antique furniture quietly appreciates. Edwardian furniture, and
later, has overtaken Victorian as the new growth area and is still
inexpensive. Recently, good examples of the furniture of the 1950s have
risen rapidly in price.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVIII

941021

