FT944-11005

FT  08 NOV 94 / International Company News: Founders of Southern Peru Copper
plan IPO


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent and BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


Two of the US founders of Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPCC), one of
the world's biggest integrated copper producers, are to sell their shares
through an international public offering, taking advantage of high metal
prices and interest in emerging markets.
Some 28 per cent of SPCC will be on offer and the company will apply for a
listing on the New York Stock Exchange.
Non-voting, employee shares in SPCC are quoted on the Lima exchange and at
present give the group a market value of about USDollars 1.3bn.
Selling their SPCC shares are Cerro Trading, a Marmon Group subsidiary,
which owns 20.7 per cent, and Newmont Gold, with 10.7 per cent.
SPCC has no plans to offer any shares and will receive no proceeds from the
offering, through US and international syndicates led by CS First Boston and
SG Warburg.
The other founding shareholders in SPCC are US copper producers Asarco, with
52.3 per cent, and Phelps Dodge, which has 16.3 per cent.
SPCC operates two mines and a smelter in the south of Peru. Last year it
produced 307,000 short tons of copper, 3.3m troy ounces of silver and 6.3m
lbs of molybdenum.
The company is three years into a five-year, Dollars 300m investment
programme aimed at increased output and correcting environmental problems.
In June it acquired the nearby Ilo copper refinery, sold as part of Peru's
privatisation programme, for Dollars 68.9m.
A consortium comprising Cominco, the Canadian metals producer, and Japan's
Marubeni has won a bidding contest for the Cajamarquilla zinc refinery on
the outskirts of Lima, Peru, writes Bernard Simon in Toronto.
Cominco, which will have an 83 per cent stake in the refinery, said that the
purchase price is about USDollars 108m, part of which will be paid in
instalments over 14 years.
About a dozen other groups expressed interest.
Cajamarquilla has an annual capacity of about 100,000 tonnes. Cominco has
indicated that it plans to expand the capacity to 140,000 tonnes, which is
about half the size of its flagship complex at Trail, British Columbia.
In addition to an improving political and economic climate, Cominco said
that it was attracted by Peru's active mining industry and 'strong'
geological potential.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941108

