FT942-16043

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (9): Costs cut at all levels - Gavin Gray
profiles Henkel Zlatorog, the cosmetics company


   By GAVIN GRAY


On the face of it, Slovenia looks one of the least promising countries in
central and eastern Europe for consumer goods producers. Average wages and
production costs are the highest in the region and, with a population of
only 2m, the country's domestic market is smaller than many cities in
Europe.
Things seemed very different in May 1990, when Tovarna Zlatorog, the soap
and cosmetics factory in Maribor, signed a joint venture agreement with
Henkel, the German personal care products company. The two companies had
been working together since 1968, both informally and through trade
agreements. They hoped that setting up a joint venture would cement their
relationship and help the factory lift its market share in the 23m strong
Yugoslav market.
'The aim of the joint venture was to cover all of the former Yugoslav
market,' says Mr Ernst Hackel, a member of the board of Henkel Austria.
'During the first year we ran into difficulties because we couldn't trade
with Yugoslavia. After 1991, Henkel Zlatorog faced many problems.'
Instead of pulling out after the break up of Yugoslavia, Henkel pressed
ahead with the venture. In March this year it lifted its stake in the
company to 51 per cent and it has invested DM20m so far, including DM5m for
washing powder production. While new equipment has improved efficiency, the
size of the workforce has shrunk from 1,264 when the joint venture was
signed, to 591 today.
'The whole process of production has been changed to cut costs at all
levels,' adds Mr Andrej Mesaric, general director of Henkel Zlatorog. 'Our
western partner brought knowledge of production and the way a company should
be run. Henkel not only cut the number of employees but also cut production
costs, leading to a rise in productivity.'
The factory is now producing cosmetics for Henkel Austria and is also
exporting cosmetics to Romania. Even so, turnover is still down sharply,
having fallen from DM200m in 1990 to DM110m in 1993. 'Without Henkel we
would have had considerable difficulties in surviving,' says Mr Mesaric.
Henkel Zlatorog's managers are looking forward to the revival of their old
markets in other former Yugoslav republics. In 1993, about 10 to 15 per cent
of its sales were in Croatia and a further 3 per cent were in Macedonia.
Mr Hackel says: 'If these trends continue, our market will rise in the next
two to three years, from the present 2m in Slovenia to 10m people when these
other former Yugoslav republics are taken into account.'

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940412

