FT942-15725

FT  14 APR 94 / Hata likely to be chosen by coalition


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Japan's seven-party coalition yesterday moved closer to choosing Mr Tsutomu
Hata, foreign minister and deputy prime minister, as the country's new
leader.
The warring left and right wings of the alliance declared a conditional
truce in the power struggle set off by last Friday's decision by Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa to resign as prime minister. Neither side had managed to attract
enough support to overcome the other, forcing socialist supporters to call a
halt.
Coalition leaders now tentatively aim, barring last minute skirmishes, to
put the new candidate to the vote on Monday in both houses of parliament and
announce a new cabinet line-up the same day. The prospect of the
pro-business Mr Hata as prime minister cheered equity investors, lifting the
Nikkei index by 2.1 per cent, or 412.08 points, to 20,060.41.
Mr Hata, who had been a possibility for prime minister when the coalition
chose Mr Hosokawa last summer, is an activist for political reform, a keen
advocate of economic de-regulation and believes Japan should play a wider
part in United Nations peacekeeping.
His closeness to Mr Ichiro Ozawa, joint leader of Mr Hata's Japan Renewal
party, the dominant group on the coalition's right wing, may go down well
with the Washington, where Mr Ozawa is respected as a useful
behind-the-scenes negotiator in the US trade dispute.
Mr Hata is due this evening to meet US Vice President Al Gore at the Gatt
ministerial meeting in Marrakesh, to discuss US-Japan relations, including
the deadlocked trade talks. He returns to Tokyo on Sunday.
The coalition has not yet formally adopted Mr Hata as its candidate, and one
of its smaller members, the New Harbinger party, refused to negotiate
yesterday, but there are no rivals with a chance of commanding majority
support.
The alliance looked well on the way to breaking up early this week, but it
now appears it will merely miss its end-of-week deadline for choosing a
prime minister by a few days.
The left wing's decision to end its breakaway bid came in response to a plea
for coalition unity from Mr Akira Yamagishi, president of Rengo, the
8m-strong trade union confederation, a powerful backer of the Social
Democratic party, which is the largest coalition member and leader of the
left wing. Mr Hata is 'the most likely candidate,' said Mr Keigo Ouchi,
leader of the Democratic Socialist party, an SDP partner.
Until yesterday, the SDP and its allies were reluctant to accept Mr Hata
because they feared this would strengthen Mr Ozawa's dominance and pull the
coalition to the right. They still feel suspicious, indicating the next
government might be as unstable as the current one, but accept that Mr Hata
may be the only option.
Mr Ozawa yesterday insisted coalition members should reach 'at least a rough
agreement' on the main issues facing the next government, such as tax
reform, deregulation and a response to North Korea's suspected nuclear arms
programme. The socialists differ with Mr Ozawa's supporters on all three
issues.
Negotiations in the next few days are expected to focus on policy
co-ordination and make-up of the cabinet. Mr Wataru Kubo, deputy head of the
SDP, was tipped yesterday as possible chief cabinet secretary. That includes
being government spokesman and the prime minister's chief of staff, a job
which may help assuage socialist fears of being dominated by the
conservatives.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940414

