FT942-15305

FT  15 APR 94 / International Bonds: Marked pick-up in issuance


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


The Eurobond market saw a marked pick-up in issuance in a range of
currencies as sentiment was lifted by the Bundesbank's latest monetary
easing.
The Council of Europe launched its long-awaited Ecu300m of 10-year bonds,
which are due to be priced today to yield between three and five basis
points over the 6 per cent 10-year Ecu OAT.
According to the lead manager, Swiss Bank Corporation, the deal is targeted
mainly at institutional investors, which have shown good demand for 10-year
Ecu paper.
In the dollar sector, the City of Prague launched its long-planned Dollars
250m of 7 3/4 per cent five-year bonds at a 120 basis point spread over
Treasuries. According to an official at lead manager Nomura International,
the bonds closed at 99.55 bid, below their 99.63 re-offer price, but the
spread remained steady at 120 basis points.
While some traders said they saw little demand for the triple-B-minus rated
bonds and felt they were tightly priced, others reported interest from
institutional investors seeking high-yielding paper with potential for
credit improvement.
Two dollar floaters also emerged: Dollars 500m of five-year notes for the
Province of Nova Scotia, paying a coupon of 0.1875 points above three-month
Libor, and Dollars 250m of three-year notes for Mexico's Banco Nacional de
Comercio Exterior (Bancomext), paying three-month Libor plus 0.75 points.
The latter met strong demand from selected east Asian accounts, according to
lead manager JP Morgan.
While Nova Scotia's bonds were deemed appropriately priced, traders felt
they would be slow to place due to the large size of the issue.
However, lead manager UBS, which took Dollars 380m of the deal itself, said
it felt a smaller issue might have put the deal's liquidity into question.
The budding Greek drachma sector saw another two new deals: Dr10bn of 15 1/4
per cent Marathon bonds for the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, and Dr10bn of 15 3/4 per cent Eurobonds for Abbey National
Treasury Services. Heavy recent supply has some traders grumbling that the
sector is fast becoming saturated.
Supranational Marathon bonds are exempt from Greek withholding tax to
resident and non-resident investors while Eurodrachma non-supranational
bonds are tax-free only for foreigners. Because of this, as well as credit
considerations, they pay a significant yield premium over their
supranational counterparts.
'European investors feel safer with Marathon bonds,' said one trader. 'If
the Greek market sours, there will be a backstop bid for these bonds from
Greek investors because they're tax-free,' he said. The EBRD bonds ended
around 100 bid, inside fees, while the Abbey National bonds ended at 99 1/4
bid, at full fees.
Following the Bundesbank's rate cuts, traders in the D-Mark sector are
confident that some of the rumoured deals for L-Bank, KfW, Belgium, the
World Bank, Karstadt and several Japanese borrowers will start emerging
soon. Syndicate sources expect L-Bank to issue DM3bn of five-year global
bonds early next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940415

