FT941-5537

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Next stop the world - Scheherazade
Daneshkhu on two new privatisation unit trusts


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Last year, fund management groups met growing retail demand for emerging
markets funds with weekly launches; now, it is the turn of privatisation
issues. Fond memories of the UK government's privatisations in the mid-1980s
 -many of which proved excellent for generous returns, even after a short
period - have led to private investor interest in funds with the
privatisation label.
The large privatisation programme under way in several European countries,
particularly France, spawned two recent investment trusts from Kleinwort
Benson and Mercury Asset Management, both of them over-subscribed. The next
step beyond Europe is the world and two fund management groups, Guinness
Flight and Fidelity, have now launched Global Privatisation unit trusts. But
investors should ask themselves if these correspond to their needs.
Both emphasise the wider geographical area and stock selection opportunities
afforded by a global, rather than a European, fund. But since the two also
want to qualify for the full Pounds 6,000 annual general personal equity
plan allowance, they are restricted to holding a minimum of 50 per cent in
the UK and Europe.
Fidelity will invest an initial 75 per cent of its fund in Europe (35 per
cent in the UK), although it will increase its holding outside in due
course, while the European weighting for Guinness Flight is 65 per cent. The
exposure outside Europe is, therefore, not much greater than you can get by
investing in non-qualifying funds through a self-select Pep.
The attraction of the new funds will lie in an ability to produce returns
higher than those found in other European or international growth unit
trusts. But by focusing solely on privatisations, the choice of companies in
which to invest will be less than a more general fund.
Fidelity finds this too much of a restriction and will include companies
that benefit from privatisations. In the UK, this would mean a holding in
Mercury as well as British Telecommunications, since it was the
privatisation of BT which allowed Mercury to become a viable presence in the
UK telecommunications market.
'We are more comfortable running a portfolio with stocks other than
privatisation issues because it will give us a greater opportunity to give
better performance and a wider range of stocks to choose from,' says
Fidelity executive Mary Blair.
Guinness Flight is sticking to the pure definition of privatisation. Tim
Thomas, manager of the new trust, says: 'It does offer a bit of a
restriction; it probably means you buy half of all companies privatised in
Europe. But that will rapidly become less important as more issues come
through.'
These are not funds for income-seekers. The Guinness Flight trust will have
a yield of about 2 per cent and Fidelity says its yield will be between 1.5
and 2 per cent. Richard Boyton, of Boyton Financial Services, adds: 'They
have a place in a portfolio as a long-term hold and, on balance, I prefer
Fidelity because of the wider investment brief.'
Charges on the Guinness Flight fund are an initial 2 per cent if you invest
through the Pep. There are withdrawal charges of 3 per cent in the first
year, 2 per cent in the second and 1 per cent in the third. The initial
charge on a direct investment in the unit trust is 5 per cent, with a 1
percentage point discount until the end of March. The annual fee is 1.25 per
cent but the Pep carries a 1.5 per cent annual charge. The minimum
investment in the Pep is Pounds 3,000 or Pounds 1,000 into the unit trust.
Fidelity's Pep charges are the same. The initial charge outside the Pep is
5.25 per cent with an annual charge of 1.5 per cent. The minimum investment
is Pounds 1,000.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940305

