FT944-11101

FT  08 NOV 94 / Cook urges EU to widen, not deepen


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


The European Union should be more concerned about expanding to the east, its
mission for the 1990s, than tightening the links between the present member
states, Mr Robin Cook, the shadow foreign secretary, said yesterday.
In his first speech since Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, appointed him to
speak on foreign affairs, Mr Cook laid out the opposition's European policy
priorities.
Mr Cook told the conference of the Confederation of British Industry in
Birmingham: 'We should take no steps to deepen the bonds of the European
Union which will make it more difficult to widen access.'
Talks to define future relations between the EU and eastern European
countries once part of the Soviet bloc have started but there is little
expectation of the EU having eastern members during this century.
Mr Cook put EU accommodation with the east - the buttressing of market
economies there - as one of his four priorities.
The other three reflected a sharing of views between the Labour leadership
and the CBI:
He called for the proper working of the single market, citing anomalies such
as the British import of electricity from France and the French refusal to
import or transmit British electricity elsewhere.
He demanded symmetry of regulation - the imposition of EU rules
even-handedly across the EU countries.
He urged the reform of the common agricultural policy.
Later, business leaders said that separating the activities of government
and business would strengthen the single market. Sir Michael Angus, deputy
president of the CBI, said: 'Over-regulation destroys jobs. Freeing business
from unnecessary regulations is one positive step in addressing the
critically high unemployment.'
UNICE, the federation of European employers' organisations, called for close
analysis of the costs and benefits of European legislation. Mr Francois
Perigot, its president, said: 'Every project should be judged in terms of
its positive impact on competitiveness and nothing else.'
Sir Michael, true to CBI form, wanted to ensure that 'social objectives are
not pursued at the expense of competitiveness but rather result from it.'
Mr Padraig Flynn, the European commissioner for social affairs and
employment, received a polite rather than enthusiastic welcome.
He had a warning for the CBI, a dedicated opponent of the EU's social
chapter and devoted supporter of the UK government's opt-out.
He said: 'As we seek to build a Europe for business, we must also be seen to
build a Europe which is not only for business. We have to build a Europe
that offers a broad vision of economic and social progress for all.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941108

