FT942-12588

FT  28 APR 94 / SAS close to sale of two biggest non-core units


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES and MICHAEL SKAPINKER


   STOCKHOLM, LONDON


Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) said yesterday it was well on the way to
selling its two biggest non-core business units, SAS Leisure and SAS Service
Partner, to European buyers.
The airline said it had almost finalised a SKr870m (Dollars 111m) deal to
sell SAS Leisure, Scandinavia's leading tour operator, to Airtours, the UK
holiday group.
It added that it was about to begin detailed discussions with Swissair over
the sale of its Service Partner airline catering unit. This unit has been
valued at up to SKr2.5bn.
Mr David Crossland, Airtours' chairman, has long expressed the desire to
expand into continental Europe. Airtours, the second biggest UK tour
operator after Thomson, said it is also close to agreement to buy a cruise
ship for Dollars 24m. The vendor of the cruise ship is believed to be
Kloster Cruise of Norway.
Last year SAS Leisure made a SKr199m pre-tax loss on sales of SKr4.44bn.
The performance followed a SKr209m profit in 1992 and reflected depressed
travel industry conditions, recession in the Nordic region and the weakness
of the Swedish krona.
The deal, which could be finalised today, received a cool welcome from the
City of London, which marked Airtours' shares down 18p to 448p. Airtours has
been criticised in recent weeks for its acquisition record.
SAS Leisure's operations include two tour operators, Ving and Always, a 50
per cent stake in Premiair, the charter airline, and a 49 per cent stake in
Spanair, another charter operator. It also owns 14 hotels, mainly around the
Mediterranean.
SAS wants to concentrate on core flying operations after four consecutive
years in the red and last year's failed attempt to merge with Swissair,
Austrian Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines in the Alcazar project. The
group is also cutting costs by SKr3bn by shedding nearly 3,000 jobs over the
next 18 months.
SAS said Service Partner would be combined with Swissair's catering
division, Gate Gourmet, if talks with the Swiss airline were successful.
The unit achieved a SKr170m profit last year on sales of SKr4.8bn.
Earlier this month SAS sold Diners Club Nordic, a credit and charge card
operation. It has also sold a stake in LanChile, the Chilean airline.

The Financial Times


International Page 15

940428

