FT942-16019

FT  12 APR 94 / Leading Article: A Tokyo vacuum


Japan has long differed from other leading industrialised countries in
having no clear centre of power. The political horse-trading provoked over
the past few days by the resignation of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa suggests that
this situation will continue.
Mr Hosokawa's administration had made real progress in breaking with the
corrupt politics of the past and towards making the Japanese parliament more
representative of popular concerns. This must not be allowed to go into
reverse.
His drive for a more open style of democracy, his achievement in getting
electoral reform through parliament and his economic deregulation have
attracted so much public support that future governments will find it
difficult to turn back the clock. That much is encouraging.
Less so is the fact that the stable government needed to carry Japan through
this process is a distant prospect. The difficulty experienced by members of
the fractious seven-party alliance in agreeing a new leader supports the
view that the country is set for several years of rule by unstable
coalitions.
Stable government can only emerge once the present and former factions of
the Liberal Democratic party work out a pattern that reflects the Japanese
public's aspirations for a more open, honest and international style of
politics. A particular difficulty is that any likely candidate for the prime
minister's office will be as vulnerable to corruption allegations as was Mr
Hosokawa, if not more so.
This carries an important lesson for Japan's foreign partners. On the one
hand, Tokyo should be handled gently. Foreign trade pressure, of the kind
applied recently by the US administration, will be less effective than ever
in current circumstances and could be counter-productive.
On the other, if the US and other trade partners are to take Japan
seriously, they have a right to expect Japan to take itself seriously. The
quirky events leading up to Mr Hosokawa's resignation have a flavour of
farce, which risks devaluing the international image of Japanese
governments. Likewise, the opaque negotiations to find a new leader provoke
anxiety. Tokyo's smoke-filled rooms are no more fragrant today than in the
LDP's heyday, when policy was formed in private by an inward-looking elite.
Even if Mr Tsutomu Hata, the foreign minister and front runner to succeed Mr
Hosokawa, does make it to this week's Gatt ministerial gathering in Morocco,
he is unlikely to get there, according to the latest official report, until
the final day, Friday. That will leave inadequate time for discussions with
Mr Mickey Kantor, the senior US trade negotiator, as a result of which the
unwelcome shadow caused by the US-Japan trade row will linger for longer
than necessary.
To some extent, Japan is lucky to have a bureaucracy capable of filling the
power vacuum during the chaotic period to come. But not even the Japanese
public administration can set its own policy, despite US suspicions that the
more powerful ministries are inclined to act on their own agendas.
Bureaucrats alone certainly cannot handle the trade dispute with Washington,
as the past few months have shown. It is time for Japanese politicians to
wake up to their international obligations.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940412

