FT944-2830

FT  15 DEC 94 / Train maker promises big rise in reliability


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


GEC-Alsthom, winner of an Pounds 800m contract to supply new trains for
London Underground's Northern Line, has promised to provide an eightfold
increase in the reliability of its trains, it emerged yesterday.
If the conditions are not met, London Underground can reduce payments and,
in the worst case, demand that the Anglo-French engineering group takes back
its trains.
The Treasury hailed the deal, announced last Thursday, as a considerable
success for the private finance initiative, because it transferred
significant risks to the company. GEC-Alsthom will supply just over 100
trains and maintain them for 20 years.
London Underground will pay between Pounds 40m and Pounds 45m a year to
cover the capital cost of the trains and the maintenance charges. At the end
of 20 years it has an option to extend the contract for a further 16 years.
At present London Underground expects its Northern Line trains to break
down, on average, every 2,500 miles, or 2 1/2 weeks. GEC-Alsthom has said
its trains will only fail every 19,000 miles, or four months.
This is a near eightfold improvement on past performance and almost four
times better than the best results achieved on other Underground lines.
Maintaining this level of service would be demanding but it was regarded as
feasible, London Underground said.
If the new trains fall well below the promised reliability, London
Underground can at any time cease making lease payments and arrange for the
return of the trains to the manufacturer. After 12 years it can review the
performance of the trains and, if it is unhappy, return them to GEC-Alsthom.
At the end of the 20-year contract GEC-Alsthom will have received only
two-thirds of the capital value of the trains though they will be fully paid
for after 36 years. This formula means that GEC-Alsthom has an incentive to
provide a good level of service to encourage London Underground to extend
the contract.
GEC-Alsthom will also receive a small payment related to the number of
passengers using the Northern Line although this is not significant in the
overall contract.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941215

