FT942-12744

FT  28 APR 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Japan's brands feel
the pinch, too - Competition laws and recession are helping retailers'
own-label goods


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


Daiei, Japan's biggest supermarket chain, has for years posed a challenge to
the country's old-fashioned retailing industry, as it strove to remove long
distribution lines and networks of wholesalers and allow more flexible
retail prices.
Although it has toned down its revolutionary stance since Isao Nakauchi, its
chairman, joined the Keidanren league of business leaders, the retailer has
been the catalyst of the recent 'own label' brand boom.
As in the west, retailer brands, which are not only cheaper than national
brands but now also of high quality, are known as private label or no-name,
and their pricing, shelf space and promotion are entirely in the hands of
the retailer.
Although the concept was adopted by many Japanese supermarket chains during
the late 1970s, the number of items was limited, and they were never a
threat to national brands. During the consumer boom of the 1980s, Japanese
shoppers became even more brand conscious than ever, forcing many retailers
to scale down their private-label lines.
However, Daiei says private brands are entering a new age. Partly this
reflects the recession but also supermarkets have gained purchasing and
distribution power by expanding. The Daiei group has more than 6,000 retail
outlets and holds 3 to 4 per cent market share of most products. Other big
supermarket chains such as Jusco and Ito-Yokado are also seeing increasing
private-brand sales.
The yen's recent appreciation has also helped, allowing retailers to buy
cheaper imports for their private-label lines.
This growing trend hurts national brands which are already feeling the
squeeze due to the tightening of the laws promoting competition. In the past
manufacturers would threaten to stop supplies if a retailer failed to apply
the retail price 'suggested' by the manufacturer. However, US pressure to
give more power to Japan's Fair Trade Commission, the anti-monopoly
watchdog, helped clamp down on such practices.
Recently, Daiei's private label video tapes, sourced from a Korean
manufacturer, have forced TDK, the leading video tape maker, to abandon the
low end of the domestic market.
Meanwhile, national-brand orange juice makers were compelled to discount
their products after Daiei's orange juice, imported from Brazil, was sold at
half the price of the leading labels.
The private brand boom is also opening the door to overseas manufacturers
which lack the ability to set up distribution networks in Japan. Agfa, the
German-Belgium photo film maker which recently agreed to supply Daiei with
its private brand photo film, says the market has been impenetrable. Since
the brand is virtually unknown in Japan, the company says supplying Daiei
will be good exposure.
Similar changes have also been seen in the higher end of the retail market,
where leading department stores are creating lower-priced goods. The recent
decline in consumer spending has hit high street retailers the hardest, and
to bring back shoppers they feel the need to differentiate themselves from
their peers.
Isetan, which has recently opened a store in London's Piccadilly, offers
shoppers its 'Only I' brand in its Tokyo outlets, covering a range from
fashion items to food, developed originally or together with famous
designers. The retailer says its 'Only I' brand totals 8 per cent of total
sales, and it hopes to bring the figure up to 20 per cent in the near
future.
But while the penetration of private brands is growing, analysts estimate
that retailer labels still account for less than 10 per cent of the retail
market.
'We've nurtured our brand, putting in money for research and development and
marketing, and consumers want to pay for the certificate of quality,' says
Fuji Photo Film, which holds 70 per cent of the Japanese market. Kao, a
leading household goods producer, says marketing costs account for about 10
per cent of its retail price, but plays an important part in providing
shoppers with information about the product.
One major problem, say the retailers, is the decline in choice due to the
spread of private-brand items on the shelves. Takanobu Seko, chief of foods
merchandising at Daiei, says its private-label orange juice accounts for 80
per cent of its total orange juice sales, and it has to cut down on the
shelf space of national brands. But retailer Jusco says its own label's
current level of 6 per cent of total sales is just the right balance.
Nevertheless, manufacturers are aware of the shift in power to retailers.
Some are rushing to form alliances with large-scale retailers to remain in
favour and secure shelf space.
Kao formed a marketing alliance with Jusco last year in which they connected
their computers to eliminate order and sales slips, and agreed to co-operate
on marketing.
But Japanese manufacturers are also seeing their influence weakening due to
international retail alliances. Retailer Ito-Yokado recently announced it
had agreed a tie-up with Wal-Mart, the leading US discount retailer, to buy
Wal-Mart's own-brand products.
And while until now most private brands have been products such as foods,
household goods and clothing, retailers say they want to expand their range.
'It would be nice to have our own consumer electronics line,' says Atsushi
Yamashiro at Jusco.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940428

