FT942-16052

FT  12 APR 94 / International Capital Markets: BZ group launches covered
option fund


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


Mr Martin Ebner's BZ banking group has launched a SFr1bn blue chip share
investment fund, whose strategy will be to reduce volatility by continually
writing covered call options on the component shares.
The fund, called Stillhalter Vision, was formed last week by BZ and a few of
its large clients, who contributed some of their shares to it. (Stillhalter
is a German term for covered options used in Swiss financial markets.)
In anticipation of a SFr1bn capital increase by way of a public issue of
Stillhalter bearer shares next week, BZ placed 1.1m call warrants on the
bearers on Friday at SFr15. In initial trading yesterday, they rose to SFr23
on the Basle stock exchange.
Mr Kurt Schiltknecht, a director of the fund, said the idea was to appeal to
investors who wanted a higher return than available on bonds but who were
uncomfortable with the volatility of even blue chip equities.
By continually writing call options, the fund would limit the gains and
cushion the losses on its holdings.
The directors said they hoped the fund would appeal to both small and large
investors seeking the advantages of option writing combined with the
liquidity of a quoted share. Initially, the fund will only hold Swiss blue
chip shares.
As in the cases of the three existing Vision funds, the founding shareholder
group, led by BZ, would maintain majority control of Stillhalter through
holdings of registered shares with five times the voting power of the bearer
shares.
BZ Trust, manager of the Vision funds, has accepted the same aggressive
commission structure for Stillhalter as for BK Vision, Pharma Vision and Gas
Vision, even though the growth potential for the new fund would seem more
modest.
Under this structure, no commission is payable in a quarter unless the
fund's net asset value has risen by more than an annualised 6 per cent.
Thereafter, commission rates rise rapidly.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940412

