FT942-16034

FT  12 APR 94 / Markets Report: Political fears boost yen


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Bullish predictions about the outlook for the currency and concern about a
political vacuum in Japan caused the yen to appreciate on foreign exchanges
yesterday, writes Philip Gawith.
The Japanese currency finished in London at Y103.325 against the dollar,
compared with Y104.50 where it started the day. In New York it ended at
Y103.45. The trigger for selling the US currency was a forecast from US
economist Mr Fred Bergsten that the dollar could fall to a range of Y90 to
Y100 if Japan failed to stimulate its economy.
This forecast played on the nerves of a market already jittery about the
implications of the resignation last Friday of Japanese prime minister Mr
Morihiro Hosokawa.
In Europe, the lira continued its rise as further evidence emerged over the
weekend of co-operation between the victorious coalition partners in the
recent elections. After touching a high of L946 against the D-Mark, the lira
lost ground to finish at L950.3, compared with Friday's close of L950.9.
Markets were generally fairly quiet, with attention focused more on events
later in the week: the release of US and UK consumer price data, and the
Bundesbank council meeting on Thursday.
Mr David Barrett, proprietary trader at NatWest Markets, said the market had
recently been fickle towards the yen and Mr Bergsten's comments provided the
excuse it needed to buy the currency. Although not part of government, he is
seen as reflecting the views of the Clinton administration on the dollar/yen
rate.
Another reason for yen strength is the view that the US may find Mr
Hosokawa's successor less to its liking. Mr Barrett said the question the
market is asking itself is: 'Will it (the resignation) accelerate the trade
war?' He predicts that the dollar will remain soft until there is clarity
about a new prime minister and cabinet.
Mr Adrian Cunningham, senior currency economist at UBS in London, said he
would not discount the dollar falling below Y103 and testing record lows
against the yen.
Against the D-Mark, the dollar eased to end at DM1.7080 from DM1.7134, but
it closed in New York at DM1.7129.
The D-Mark had a mixed performance in Europe. It closed slightly softer
against the French franc at FFr3.425, from FFr3.427 on Friday. It was also
lower against the lira and the escudo, but was unchanged against the peseta
and up against the Danish krone.
Rates eased in German money markets, with call money falling to 5.75/5.85
per cent from Friday's 5.85/5.95 per cent. The repo rate, currently at 5.73
per cent, is expected to fall further this week. Sentiment about interest
rate prospects was slightly more positive in the futures market. The June
contract ended one basis point firmer at 94.56.
Elsewhere in Europe, the lira rose on the back of weekend comments from Mr
Umberto Bossi, leader of the Northern League, indicating his backing for a
government alliance with Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the Forza Italia leader.
The escudo was firm at Es101.6 per D-Mark following comments from Mr Eduardo
Catroga, the finance minister, that the exchange rate was correct. Although
the government seems to have arrested the currency's recent weakness, Mr
Cunningham said there remained concern about whether there would be any
demand for the currency when the government started to reduce interest rates
to boost growth.
Sterling was quiet yesterday ahead of important trade and retail price data
due later in the week. The trade weighted index finished at 79.7 from a
previous 80. The UK currency ended at DM2.517, down from DM2.5265. It was
slightly lower against the dollar, closing at Dollars 1.4737 from Dollars
1.4745.
The interest rate futures market has continued its recovery from recent
lows. The June short sterling contract closed yesterday at 94.56 (the same
as the June Euromark contract) from 94.51 on Friday.
The Bank of England yesterday offered Pounds 450m of assistance to the
discount market after forecasting a Pounds 550m shortage.
Yesterday saw the first sign of serious pre-election jitters in South
African financial markets. The financial rand (finrand) - the investment
currency for foreigners - fell by 12 per cent to finish in London at R5.6435
against the dollar, the lowest level in six years, from Friday's close of
R5.025. The currency, regarded as a barometer of foreign investor sentiment,
touched a low during the day of R5.72.
Mr Tom Chenoweth, chief dealer at Standard Bank in London, said trading had
been 'horrific', with panic selling the order of the day. He said the market
had been spooked by reports in the London Sunday press quoting senior ANC
officials as saying they would 'wipe Inkatha out' when they came to power.
The financial rand market is small and highly volatile, but even by these
standards yesterday's move was exceptional. The more widely traded
commercial rand also weakened, ending at R3.5925 from Friday's close of
R3.5565.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940412

