FT943-764

FT  28 SEP 94 / Inkatha intends to sue Mandela over killings


   By MARK SUZMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


South Africa's Inkatha Freedom Party said yesterday it intends to sue
President Nelson Mandela, his African National Congress party and the South
African police for R8m (Pounds 2.2m) damages, following the killing of eight
IFP supporters outside the ANC headquarters in Johannesburg last March.
Announcing the lawsuits, Mr Themba Khoza, IFP political director, said
summonses had been served on Mr Mandela and Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, ANC
secretary-general, for allegedly obstructing a police investigation into the
incident.
Summonses had also been served on Mr Sydney Mufamadi, safety and security
minister, and General Koos Calitz, regional commissioner of police, for
alleged inadequate protection of the marchers.
The decision marks a new deterioration in relations between the ANC and
Inkatha, partners with the National Party in the ruling National Unity
government.
Before the April election, ANC and Inkatha supporters were frequently
involved in clashes; in recent months they have been embroiled in disputes
within the KwaZulu/Natal provincial government.
Inkatha has for several months been demanding a full investigation into the
killings, which occurred when a crowd of its supporters were apparently
fired on by ANC security guards during a political demonstration.
The timing of the announcement seems designed to deflect attention from the
controversy surrounding Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Inkatha party leader and
home affairs minister.
On Sunday night, the chief and a group of bodyguards interrupted a live
broadcast by Prince Sifiso Zulu, a political rival instrumental in
persuading the Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini to break off relations with
Chief Buthelezi last week.
Chief Buthelezi has since apologised for the incident, saying he was not
aware the television programme was still on the air, but his actions have
been widely condemned, and Prince Sifiso Zulu has said he will press charges
against the chief.
The ANC has released a statement critical of Chief Buthelezi. President
Mandela will not make a statement until he has discussed the issue with the
cabinet today.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940928

