FT943-13007

FT  21 JUL 94 / Arts: Peter Brooke bows out


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Everyone knew Peter Brooke was about to lose his job as the national
heritage minister. Always good humoured and laid back, he has seemed even
more relaxed in recent weeks as he dutifully attended the arts functions,
the heritage briefings, the broadcasting confrontations and the sports
meetings which litter the life of the Minister of Fun.
He only got the job because of the sudden crisis in September 1992, when
David Mellor, the prime minister's friend and the main advocate of the new
ministry, was forced out of government. Brooke was chosen as a safe pair of
hands who, at 58, harboured no great ambitions. He has done his duty with
urbanity and pragmatism and leaves with the warm goodwill of most of the
disparate band of supplicants who look to the heritage minister for funds.
His great achievements were getting the Lottery up and running with little
fuss, and securing a new charter for the BBC. He has proceeded slowly and
safely with other broadcasting reforms; he has proved a friend of the media
by not rushing through a draconian Privacy Act; and as a collector of
watercolours and an old-fashioned gentleman he was a quiet supporter of the
heritage lobby.
He cut the Arts Council grant this year - the first time ever - but he will
argue that he fought his corner against an axe-wielding Treasury with skill.
Things might have been worse and the total budget of his ministry increased,
quite an achievement.
He reformed the council gently, making it more accountable. Perhaps his
greatest long-term contribution was to strengthen its management by
appointing Lord Gowrie as chairman, and names such as Trevor Nunn and
Richard Rogers as members.
Like his predecessors Brooke failed to get to grips with the British Library
juggernaut, which acts like a leech on his budget and got him embroiled
earlier with the Commons Heritage Committee, which yesterday released a
scathing report.
He also lacked imagination in dealing with the powerful British film lobby:
the UK still starves its movie makers of necessary financial incentives.
His main blunders were small but emotive. He failed to catch the public mood
after fire destroyed part of Windsor Castle and unwisely pledged government
money for the rebuilding, and he somehow messed up the D-Day commemoration.
If John Major was looking for an excuse to shed him, rousing the ire of the
strongest Conservative lobby in the land provided it.
But Peter Brooke went because he was expendable, and because he was too
sensitive and restrained to bang the promotional drum. The Heritage Ministry
was designed as a vote winner for the government, to spread a powerful
feel-good atmosphere throughout the land. Mellor had the personality to lead
the parade; it went against Brooke's grain.
It might suit Brooke's successor, Stephen Dorrell, rather well. He is a
politician on the make. He will see heritage as a step up the ladder. He
will raise his profile through the ministry, and be keen to demonstrate that
this is one government department that sees its job as improving the mental,
and physical, health of the people. He is as much the new-style politician
as Peter Brooke represented the dying breed.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940721

