FT944-6018

FT  01 DEC 94 / World Trade News: US Senate starts Gatt debate -
Administration cautions against over-confidence


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


The US Senate yesterday began debating the Uruguay Round trade pact, one day
after the House of Representatives voted by a margin of almost 2-1 for
passage of the accord.
Vote counters yesterday said the administration was just a few votes short
of the 60 out of 100 votes needed in the Senate. However, in a morning
meeting, Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury secretary, and Senate leaders
cautioned against over-confidence and urged business groups to lobby 'until
the last vote is counted'.
Both sides in the debate acknowledged that the outcome of the Senate vote
would be crucial to the US economy and US international status. Opponents
warned that it would cost jobs. Senator Ernest Hollings, whose delaying
tactics prompted today's special session, warned of the collapse of the US
economy as jobs in industry were replaced by services.
Senator Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat, said the agreement would
benefit the average US family of four Dollars 1,700 for every year of the
next 10.
'How often are we able to put Dollars 1,700 in a family's bank account and
reduce the budget deficit at the same time?' he asked.
The voting dynamics are complex. The Senate may take a lead from Tuesday's
convincing vote of approval in the House, but those up for re-election in
two years are cautious. Senator Max Baucus, a Democrat, and Senator Hank
Brown, a Republican, both usually in favour of trade liberalisation and both
up for re-election in 1996, have come out against the pact.
In the implementing legislation, the administration strove to address
concerns of various constituencies; in the view of some it tried too hard.
The 10-year phase out of protection for textiles and apparel - one of the
great concessions for the developing countries - gives virtually no
liberalisation for the first few years and little until the end of the
transition period.
The American Textile Manufacturers Institute, which usually seeks
protection, issued a statement yesterday acknowledging but not condemning
the House vote. Passage of the legislation 'is just the beginning of major
changes we will see in international trade policies and practices,' said Mr
William Armfield, ATMI president. 'Much is still undecided and unexplored,
but opportunities will exist for our industry, along with new problems'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941201

