FT944-10890

FT  09 NOV 94 / France's centre-right split over Europe: Chirac criticised
over proposal for new referendum on monetary union


   By DAVID BUCHAN, DAVID GARDNER and REUTER


   PARIS, BRUSSELS


The fragile consensus of France's ruling centre-right coalition on European
policy yesterday appeared to be fracturing fast under opposing pressures
from Mr Jacques Chirac, the newly declared Gaullist contender for the
presidency, and German Christian Democrats.
Mr Pierre Mehaignerie, justice minister and president of the CDS, which is
the coalition's most pro-European element, yesterday said he 'greatly
regretted' Mr Chirac's call two days ago for France to put its eventual
participation in any European monetary union to a second referendum, in
addition to the 1992 plebiscite that narrowly approved the Maastricht
treaty.
Another prominent French centrist, Mr Jacques Barrot, chairman of the
National Assembly's finance committee, said the referendum call might serve
Mr Chirac well in the first round of voting in the presidential election,
but would prevent him winning the final run-off vote.
In suggesting another referendum on economic and monetary union (Emu), Mr
Chirac is plainly paying his dues to anti-Maastricht politicians such as Mr
Philippe Seguin, National Assembly president, who are backing his Elysee
bid, in the hope of gaining the quick boost he desperately needs in the
opinion polls to rival prime minister Edouard Balladur.
But his tactic could backfire by increasing the chances that Mr Jacques
Delors, the outgoing European Commission president, might enter the
presidential race as the Socialist challenger in order to keep a Eurosceptic
out of the Elysee. The opinion polls have consistently shown Mr Chirac not
only trailing Mr Balladur but also far more likely than the prime minister
to be beaten by Mr Delors in a two-candidate run-off.
In the time-honoured tradition of French would-be presidential candidates,
Mr Delors has just published his personal ruminations in the form of a
400-page book called 'The Unity of One Man'. In Brussels yesterday, the
Commission president insisted: 'This is not a (presidential) programme but a
book of reflections. If you're looking for a programme, don't buy the book.'
But the Socialist party is also looking for a candidate, and the country's
pundits are unanimous in seeing the new tome as paving the way for Mr Delors
to announce his candidacy after he leaves Brussels some time next January.
'Delors-for-president' committees are mushrooming daily now.
Meanwhile, Mr Karl Lamers, chief architect of the German Christian
Democrats' recent paper calling on France and the Benelux countries to join
Germany in a new 'hard core' to the European Union which would set the pace
for faster integration, was in Paris yesterday to press his case. He avoided
making direct criticism of Mr Chirac but said: 'We must do all we can not to
endanger putting Emu into effect at the earliest opportunity, in 1997.'
Mr Chirac had claimed a second referendum would give France the same right
to accept or reject Emu as the Bundestag already enjoyed in Germany. But the
Bundestag has already ratified the Maastricht Treaty and Mr Lamers recalled
that the Bundestag now merely had the power to express its views on whether
individual countries fulfil the technical economic criteria for Emu, not on
the principle of Emu itself. 'It is therefore not a second ratification,' Mr
Lamers said.
Mr Balladur's officials regard the Chirac referendum call as impractical and
unconstitutional, though the prime minister himself has refrained this week
from commenting. But the Lamers plan opens up a further division in the
government.
While his centrist coalition partners generally favour the idea of France
joining Germany and Benelux in declaring themselves to be Europe's hard core
implementing all Maastricht's policies, Mr Balladur has criticised this as
too rigid. Instead, he sees European integration taking the form of several
'inner circle' arrangements, bringing, for instance, Britain in on defence
but respecting its wish to stay out of monetary union.
France's highest appeal court yesterday refused to throw out charges against
Socialist party leader Henri Emmanuelli, clearing the way for his trial next
year for alleged illegal party financing, Reuter reports from Paris. Mr
Emmanuelli has repeatedly denied charges he was an accomplice in
influence-peddling when he was party treasurer from 1988 to 1992. He is not
suspected of personal enrichment but is accused of receiving funds raised by
front companies from construction businesses seeking preference in public
tenders when the Socialists were in power.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941109

