FT942-16391

FT  11 APR 94 / US bids are sought in coal sell-off


   By MICHAEL SMITH and LAURIE MORSE


   LONDON, CHICAGO


US mining groups could become owners of significant parts of the British
coal industry if a government marketing drive in the US succeeds.
A decade after the year-long miners' strike over pit closures, the
government's financial advisers are hoping to attract US groups to buy parts
of British Coal when it is privatised by early next year. Details of the
privatisation are to be published later this week.
Government advisers believe US companies are the most likely among overseas
groups to tender to buy parts of British Coal, in spite of the sharp fall in
demand for coal in the UK. Bids from abroad would considerably raise the
selling prices of the five regional groupings of pits to be sold.
The number of UK companies considering bids is growing, but so far only two
foreign groups have expressed interest publicly. Both are North American.
Jim Walter Resources, of the US, is part of a consortium involving the Union
of Democratic Mineworkers that is considering making bids.
Alcan, the Canadian aluminium company, has teamed up with Ryan Group of the
UK to study the feasibility of a bid for the north-east region.
The government, advised by NM Rothschild, hopes to stir interest among other
US companies such as Consol, Cypress Amax, Ashland Coal and Ziegler.
Companies all over the world will be sent details of the sale. However, it
is thought that the South Africans will be constrained because of their
shortage of foreign exchange. And Australian companies such as BHP are
believed to be more interested in extending their Asian interests than in
the UK coal industry.
The US coal industry is in a period of consolidation, with many energy
companies selling coal properties that do not perform as well as other
businesses.
Mr Paul Chellgren, president of Ashland Oil, which owns 41 per cent of
Ashland Coal and has an interest in Arch Minerals, another US coal producer,
said US companies might be interested in bidding for British Coal
properties, but only under certain conditions.
He said: 'If the purchase opportunity came with guaranteed sales contracts
with prices and volumes that would allow the properties to generate gross
margins, I'm sure there would be some interest.'
British Coal has contracts to sell more than 30m tonnes of coal a year to UK
electricity generators, but the contracts expire in 1998.
Another coal company executive said: 'We will take a look at anything
offered to us but we are unlikely to make a bid for companies that do not
have long-term contracts. It comes down to what price they are willing to
take.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940411

