FT942-12302

FT  30 APR 94 / The Japanese seize a golden opportunity: Recession-hit
companies are giving their workers extra days off


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Many of Japan's hard-pressed industrial companies breathed a sigh of relief
yesterday and packed their surplus workforces off for a long break.
Golden Week, which started yesterday, has always been an elastic holiday.
But this year corporate Japan has stretched it extra long.
On average, Japanese companies have given their workers 6.2 days of holiday
this year, an increase of more than half a day on 1993, according to a
survey by the labour ministry. That is not bad, considering that Golden Week
officially includes only four public holidays.
It is a welcome opportunity to shut down production when stocks of unsold
goods are still uncomfortably high, as Japan continues to labour under its
worst post-war recession.
Just over 450,000 people have seized the chance to spend their strong yen
abroad and have booked a foreign holiday - up 20 per cent on last year,
according to the Japan Travel Bureau, the leading travel agency. This partly
reflects a sharp drop in package tour prices, but some Japanese economists
believe the holiday rush is another sign of the recovery in consumer
confidence that may herald the beginning of the end of the downturn.
But the airport crowds are only a small fraction of the nearly 67m Japanese
who plan to take it easy this week. Many of them headed for the countryside
yesterday, creating motorway jams up to 70km long, another important Golden
Week ritual. The sensible ones stayed at home, to enjoy the pleasant
emptiness of their city streets.
Some people will be taking life easier than others. The car, steel and
consumer electronics industries, burdened with overcapacity, are asking
their workers to stay away for longer than most. Mazda and Honda have
offered 12 days off, to the irritation of some of their suppliers, which
have had to scale back capacity accordingly. Hitachi is taking nine days
off.
Semiconductor makers, by contrast, have asked their workers to take the
minimum four days, to keep up with strong demand for computer components.
Foreign exchange dealers and politicians also get a raw deal this year. The
finance ministry has suggested that some Japanese and foreign banks and life
insurers keep dealers on duty during the holidays.
They are needed to head off another rise in the yen against the dollar, on
fears that Mr Tsutomu Hata's new minority administration proves too weak to
make progress on the US-Japan trade dispute. Japanese markets will be closed
from next Tuesday to Thursday, but a few traders will be closely watching
the yen-dollar movement elsewhere in the world, from their lonely screens in
Tokyo.
Mr Hata, meanwhile, will also be busy next week, when he is due to tour
Europe, his first foreign visit as prime minister. He will no doubt have his
work cut out to persuade his hosts in Italy, Germany, France and at the
European Union headquarters in Belgium that Japan's recent political
turmoils have not harmed its reliability as a partner.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940430

