FT941-5707

FT  04 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Oil market looks to Gulf
meeting for Opec clues


   By ROBERT CORZINE


Petroleum ministers from the six Gulf Co-operation Council members,
including Saudi Arabia, meet in Jeddah tomorrow amid contuining speculation
over whether a plan to cut oil output will emerge.
The Jeddah talks are likely to be the first in a string of contacts between
members of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries in the run-up
to its next meeting in Geneva on March 25. The persistence of weak oil
prices since Opec's last meeting in November is putting pressure on the
organisation to agree to additional production cuts.
Reuters news agency yesterday reported that the Opec secretariat was
circulating a proposal among member states for a cut of 1m barrels a day in
the second quarter of this year, although an official of the organisation
later denied the report.
Few analysts expect a formal proposal to emerge from the GCC session, as it
excludes crucial Opec members such as Iran. But the meeting may indicate
whether there has been any change in the attitude of Opec's most influential
member, Saudi Arabia, which accounts for 30 per cent of the organisation's
output.
The previous GCC meeting last December proposed that any Opec cuts be
reinforced by reductions from independent producers. Mr Abdullah bin Hamad
Al-Attiyah, Qatar's energy minister and the current Opec president, recently
said that some of the smaller non-Opec producers had put forward proposed
cuts totalling 300,000-400,000 barrels a day.
The Jeddah meeting may review ways on how such cuts could be implemented.
But oil markets are likely to remain sceptical of such proposals as long as
the bigger independent producers decline to go along with Opec.
'They would need some participation from the UK, Norway and Mexico' for the
proposed non-Opec cuts to make a big impact in the markets, according to Mr
Mehdi Varzi, director of energy research at London broker Kleinwort Benson.
Mr Varzi believes Opec's strategy of relying on quotas to influence oil
prices is flawed as long as Saudi Arabia insists on maintaining its 8m b/d
quota out of Opec's total production ceiling of 24.52m b/d.
But Saudi officials have consistently rejected arguments that it could
absorb greater cuts than other Opec members, and Mr Varzi concedes that
there is 'no sign of any change in the Saudi mood'.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940304

