FT944-14648

FT  21 OCT 94 / Property: Upwardly mobile - The outlook for rents in the
City of London


   By SIMON LONDON


Exactly what is happening to City of London rents? The question is of more
than academic interest to banks locked in refinancing discussions with
Stanhope, the developer whose main asset is the Broadgate complex in the
City.
If the banks are prepared to take an optimistic view of the outlook for City
rents, Stanhope could generate enough cash and asset growth over the next
few years to justify their continued support in its present form.
Yet the calculation might look rather different if they believe rental
growth prospects at Broadgate are unexciting.
Jones Lang Wootton, surveyors, recently forecast that rents for the very
best City property - including Broadgate - could reach Pounds 50 per square
foot within three years, from about Pounds 30 per sq ft today.
On that basis the value of Broadgate could rise to anything up to Pounds
1.5bn in three years, depending on what happens to property yields in the
meantime.
Rental growth of this magnitude would clearly transform Stanhope's position.
While up-to-date figures are not yet available, Broadgate Properties
(Stanhope's 50 per cent owned holding company for much of Broadgate and the
Ludgate office development) showed net assets of only Pounds 38m at June 30
1993, with its property assets valued at about Pounds 1bn.
According to some firms of surveyors, the green shoots of rental growth are
already visible. Richard Ellis recently estimated that top City rents
increased by 8.3 per cent in the third quarter of the year, with leases now
being signed at about Pounds 32.50 per sq ft, up from Pounds 30 per sq ft in
the spring.
After three years of development drought, the shortage of modern, quality
space in the City is part of the reason. Richard Ellis calculates that 7m sq
ft of central London office space was taken up in the year to the end of
September, substantially more than in the same period of 1993.
Mr Clive Arding, chairman of the City Business Division at Richard Ellis,
said: 'The City market is certainly starting to show movement. We have for
some months witnessed reductions in rent-free deals and incentives, but now
evidence of real rental growth is coming through for the best space, largely
as a result of the reduction in quality office stock.'
Richard Ellis also broadly agrees with Jones Lang Wootton's view of the
outlook, estimating that prime space will rise to Pounds 45 per sq ft by the
end of 1996 and Pounds 50 per sq ft by the end of 1997.
But not everyone agrees that rents are rising or that progress will
accelerate towards Pounds 50 per sq ft over the next few years.
One problem is that there is no longer anything like a 'normal' lease
structure, making comparisons between new lettings difficult. Most
agreements still involve rent-free periods and options for the tenant to
break before the end of the lease.
For example, Barings, the UK merchant bank, is rumoured to be negotiating to
take 240,000 sq ft of space at 60 London Wall at about Pounds 35 per sq ft
for the best space on offer.
If the deal is confirmed, it would be one of the largest City lettings in
recent years and could provide a benchmark against which others could be
judged. The snag is that the final terms could be anything but
straightforward.
Even if City rents are not yet rising, there seems little doubt that the
balance of supply and demand is gradually tilting in favour of landlords.
While there are plenty of smaller units available, especially around the
fringes of the City, there is no more than a handful of large, modern
buildings still available. Under those circumstances rents will surely rise
before long even if they have not already done so.
The question is whether rents head back towards the peak levels at the end
of the 1980s - importantly reducing the weight of over-rented space - or
make more sedate progress.
Mr Alec Pelmore, property analyst at merchant bank Kleinwort Benson, is
among the sceptics. He points to the pipeline of development and
refurbishments which will add to the supply of modern space.
He commented: 'Our view on rents for the best prime new space is that they
will indeed rise over the next two years to Pounds 35-Pounds 40 per sq ft.
But at this level there are a number of developers with sites and finance
waiting for the chance to rebuild or upgrade old unlettable buildings.
Supply will re-emerge, if only in the shape of a competitive pre-letting
market, and rents will then stagnate at this level.'
Kleinwort Benson estimates that there are plans for some 4.5m sq ft of new
or refurbished City office space already announced. More is being added to
the pipeline every week.
Last week, Argent, the developer run by Mr Peter Freeman and Mr Michael
Freeman, announced plans for a 120,000 sq ft development at Suffolk House,
near Cannon Street.
The optimists point out that this supply will be phased, with construction
of only about 1m sq ft of City office space being started this year and
perhaps 1.5m sq ft next.
With the banks still cautious, raising funding for speculative development
is difficult. Most developers are waiting for pre-lettings before raising
firm finance and putting the cranes up.
Moreover, in core City areas development sites of the right size and shape
are not easy to come by. This could constrain the development opportunities
as the economic recovery continues.
Besides, much of the development will simply replace old offices with modern
space rather than adding to the overall stock of offices.
Given the profile of City tenants, much also turns on the outlook for the
financial sector. Struggling stockbrokers and merchant banks are unlikely to
take acres of new office space.
In that respect recent disappointing trading statements from the likes of SG
Warburg and Hambros could be disturbing, especially if they presage a round
of City redundancies.
What Stanhope's banks make of all this remains an open question. They
should, at least, be in a good position to judge potential demand for space
from the financial sector.
They also have the best possible vantage point from which to judge whether
funding will be available for the developments planned in the Square Mile.
If the developers are starved of bank finance, the outlook for Broadgate
will be brighter.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941021

