FT943-1044

FT  26 SEP 94 / FT Guide to the Week


MONDAY 26
Yeltsin addresses the UN
US president Bill Clinton and Russia's president Boris Yeltsin are both due
to address the 49th session of the United Nations General Assembly in New
York. Mr Yeltsin is expected to talk on nuclear arms reductions and the role
of Russia in the world - especially its own part of the world, the former
Soviet Union. He will then meet US business leaders before flying to
Washington.
The European Parliament begins an all-week plenary session, its first since
the Euro-elections in June. Attention will centre on internal reforms to
make the Strasbourg assembly more efficient, now that it has enhanced powers
under the Maastricht treaty.
The main debates will be on: multi-speed Europe; whether the Parliament
should sit in Strasbourg, as France insists, or in Brussels alongside the
Commission and Council of Ministers; and on the confirmation hearings
Euro-MPs plan to hold in November for members of the new Commission, whose
nominations they can veto.
UK-Russian trade: Russia's deputy prime minister for the economy, Alexander
Shokhin, visits London for talks with the Russian-British Committee for
Trade and Investment, of which he is co-chair with Michael Heseltine, the UK
trade and industry secretary. Mr Shokhin will press for more access to the
British market for Russian goods and for work to start on such projects as
the Moscow telephone system, which was agreed with the UK two years ago.
UK telecoms: Energis, the UK's third long-distance telecommunications
company, is launched. Energis, a subsidiary of the National Grid, has
erected its network across the Grid's pylons. Its marketing pitch includes
significant discounts on BT tariffs for long-distance calls.
Consumer congress: The International Organisation of Consumers Unions,
representing consumers' groups from 72 countries, begins its 14th world
congress in Montpellier, France (to Sep 30).
Saleroom: Sotheby's opens the art market season with two house sales. Today,
the Corsini family of Florence starts to dispose of some 2,000 objects
culled from the guest suites, library and store-rooms of its 18th century
baroque palazzo, where the auction is being held. The family hopes to raise
Pounds 1m (Dollars 1.58m) for restoration work.
On Wednesday, at Stokesay Court in rural Shropshire in the west of England,
Victorian treasures which had been lost for more than 50 years come under
the hammer in Sotheby's biggest house sale for a decade.
FT Survey: Using Computers in Business.
Holidays: Israel.
TUESDAY 27
US interest rates in focus
The US Federal Reserve's Open Markets Committee, its policy-making body,
meets in Washington amid signs that demand is still growing steadily,
despite five interest rate increases this year. Most economists expect the
Fed will have to raise rates again before the year is out, although few
believe it will do so at this meeting.
Boris Yeltsin, Russia's president, holds talks with US president Bill
Clinton in Washington. Bosnia, nuclear arms reductions, trade and investment
figure on the agenda, with the US pressing for speedier economic reforms.
Japan pitches for UN seat:
Foreign minister Yohei Kono, addressing the United Nations General Assembly
in New York, is expected to make Japan's clearest bid yet for permanent
membership of the security council. He will say Japan is willing to assume
the duties of membership, but cannot take part in military operations
involving force because of its pacifist constitution.
Aid initiative: Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, will launch an initiative
to help ease the debt burden of some of the poorest developing countries
when he meets fellow Commonwealth finance ministers in Malta on the first
day of their two-day annual conference.
The Bank of Italy's governing council holds it first monthly meeting after
the summer recess with the issue pending of nominating a director-general to
succeed Lamberto Dini, who became treasury minister in May. It has become a
sensitive issue in relations between the central bank and the Berlusconi
government, with the Bank of Italy seeking to preserve its autonomy over the
appointment.
Romania's president, Ion Iliescu, on his first state visit to the US, holds
talks with International Monetary Fund and World Bank officials in
Washington. The visit, which includes a meeting with President Bill Clinton,
is being seen as a sign of improved relations, strained by the Iliescu
administration's handling of anti-government demonstrations in 1990 and
1991.
Cleanlier than thou: The Tidy Britain Group will spread anger and delight by
publishing its first cleanliness ranking of British cities.
FT Surveys: Mauritius and Business Locations In Europe.
Holidays: Israel.
WENESDAY 28
IMF gives its world outlook
The International Monetary Fund will publish updated forecasts for the world
economy ahead of next week's annual meetings of the IMF and World Bank in
Madrid. Its latest World Economic Outlook will upgrade the near-term growth
forecast for the Group of Seven leading industrial countries from the annual
rate of 2.5 per cent predicted by the Fund in April.
OECD headship: Ambassadors of the 25 member countries of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development meet in Paris with little hope of
ending the impasse over who should be the next OECD secretary-general.
There is little sign that the OECD's decision-making council can achieve the
consensus needed to choose either present incumbent Jean-Claude Paye or
Canadian challenger Donald Johnston when it meets on Thursday. That would
leave the OECD top job in limbo once Paye's contract expires on Friday.
European Union industry ministers convene in Brussels to discuss the
European Commission's action plan to prepare for the new 'information
society' covering multi-media, telecoms liberalisation and electronic
banking.
The German presidency will also consider latest progress in restructuring
the European steel industry, amid clear evidence of an economic upturn.
Pensions ruling: The European Court of Justice will deliver its opinion in
six separate cases which will determine how European employers equalise
pension benefits for men and women. Pension benefits for part-timers and
single-sex annuity rates are also key issues.
House sale at Stokesay Court:
Sotheby's four-day sale of antiques and treasures at
Stokesay Court, near Ludlow, Shropshire, is expected to raise Pounds 2.5m
(Dollars 3.95m) from 5,000 items. They were locked away for security in 1941
and are wonderfully preserved. The highlight is a Louis XIV boulle commode
of 1710, estimate Pounds 100,000. Among the oddities are suits of 18th
century Japanese armour (one illustrated above), and some Fortnum and Mason
dried turtle - together with instructions for making turtle soup.
Showjumping: The Horse of the Year Show begins at Olympia, London (to Oct
2).
Holidays: Taiwan.
THURSDAY 29
Report due on Berlusconi
Three legal experts, appointed by Italian premier Silvio Berlusconi on
taking office in May to examine if there is a conflict of interest between
his roles of prime minister and owner of the Fininvest media empire, are due
to present their proposals.
The unresolved issue remains a handicap for Mr Berlusconi and is becoming
enmeshed in a controversy over recent appointments at the RAI, the state-run
broadcasting organisation.
Nato defence ministers meet informally in Seville, against a background of
mounting tension in Bosnia and transatlantic strains over military tactics
in former Yugoslavia. France, a rare participant in high-level Nato
discussions, will attend. Germany and the US have signalled they want to
discuss admitting former communist states in central and eastern Europe.
US trade policy: The US International Trade Commission holds a hearing in
Washington on a controversial report to assess the economic effects of US
anti-dumping policies and countervailing duty orders.
Amsterdam's bourse closes at 10am GMT ahead of the introduction of a new
trading system on Friday.
World Maritime Day, declared by the United Nations' International Maritime
Organisation, is devoted to the training and standards of merchant navy
crews.
FRIDAY 30
Slovakia holds election
Two days of voting start in Slovakia in the first general election since
independence last year. The pro-reformers of the outgoing government of
Jozef Moravck are pitted against the strongly nationalist opposition, led by
former prime minister Vladimr Meciar.
US-Japanese trade: A 60-day consultation period expires. It was designed to
settle disputes over cars and car parts, Japanese government procurement in
medical and telecommunications equipment, flat glass and insurance.
Washington has threatened sanctions failing agreement. At least a partial
deal seems to be in the making, with partial sanctions likely for unresolved
issues.
United Nations peace-keeping troops' mandate in former Yugoslavia expires,
but is expected to be renewed for another six months.
UK nuclear power: Deadline for submissions to the government's review of the
industry. The main issue is whether to build more nuclear power stations,
and if so, whether construction can be financed by the private sector.
UK financial regulation: The last day for life insurers and financial
advisers to apply to be regulated by the Personal Investment Authority, the
new watchdog to protect private investors.
FT Survey: World Economy and Finance.
WEEKEND 1-2
IMF meetings in Madrid
Finance ministers and central bankers of the Group of Seven countries meet
in Madrid on Saturday ahead of the annual meetings of the International
Monetary Fund and World Bank to discuss strengthening world output, recent
turbulence on financial markets, and how best to help Russia and Ukraine.
On Sunday, the IMF's policy-making Interim Committee tries to break the
deadlock on issuing new special drawing rights or SDRs, the IMF's reserve
asset, aided by joint proposals from the British and US treasuries.
Palau ends its status as the last United Nations trust territory in the
Pacific on Saturday and becomes formally linked to the US.
Nelson Mandela, South African president, begins the first state visit by a
South African leader to the US on Saturday (to Oct 6).
Milan's spring and summer ready-to-wear fashion shows start on Sunday (to
Oct 6).
The Asian Games open on Sunday in Hiroshima, western Japan, bringing
together more than 7,200 athletes from 42 countries (to Oct 16). The
possible attendance of Taiwanese government officials is annoying China,
which has spoken of boycotting the event.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940926

