FT942-12693

FT  28 APR 94 / Airtours to buy Scandinavian leisure group from SAS


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER and CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   LONDON, STOCKHOLM


Airtours, the holiday group, said yesterday that it is close to agreement to
buy SAS Leisure, Scandinavia's leading tour operator, from Scandinavian
Airline System for SKr870m (Pounds 79m).
Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) said it was also about to begin detailed
discussions with Swissair over the sale of its Service Partner airline
catering unit. This unit has been valued at up to SKr2.5bn.
Mr David Crossland, Airtours' chairman, has long wanted to expand into
continental Europe. Airtours, the second biggest UK tour operator after
Thomson, said it is also close to agreement to buy a cruise ship for Dollars
24m (Pounds 16.4m). The vendor is believed to be Kloster Cruise of Norway.
SAS Leisure's operations include two tour operators, Ving and Always, a 50
per cent stake in Premiair, the charter airline, and a 49 per cent stake in
Spanair, another charter operator. It also owns 14 hotels, mainly around the
Mediterranean.
Last year, SAS Leisure made a SKr199m pre-tax loss on sales of SKr4.44bn.
The performance followed a SKr209m profit in 1992 and reflected depressed
travel industry conditions, recession in the Nordic region and the weakness
of the Swedish krona.
The deal, which could be finalised today, received a cool welcome from the
City, which marked Airtours' shares down 18p to 448p. Airtours has been
criticised in recent weeks for its acquisition record.
After failing last year in a bid to take over its rival Owners Abroad,
Airtours acquired Aspro Travel of Cardiff for Pounds 20.1m. Earlier this
year, Airtours announced it was suing the former owners of Aspro, saying it
had been the victim of fraudulent misrepresentation at the time of the
takeover.
SAS wants to concentrate on core flying operations after four consecutive
years in the red and last year's failed attempt to merge with Swissair,
Austrian Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines in the Alcazar project.
SAS said Service Partner would be combined with Swissair's catering
division, Gate Gourmet, if talks with the Swiss airline were successful.
Last year SAS sold the airport restaurant and contract catering businesses
within Service Partner to Compass Group, the UK healthcare and catering
company, for Pounds 71.9m.
Compass deal confirmed, Page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940428

