FT942-14462

FT  20 APR 94 / UK Company News: Keller flotation price set at 130p for
Pounds 72.8m tag


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Shares in Keller Group, an international ground engineering group, are being
floated at 130p, giving the group a market capitalisation of Pounds 72.8m.
Keller specialises in improving ground for the construction industry, using
a variety of drilling, grouting and piling techniques. Projects outside the
UK account for more than 80 per cent of sales.
Because Keller makes most of its profits outside the UK, it intends to
become one of the first companies to employ foreign income dividends, which
should reduce the group's unrelieved advance corporation tax problem.
A placing and intermediaries offer will raise Pounds 15.3m, which will be
used to repay existing borrowings and help fund further overseas expansion.
About Pounds 27.7m will be raised by the sale of shares by existing
shareholders.
A former engineering offshoot of GKN, Keller was bought by its management
for Pounds 26m three years ago, backed by funds led by Candover Investments.
In spite of recession, Keller has increased operating profits by 46 per cent
since 1991 from Pounds 6.3m to Pounds 9.2m on turnover up by 30 per cent to
Pounds 148m. It has benefited from the recent building boom in Germany,
which accounted for 43 per cent of last year's sales.
The issue has been underwritten by Kleinwort Benson Securities, sponsors and
brokers to the issue.
Applications for the intermediaries offer close next Wednesday, and dealings
are expected to start on May 5.
COMMENT
Niches do not come much more obscure than Keller's, but the group has a good
reputation in the arcane world of ground engineering and a solid record of
profits growth and cash generation. The shares have been priced not in line
with the UK construction sector, where ratings assume a great deal of
recovery, but on a prospective multiple of 13, putting them on a discount to
the market as a whole. Concern that the German building boom will eventually
falter can be set against growth prospects in the US, where Keller has just
made a Dollars 9m (Pounds 6m) acquisition. Overall, the unaggressive pricing
should ensure a good platform of support for the shares.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940420

