FT941-16820

FT  07 JAN 94 / International Company News: Nestle in deal to control Polish
chocolate plant


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   WARSAW


Nestle, the food and mineral waters group, yesterday took a step into the
east European market when it won effective control of Goplana, Poland's
second largest chocolate factory with sales last year worth Dollars 64m.
The Nestle investment valued at Dollars 43m is Poland's largest joint
venture and marks the Swiss group's first large move into manufacturing in
the country. The agreement, comes after PepsiCo Foods International bought a
majority share in Wedel, the country's largest chocolate manufacturer in
1991.
Goplana and Wedel control over a quarter of the domestic confectionery
market. Wawel, Poland's other main producer based in Krakow, has been
privatised through an employee and management buy-out. Under the deal
clinched yesterday in Poznan where Goplana is based, Nestle will take a 47
per cent share in the joint venture at the cost of Dollars 35.9m. The state
Treasury is to contribute the Goplana plant, valued at Dollars 35.9m, for
its 47 per cent share.
The Swiss food group is to finance the purchase of the remaining 6 per cent
of the equity by the plant's employees. Nestle has snatched Goplana away
from E. D. and F. Man, the UK commodities broker who had for two years been
working in partnership with Elite Industries, an Israeli food processor to
win control of the factory.
The E. D. and F. Man offer which was strongly supported by the Goplana
employees was finally rejected by workers' delegates after a campaign last
autumn masterminded by Samuel Montagu. This used advertising on local radio
and had Nestle representatives at the factory gates explaining the merits of
their company's offer to the 2,400 workforce.
Under the terms of yesterday's agreement the Treasury will after two years
sell to Nestle as many shares as are needed to bring the Swiss group up to
51 per cent. Nestle has agreed to see the remaining equity held by the state
then floated on the Warsaw stock exchange.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940107

