FT944-14561

FT  22 OCT 94 / Growth slips in third quarter: Gross domestic product ahead
by just 0.7% as industrial production slows


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Economics Correspondent


A slowdown in industrial production caused the pace of economic growth to
slip in the third quarter of 1994, according to a preliminary estimate
released by the Central Statistical Office yesterday.
Gross domestic product grew a seasonally adjusted 0.7 per cent in the third
quarter, down from a growth rate of 1.1 per cent in the previous three
months. On an annual basis, GDP was 3.6 per cent higher than in the third
quarter of last year 1993. The annual growth rate in the second quarter was
3.8 per cent.
A decline in the pace of third-quarter growth had been widely expected after
figures were published earlier this month showing a fall in manufacturing
output in August. The decline may reduce the enthusiasm of the Bank of
England for further increases in interest rates - the pace of GDP growth in
the second quarter was one of the factors cited as being behind last month's
rise in base rates from 5.25 to 5.75 per cent.
Mr Kevin Darlington, UK economist at stockbrokers Hoare Govett, said: 'In
our view, the third-quarter slowdown is not a downblip in a still-fast trend
but the first sign that activity is set to decelerate over the next year.'
According to the Central Statistical Office, the service sector grew at a
quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.8 per cent, slightly higher than its growth
rate in the second quarter. The strongest service sector was transport and
communications, with air transport and telecommunications being particularly
robust.
However, the rate of growth in the production industries has shown signs of
slowing. The office said that over the three months to August production had
risen at a quarterly rate of 1 per cent, compared with a rate of 2 per cent
in the second quarter. There were signs that growth had slowed even further
in September. It was likely that, between the second and third quarters,
production grew by less than 0.7 per cent.
The Central Statistical Office said the slowdown in industrial production
was partly due to a weak engineering sector and partly reflected the effects
of the Milford Haven fire and other oil-refining problems.
Rising North Sea oil and gas production have been an important part of the
recovery. However, even if oil and gas are excluded, GDP grew 0.7 per cent
in the third quarter and was 3.2 per cent higher than in the same period a
year ago. Overall GDP is now 2.6 per cent above its pre-recession peak in
1990, or 1.8 per cent if oil and gas are excluded.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

