FT943-12741

FT  23 JUL 94 / Rome budget revenue hurdle overcome: Legislation to
deregulate Italy's labour market allows for temporary jobs


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


The Berlusconi government yesterday resolved one of the main issues holding
up plans to find fresh revenues for the 1995 budget - a pardon for buildings
constructed without proper planning permission.
At the same time the government has unveiled legislation for deregulating
Italy's rigid labour market that introduces for the first time the principle
of temporary jobs.
The cabinet failed to agree on the scope of the pardon on Thursday night
because of objections from the Northern League that it would afford a
blanket amnesty to many kinds of illicit construction and property
speculation. As a result the matter was pushed on the agenda of yesterday's
cabinet session.
The pardon, which will allow the proper registration of buildings and
conversions, is expected to raise L5,400bn (Pounds 2.2bn) by the end of
1995. A further L12,000bn is expected to go to the city and municipal
administrations concerned. It is estimated that up to 3m families could be
affected; but in the previous such pardon in the mid-1980s, less than 10 per
cent of the 8m requests were able to complete the required procedures.
The measure runs alongside an amnesty on a back-log of 3.2m tax assessment
cases expected to generate most of the L15,000bn in new revenues for the
1995 budget. The cabinet confirmed it would aim to cut the 1994 budget
deficit of L154,000bn to L138,600bn next year.
The cabinet also confirmed that key decisions on spending cuts in pensions
would not be taken until after the summer recess. Confindustria, the
industrialists confederation, while applauding the government's commitment
to reducing the public sector deficit expressed disappointment at the
postponement.
Confindustria also voiced reservations about the scope of measures approved
to regulate the labour market. The measures introduce the principle of
temporary employment and apprentice wages at below minimum rates. But since
they were first discussed a month ago with the unions, they have been
considerably modified.
The unions have managed to prevent a free hire and fire policy. Instead,
temporary employment will be circumscribed by strict rules. For instance,
employers can only resort to temporary employment where jobs are being added
to a company payroll - not in substitution for existing jobs or where jobs
have been shed. There are also limits on the number of temporary employees
per company - 10 per cent of the workforce in companies with up to 500
employees - as well as a maximum time span of 12 months.
The government believes up to 200,000 jobs can be created through the new
legislation. The unions are more sceptical. Much depends on how additional
incentives for job hiring in southern Italy, the worst area for jobless, are
applied. The draft law now goes to parliament and could be altered
substantially there.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940723

