FT942-15991

FT  13 APR 94 / Schneider Chief missing as threat to group mounts: German
company debts may total Pounds 3bn - Banks to hold talks


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


The Jurgen Schneider group, one of Germany's most prominent property
developers, is on the verge of collapse with banks owed up to an estimated
DM8bn (Pounds 3.2bn).
Bank creditors were yesterday summoned to an emergency meeting after the
company's charismatic founder and chief executive stepped down and went
missing.
More than 40 banks will meet tomorrow to consider Schneider's fate.
Financial information on the privately owned group is scarce. Estimates of
its total debts ranged between DM3bn and DM8bn, while the value of its 85
prestigious properties in Germany was placed at between DM5bn and DM8bn.
The collapse of Schneider would be one of the largest insolvencies in the
German property sector since the second world war. Fears of the knock-on
effects hit shares in German banks yesterday. Deutsche Bank  - believed to
be owed more than DM1bn  - dropped by DM17.50 to DM791.50, well ahead of the
overall market's decline.
The crisis follows the resignation and disappearance of Mr Jurgen Schneider,
a 59-year-old property developer. He had specialised in restoring elegant
historical buildings throughout Germany from his base in a castle in
Konigstein, a fashionable town just outside Frankfurt.
The Schneider group said Mr Schneider had resigned on medical advice
following an unspecified illness developed since Easter, and that his
whereabouts were unknown.
The group's remaining board members said they were 'thunderstruck' by the
circumstances of his departure, stressing that his absence denied the
company access to significant sources of funds and forced it to turn to its
bankers.
The events follow a long period of speculation about the group's financial
soundness. It was triggered by rapid expansion, particularly in eastern
Germany, combined more recently with widespread complaints in the building
sector over Schneider's slowness in paying creditors.
In February, Mr Schneider told a German newspaper the group was financially
sound, but this did little to stop the rumours.
Property analysts said yesterday that if Schneider collapsed, it would have
a big impact on confidence in the highly fragmented German commercial
property sector. The sector has been depressed in the past two years, but
has avoided the spectacular crashes in other economies, particularly in the
UK and the US.
The impact on the market overall is likely to be limited by the quality of
the group's properties. They include the Berheimer Palace in Munich, the
Hotel Rose in Wiesbaden and two prestige shopping developments in Frankfurt
 - the Schiller Passage and the Zeilgalerie.
Schneider also owns the Madler Passage in Leipzig, within which is Auerbachs
Keller, where Mephistopheles proved a devilish drinking partner in Goethe's
play Faust.
Of the group's 85 large properties, 32 are believed to be located in
Leipzig, making the company by far the biggest private investor in the
eastern German city.
The city's lord mayor summoned journalists yesterday to tell them that
Schneider's difficulties would not have a financial knock-on effect for
Leipzig, denying rumours that Schneider owns virtually the whole of the
city's historic centre.
Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank, said its lending to Schneider was
secured on individual properties. The lending is thought to have been made
via the group's Mannheim office and Deutsche Centralbodenkredit, a property
financing subsidiary.
Hypo-Bank, a large Bavarian bank specialising in property lending, said it
was owed a significant sum, but far less than Deutsche Bank; analysts said
this meant an exposure of up to DM500m.
German stocks Page 43

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940413

