FT941-3515

FT  16 MAR 94 / Ship repairer set to buy Cammell Laird yard


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


Cammell Laird, the Merseyside military shipyard which closed last year, is
within weeks of being sold to a ship repair company which plans to employ
1,600 people there by the end of next year.
VSEL, the Barrow-based nuclear submarine builder which owns the Birkenhead
yard, yesterday confirmed that a March 31 deadline had been imposed for
completion.
The bidder is Coastline Industries, which already leases Cammell Laird's dry
docks and other facilities and has taken on about 600 workers in the past
year to fulfil contracts with several shipping lines and owners.
Coastline was founded five years ago by Mr John Stafford, a former Grant
Thornton accountant, to exploit ship repairing opportunities which could
emerge from the upturn of trade at the port of Liverpool and intensification
of Irish Sea trade.
The deal was negotiated in January by Mr Amin Amiri, corporate finance
partner of Grant Thornton in Liverpool, but completion has been bogged down
by legal arguments over site values and long-term environmental liabilities.
These are understood to have forced VSEL to lower its price while confining
future use of the site to shipbuilding and ship repair.
VSEL has imposed the March 31 deadline to force sale or withdrawal. Mr
Norman Broadhurst, VSEL finance director, said: 'There are other
shipbuilding companies now interested. We gave Coastline exclusivity, but it
is now up to them to complete.'
Rival bids for Cammell Laird are understood to depend on the European
Commission allowing intervention funding. Mr Frank Field, Labour MP for
Birkenhead, and Mr Barry Porter, Conservative MP for neighbouring Wirral
South, discussed this in Brussels yesterday. However, VSEL has been
consistently refused EU help for Cammell Laird because it made warships -
intervention funding has so far been limited to civil yards facing closure.
Mr Jonathan Diggines, director of the Manchester office of Murray Johnstone,
the Glasgow-based fund manager, yesterday confirmed it would be underwriting
the deal. The price is not being disclosed, but about Pounds 10m is
understood to be available. Allied Irish Banks is providing loan and working
capital for Coastline's expansion.
Coastline has brought in Mr Alan Greenough, a deal-making specialist, in an
attempt to push the sale through.
If the deal is completed, Coastline will take over Cammell Laird's
all-weather construction hall, three dry docks and its wet basin. Some of
the facilities may be leased later.
Aluminium Shipbuilders, which specialises in large catamarans, has looked at
the construction hall as a site for building third-generation Seacat
ferries.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940316

