FT944-5934

FT  01 DEC 94 / Arts: New England, hilarious but serious - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


In New England, Richard Nelson has written a play at once brilliantly
accomplished and repulsively artificial. Every word, every scene, makes its
contribution to the whole. And not a word, not a scene, rings true.
Nelson is perhaps the most eminent of the several American playwrights who
now have the world premieres of their plays take place in London. New
England, set in America today, covers the events of one weekend, starting
almost at once with the onstage suicide of Harry, before the very eyes of
his cohabitrix, Alice. Harry's children and brother promptly arrive. None of
them know Alice well, and none of them have ever previously met Tom, who
happens to have arrived as Alice's weekend guest some two minutes before
Harry blew his brains out. What follows is as hilarious as it is serious. Oh
yes, and all of them are English expats living in various parts of the US:
hence the ironic title.
Nelson's brilliance is most evident in his ability to keep juggling several
dissimilar objects in the air at once. In one scene, two of Harry's children
and Tom do a jigsaw while airing various features of their own
Americanophobia, while the floorboards overhead tell everyone in the house
that Alice and Harry's brother Alfred have been having sex for the past
hour. Meanwhile, all of them are trying to come to terms with Harry's
suicide and are engaged artfully in preserving the illusion of fluent
discourse while actually jumping from subject to subject. Here and
everywhere else, Nelson can sustain separate currents of farce, misery,
pathos, satire, irony, suspense, and cultural commentary.
But so what? Even in the four or five minutes before Harry becomes the late
Harry, the lines have been ringing hollow: with the blatantly
pseudo-naturalism of their construction, their self-interruptions, their
contrived non-sequiturs, their awful theatricality. 'Take it easy, this
can't be easy' - spoken by Tom to Alice - is a minor, but typical, example
of Nelson's cleverness. What is its effect? Less to reveal Tom's efforts to
console Alice than to show us how admirable Nelson is in this little feat of
putting two apparently contradictory sentences back to back in unbroken
flow. Why is the jigsaw scene there at all? So that Harry's son Paul can
utter lines (about apportioning jigsaw areas) 'The sky is mine.' Poor
Chekhov, whose tragicomic influence is everywhere obvious, must be blushing
in his grave; for Nelson's artfulness is not what he - Chekhov - had in mind
at all.
Ironically, it is the theme for which Nelson is most renowned -
Anglo-American relations - which he has crafted least successfully here.
Most of the time, the occasional discussions that these English expats have
about the American culture in which they live are mere set pieces that could
be replaced by discussions of sex or traffic or art to the same effect (and
most of the play could be happening in England anyway).
There are, we eventually see, two plot connections between Harry's suicide
and his Americanophobe despair: the facts that he never told Alice that his
wife was still alive in England until two months ago (and was still his
wife) and that, only minutes before his suicide and before the play's start,
he had reviled his daughter Gemma on the phone for planning to marry an
illiterate gardener's assistant in New Mexico ('the barbarians are sweeping
over us'). Nelson leaves these bombs hanging unexploded in the air. Which
should be brilliant - except that the very way he shows the characters
avoiding their significance is too neat.
Nelson is often funny. There are lines and stories that make us laugh aloud,
and others at which we chuckle inwardly. On a larger scale, though, he
creates characters and situations without a jot of freshness in them. Paul's
French wife Sophie - humourless, possessive, coolly paranoid - is obviously
introduced solely as a two-dimensional comic device. Yet which of the
characters is three-dimen-sional? I could believe in none of them.
Peter Gill's production and the performances by the seven actors are exactly
in harmony with the play: polished, fluent, amusing, contrived in their
naturalism, and unconvincing. Angela Thorne is Alice; Selina Cadell and
Diana Hardcastle are Harry's daughters Elizabeth and Gemma; Duncan Bell and
Annie Corbier are Paul and his wife Sophie; David Burke doubles as Harry and
his twin brother Alfred; Mick Ford is poor Tom. Possibly the play would seem
more persuasive if it were played with more spontaneity, but that would be
to swim against the current of its writing. New England reminds us of real
life to the extent that a Faberge egg reminds us of a hen's egg.
In RSC repertory at the Pit, Barbican Centre.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941201

