FT942-12609

FT  28 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Oman gases up for drive to
maintain export earnings - Andi Spicer on a Dollars 9bn LNG project that
will help reduce the sultanate's dependence on oil revenues


   By ANDI SPICER


Oman, one of the smaller oil producers in the Middle East, gave the final
go-ahead earlier this year for a Dollars 9bn liquefied natural gas project
that will by the end of the century make gas almost as important as oil to
the sultanate's export revenues.
The shift in emphasis to gas is part of strategy to lead the country away
from dependence on its limited oil reserves, which will start to decline
within the next 20 years. Most recent discoveries have been of
non-associated gas (found separately from oil fields) and this makes the
economies of a large export facility more attractive. More than five
trillion (million million) cubic feet of gas was found last year.
'Reserves keep on improving every month and we're quite confident that
current estimates of 20 trillion cubic feet of gas will double by the end of
the decade, and will be enough for 50 years,' said Mr Khalifa al-Hinai,
director general of gas, after the LNG project was given the green light in
February.
But the low oil price, which has had a knock on effect on LNG rates, has
made Oman rethink its original plans and it is considering where costs can
be cut. The USDollars 9bn price tag was always at the top end of
expectations and Mr Khalifa al-Hinai believes that shaving costs will not
diminish the project in any way.
The gas will come mainly from three large fields in the central Wusta region
of the country - Sayl Rawl, Sayh an Nugaydah and Barik. These fields are
recent discoveries and between them have proven reserves of 6.3 trillion cu
ft.
A pipeline is to run north through the Wahiba Sands to a point near Sur,
where it will branch along the coast to the site of a new Dollars 2bn
liquefaction plant and loading facilities at Simmah. It will run underwater
for some of the way to protect the area's stunning natural beauty.
The upstream part of the project will be 100 per cent owned by the Omani
Government and operated on its behalf by state-oil company Petroleum
Development Oman. But a new company, Oman LNG, has been formed to handle the
downstream processing. Partners include Shell (34 per cent), Total (6 per
cent), Partex (2 per cent) and Japan's Mitsubishi (3 per cent), Mitsui (3
per cent) and C Itoh (1 per cent). The government will hold the remaining
capital.
Start up is scheduled for August 1999 and Omani oil minister Said bin Ahmed
al-Shanfari has said that the plant's capacity will be 5m-6m tonnes a year.
'This will make LNG production equal to that of oil and make gas Oman's
second largest foreign exchange earner after oil. It is a world-scale
project, like the projects in Qatar and Abu Dhabi,' he explained.
When the gas starts to flow there will initially be a high percentage of
condensate (a light liquid gas), which will gradually decline over the
lifetime of the project, said Mr Khalifa al-Hinai.
The involvement of Japanese companies in OLNG betrays the major destination
for the gas - Tokyo Gas has visited Muscat to negotiate buying LNG from the
project. But ministry officials have said that southern European utilities,
particularly from Spain, Italy and France have expressed an interest. Other
Asian countries, like south Korea and China, Taiwan, Thailand and India are
also being targeted.
Oman's LNG export is an important part of in a growing gas network in the
Gulf region. A Dollars 5m pipeline to transport gas from Oman to India is
under consideration and long-term the UAE, Qatar and Oman are thinking of
linking their gas systems together to provide a unified export route to
Asia. Yemen is on the edge of its gas exploitation, although its
non-membership of the Gulf Co-operation Council will hamper its inclusion.
The attraction of Oman as an export terminal is its strategic position on
the right side of the Straits of Hormuz. Japan, in particular, is worried
that another Gulf war would close the straits and considers Oman a safer
political bet.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940428

