FT943-13339

FT  20 JUL 94 / Business and the Environment: Uniting the Americas - A look
at controversial plans to complete a highway linking Colombia to Panama


   By SARITA KENDALL


But for a gap of just over 100km, it would be possible to drive from Alaska
to Patagonia.
For more than 60 years, while governments pondered the road connection, the
Darien rainforests and swamps on the borders of Colombia and Panama have
held out against trucks and tourists, allowing an extraordinary natural
museum to survive. Now that the political decision to bridge the gap seems
to be crystallising, new options which would lessen environmental damage are
emerging.
Linking the Americas is a romantic challenge that dates back to the 1920s.
In 1971, when the US signed agreements for the completion of the highway
with Colombia and Panama, the Colombian section was expected to cost Dollars
60m (Pounds 40m). At that time, technical rather than environmental problems
preoccupied the planners, especially the 20km section across the River
Atrato wetlands and the 1.3km bridge over the river.
However, views have changed and the Inter-American Development Bank recently
approved a Dollars 1.5m loan for outlining the terms of reference for an
environmental study. The estimated cost has also changed and is now near
Dollars 300m.
The original, most direct, route was planned to run through two national
parks, the Katios park on the Colombian side and the Darien park in Panama.
The isthmus has a wide variety of species and is the key transition area for
flora and fauna between North and South America. The Katios park was created
as a buffer zone to protect Central and North American countries from foot
and mouth disease. Cattle in north-western Colombia are now reported to be
free of the disease and the US Department of Agriculture has lifted its
objection to completing the road.
Although the 1971 agreement pledged the US to contribute two-thirds of the
cost of the pan-American link, environmental groups such as the Sierra Club
have campaigned strongly against the highway and early this year the
International Union for Conservaion of Nature meeting in Buenos Aires
opposed the road on the grounds that conserving the Darien should be an
international priority.
In Colombia and Panama, the anti-road lobby consists mainly of environmental
groups and of Indians living in the area. Roads began to penetrate the
north-western region of Colombia known as Uraba from the 1950s, with
settlers following close behind. Vast areas were razed for timber and then
planted with bananas. Later marijuana and coca growing spread into Uraba,
while drug traffickers bought up land cleared of trees and turned it into
cattle ranches.
'It's a very fragile area; there must be proper environmental and
socio-cultural studies with the participation of Indian communities on both
sides of the border,' says Alberto Achita, an Embera Indian and a leader of
the regional Indian organisation Orewa.
Colombia has always been more interested than Panama in finishing the
highway. As a result of the development of the Uraba region, peasants and
Indians were pushed off their lands and into southern Panama. Uraba is also
infested with paramilitary groups and guerrilla columns living mainly by
extortion.
Colombians - especially smugglers of arms, drugs and consumer goods - are
regularly deported from Panama and the Panamanian government is concerned
that completion of the road would exacerbate its problems. Colombia argues
that, on the contrary, it would be easier to mobilise troops to control the
situation.
Gustavo Gaviria presides over a government commission working on bi-national
issues with Panama: 'It is not possible that, as we reach the 21st century,
the Americas are not united because of a few kilometres of road. The road
would help the two governments to preserve sovereignty on their frontiers
and it would benefit trade and tourism, particularly for Medellin and the
north coast of Colombia.'
'This should be a road for the Americas, a multinational project built with
funding from all countries. The Katios park would be looked after jointly
and a pan-American ecological university established to study the area,'
Gaviria adds.
The idea seems to have some backing in government circles: Colombia's
President Cesar Gaviria goes to the Organisation of American States as
secretary general when he finishes his term and the OAS could be the
appropriate launch pad for such a venture.
What seems to have become clear is that alternative routes must be assessed.
The Biopacifico project, a United Nations biodiversity project under
Colombia's new environment ministry, has carried out a study that underlines
this point. The study publishes maps showing how the construction of a
29km-section of the pan-American highway devastated part of Uraba between
1970 and 1992.
Experience has shown that it is virtually impossible to prevent colonisation
and deforestation when roads open up new areas. The Katios and Darien parks
contain much of the best preserved forest in the region. The Biopacifico
study claims the present route would have an irreversible impact on such
local ecosystems and it suggests a less damaging alternative along the
Caribbean coastline. This would involve a ferry across the Gulf of Uraba
from Turbo and links between existing road on the Colombian side of the
frontier.
A road connecting the northern pan-American highway terminal to the
Caribbean coast of Panama is already planned and could connect with the
Colombian section.
While the road discussion continues, a Colombia-Panama ferry is due to start
before the end of the year. There will be three sailings a week between
Cartagena and Colon. It will make a more relaxing trip than battling through
rain, mud, fevers and bandits in the Darien.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940720

