FT944-2425

FT  16 DEC 94 / Chalker warns on recouping Pergau expense


   By PETER MONTAGNON and JAMES BLITZ


Lady Chalker, the minister for overseas development, has warned that her
ministry might not be able to claw back all the money due to be spent in
support of Malaysia's Pergau dam, even though the use of the aid budget for
this purpose has been declared illegal.
The government has said that the Overseas Development Administration's
overall budget will not be affected for the next two years by a recent High
Court ruling that has forced the Treasury to provide Pounds 48m in planned
support for Pergau from its own reserves.
But on Tuesday, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, left open the question
of what would happen in later years when the British government is required
to pay Pounds 122m to the Malaysian authorities.
Lady Chalker said yesterday she expected there would be some 'very tough
talking' with the Treasury over whether the ODA budget should take cuts
commensurate with the amount being paid for Pergau from Treasury reserves.
'It would be nice to have all the addition, but I don't expect we shall get
it all,' she said in an interview with the Financial Times.
Her remarks are bound to concern aid lobbies which had hoped the court
judgment on Pergau would raise the amount of money spent on projects
designed to alleviate poverty.
Under a High Court ruling last month, the ODA cannot make payments for
Pergau because it is deemed 'economically unsound'.
But in a statement to the Commons earlier this week Mr Hurd said the exact
size of the ODA budget from the financial year 1996-97 would have to be
determined in future public expenditure rounds.
Labour MPs and aid groups fear the ODA will end up indirectly financing the
project because the aid budget will suffer cuts to compensate for the
Treasury payments for Pergau.
Labour MPs reacted angrily in the Commons when the government said it would
not restore the Pounds 24m already spent on Pergau to the ODA budget.
But Lady Chalker said that the government had been through the judgment very
carefully. 'I believe we have complied with what the divisional court said
absolutely to the letter.'
The ODA had not decided how to spend the Pounds 48m that would be returned
to its budget this year and next, she said, but it was likely to go on
emergency relief in countries such as Bosnia and Rwanda.
The aid and trade provision had already been set for this year and the money
would not be used for extra projects in this area, she said, although she
defended the use of aid to help UK trade.
'We have an aid and trade system that is strict and gives British companies
the chance to compete on equal terms with other aid donors who are also
interested in trade,' she said.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941216

