FT941-5610

FT  05 MAR 94 / Man in the News: Return of Hezza the Prezza - Michael
Heseltine


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


His cabinet colleagues had approached the Scott inquiry into arms-related
sales to Iraq with a mixture of annoyance and trepidation. Mr Michael
Heseltine treated it as a pleasant day out. The president of the board of
trade took along his elegant wife Anne to pose, smiling, for the cameras
before facing his inquisitors. He turned in a bravura performance.
The message was clear. If there was blame to be apportioned for the
government's dubious role in what has become known as the arms-to-Iraq
affair, it would not fall on Michael Heseltine. He had played by the rules.
The bundles of documents laid out before Lord Justice Scott proved his
point.
The reaction among Tory MPs in the bars of Westminster was summed up in one
oft-repeated phrase: 'He's running.' For what? For the key to No 10 Downing
Street, if the bus chasing Mr John Major finally knocks down the prime
minister.
Hezza the Prezza had staged another political comeback. Prematurely written
off after the fiasco 18 months ago over coal industry closures, and once
again last summer after a heart attack, he is fully recovered and is not
about to celebrate his 61st birthday this month by announcing his
retirement.
He is not the favourite to replace Mr Major if a vacancy does arise after
the Conservatives' expected trouncing in this summer's local and European
elections. Despite the furore over impending tax increases, Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, remains the front-runner. Mr Heseltine deposed Lady
Thatcher: there are some in the party who will never forgive him.
The Prezza, anyway, is dismissive of the latest speculation: 'I think it's a
lot of garbage,' he insists. 'John Major will lead us into the election and
he will win it.' He will campaign hard alongside the prime minister in the
summer elections.
Mr Heseltine is similarly contemptuous of rumours he has been wining and
dining Mr Major's opponents on the Tory right. He has not: 'People just
invent these things.'
But whatever the protestations, he is now rated a strong second to Mr
Clarke. The bookies have shortened his odds. He is worth a bet.
Mr Heseltine has reinforced that point all week. His appearance on Monday
before Lord Justice Scott was followed two days later by a combative House
of Commons performance. Brushing aside a Labour onslaught on the erosion of
Britain's manufacturing industry, he almost convinced sceptical observers
that the government had a coherent industrial strategy.
To hear him speak in the debate about BMW's recent acquisition of the
nation's last volume car manufacturer was almost to believe that he had
planned the deal himself. No matter that a few years earlier he had insisted
that the British car industry was a vital strategic interest. We should not
have been surprised. Mr Heseltine is a political heavyweight in a cabinet
with more than its fair share of lightweights.
By Thursday night, he was ruminating on the future of western capitalism in
the annual Lord Stockton lecture. It escaped nobody's attention that the man
once branded by Thatcherites an interventionist decided to emphasise the
role of the private, not the public, sector in ensuring future prosperity.
He attacked overregulation in the European Union and even offered a hint
that he was no longer quite so wedded to the European exchange rate
mechanism. For one seasoned Westminster observer it was too much: 'It's
bloody shameless.'
If Mr Heseltine is to take the ultimate prize he must win the support of the
Tory right. His instinctive pro-Europeanism and industrial interventionism
has always been shot through with a streak of ruthless nationalism. No harm
in emphasising that now.
But it was his appearance before Lord Justice Scott that most convinced
Conservative colleagues that he is running. The political timebomb in the
inquiry is not buried in the argument over whether the government secretly
changed the rules covering sales of defence-related equipment to Iraq. The
most dangerous allegation is that ministers were ready to see three
businessmen sent to jail unjustly to cover up its own complicity.
Other ministers, including Mr Clarke, who signed Public Interest Immunity
certificates to withhold documents from the court, insisted they had no
option. Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, had issued a legal
instruction.
Not so Mr Heseltine. He had strongly resisted the same instruction. He had
agreed eventually to sign only after imposing conditions. He had voiced his
determination not to be involved in any cover-up.
It was the approach of a battle-hardened politician: one who had learnt
during the row over Westland which led to his abrupt departure from Lady
Thatcher's cabinet in 1986 that you should never take unnecessary risks.
But his evidence outraged Sir Nicholas and left a number of colleagues
feeling sore. Mr Heseltine was cast by the press in the role of knight in
shining armour - other ministers as weak or conniving. Mr Clarke, after all,
has promised to resign if his behaviour is faulted.
For his part, Mr Heseltine insists that the media got it wrong: there was
nothing in his public evidence that had not already been sent to the inquiry
by his department.
He had taken a different decision about his immunity certificate because the
secret Whitehall papers it covered were more revealing than those shown to
other ministers. He had conveyed his misgivings to colleagues at the time.
All true, but not enough to convince everyone of his good intentions: 'I
don't know whether he is running. But I do know he didn't do the rest of us
any favours at Scott,' was the judgment of one minister.
For the moment speculation is running ahead of reality. The Conservative
party might decide that casually discarding another prime minister is not
the way to win back the British electorate. In the event of a contest, Mr
Clarke still has a powerful hold over the centre and left of the party at
Westminster. So Mr Heseltine may yet be denied the office he has sought all
his political life. But that is no longer certain.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940305

