FT944-5804

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (6): Royal Mail
delivers replies - Client server systems / As a newly-organised company
where each section is a business unit, the national postal system needs
flexible ways of reporting


   By CLAIRE GOODING


Royal Mail started with a list of a dozen accounting packages when it
started looking for a client-server system that would reflect the new shape
of its structure since re-organisation in 1992.
'The main requirement was good flexible reporting and enquiry facilities,'
says Royal Mail systems accountant Penny Maguire, whose department acted as
the internal consultants on the choice of software.
Although Royal Mail had some out-of-the-ordinary VAT requirements, the main
need in addition to standard accounting was project management. 'Scala had a
project management module which managed timesheets and work scheduling, and
that was a real attraction,' says Ms Maguire.
Another consideration was that the Royal Mail's structure was not set in
concrete.
'The coding structure allowed for forward compatibility in terms of the
current company structure and future development,' she says.
The plan was to run under OS/2 and Lan Manager, over a Wide Area Network
(Wan) linking sites at Swindon and London to the centre at Chesterfield.
Scala supplied the software and some consultancy in a Pounds 65,000
contract.
In July the users came online in a 30-user PC network, and the response has
been positive, according to Ms Maguire. 'There are better response times to
our clients, the end users: having one point of contact for queries is real
benefit to them,' she reports.
'In turn they can be more responsive to outside clients who ring in with
queries, because the information is so much more accessible and timely.
'Timeliness will improve even more as the regular monthly reports become
available on the Wan.'
Supplier profile Product: Scala is a multi-lingual multi-currency and
multi-dimensional integrated business management and accounting system.
Launched in the UK in 1989, its current release is 3.1.4, with an update
Release 4.1 scheduled for September this year.
Suppliers: Scala International is a private limited company, part of the
Swedish-owned Scala Group, founded in 1978, with a UK office founded in
1989.
Turnover: Pounds 1.5m in 1993, with Pounds 760,000 profit, Pounds 1.1m in
1992, with Pounds 566,000 profit.
Employees: 30 in the UK.
Number of users: 10,000 sites worldwide.
Price: Pounds 1,500 for DOS system comprising General, Sales, Purchase
ledgers, Sales, Purchase, and some Stock Control.
Hardware and operating systems: DOS, Unix, various client-server and
networked versions, Windows release imminent.
Sales and support/maintenance: direct and through Value Added Resellers and
large consultancies. Maintenance and help desk service at 20 per cent of
licence fee.
Other services available: consultancy, training, implementation, bespoke.
User views: flexible, good management information, flexible reporting.
Contact: Rhiannon Prothero, Scala.
Tel: 081 550 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

941201

