FT942-15282

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Austria (3): Financial scene is still bubbling -
The bloated banking sector is being consolidated


   By IAN RODGER


The Austrian financial scene continues to bubble - even though the stock and
bond markets have gone quiet in recent months after surges last year.
The most significant, not to say startling, event of recent months has been
the climax of a three-year battle over the future of GiroCredit, the former
Girozentrale, the country's third-largest bank.
Giro has been a headache for Austria's bloated banking system since the late
1980s. The central clearing organisation for the country's large savings
bank sector, it became excessively ambitious in the 1980s, spending more
time on ill-considered expansions in international capital markets than on
looking after its savings bank customers and owners.
However, as it was doing so, the two largest savings banks, Zentralsparkasse
and Erste Oesterreichische, were busily building up their shareholdings in
the bank. By the late 1980s, they together counted for a small majority,
thus upsetting a delicate Conservative-Socialist balance that had long
prevailed in the Giro supervisory board.
The significance of this change was that both Zentralsparkasse and Erste
objected to Giro remaining a competitor on what they considered their turf -
capital markets and retail banking - and they began to use their power on
the board to curb the bank's executives.
In late 1991, Zentralsparkasse, which is controlled by the socialist
municipal government of Vienna, took over the ailing Landerbank, and turned
itself into a universal bank, Bank Austria.
This seemed to clear the way for Conservative Erste to merge with Giro and
resolve the impasse, and negotiations were held. However, they soon broke
off, allegedly because of bad blood between executives of the two banks, but
more likely because the proud and successful Erste, with a balance sheet
only three-fifths the size of Giro's, was unwilling to play second fiddle in
the merged concern.
A year later, Giro executives, chafing under the continuing stand-off in
their supervisory board, proposed another attempt. Erste was persuaded to
put together a consortium of big provincial savings banks that would buy out
Bank Austria's 30 per cent stake.
The negotiations proceeded at a stately pace reflecting the general lack of
enthusiasm for the project until two months ago when Bank Austria became fed
up with waiting for a solution and launched a formal bid of its own for
control of Giro.
It rapidly became apparent that Bank Austria would win. The smaller savings
banks could hardly be blamed for taking Bank Austria's cash rather than
having to put their own money into a new Giro holding company in which their
influence over Giro would be diminished.
Bank Austria's plans for Giro are not yet clear, but it is likely to strip
the bank down to its central clearing function. Among Bank Austria
strategists, this structure is already known facetiously as Giro-Lite. Other
departments - leasing, factoring, capital markets - will be merged with its
own.
Giro's retail branches, ironically acquired with the takeover of
Oesterreichisches Credit-Institut from Bank Austria two years ago, will
probably be sold off to friendly savings banks.
Whatever happens, the operation will certainly result in a significant
consolidation of Austria's bloated banking sector. As such, it is welcomed
by other bankers looking for less cut-throat competition than they have had
to live with for many years.
With the resolution of the Giro problem, the focus now turns again to
Creditanstalt-Bankverein (CA), the country's second-largest bank. The
Austrian government has undertaken to sell its 70.5 per cent voting stake in
CA, but last year turned down two concrete proposals that were put to it.
CA executives favour a wide distribution of the shares in international
markets but Mr Ferdinand Lacina, the finance minister, would rather place a
large minority stake with a strong international bank. Mr Lacina says he
wants to complete the sale this year.
That could turn out to be difficult if the current pipeline of new issues in
the Austrian capital market remains full. Also, banking securities are no
longer the favourites they were a few months ago.
The market is now absorbing one of the biggest initial public offerings ever
seen, a Sch3bn issue from Mayr-Melnhof, a large, family-owned recycled paper
and board group. This issue is, among other things, proof that the intensive
effort of the past two years to breathe new life into the capital markets is
paying off.
Among the more important reforms that came into effect at the beginning of
this year was the abolition of the wealth tax. Previously, it was a
disadvantage for a wealthy family to have a quoted value on its assets.
Analysts say other family-controlled companies are soon likely to follow
Mayr-Melnhof's lead.
Voest-Alpine Technology, the plant engineering arm of the former state-owned
Austrian Industries, is the next big issue in the pipeline, with the
privatisation of a majority of the shares scheduled for mid-May. VA-Tech's
net income jumped by a third last year to Sch925m on sales of Sch22.5bn.
The state is also planning to sell later in the year its remaining 26 per
cent stake in VA Eisenbahnsysteme, a railway technology company which was
partially privatised in late 1992.
Other candidates still on the near term privatisation list include
Vorarlberger Illwerke, a regional power utility that is to be sold to the
Vorarlberg provincial government.
Further capital market reforms are also in the works. Following the
amendment of the criminal law last year to make insider trading a criminal
offence, the focus is now on prohibiting the use of anonymous bank accounts
for securities transactions and creating a surveillance authority similar to
the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
These moves are likely to occur following the national elections expected in
October. In the meantime, Austrian capital markets leaders are planning
seminars in London and New York in May to explain the progress they have
made.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940415

