FT941-5553

FT  05 MAR 94 / Fall in US jobless hailed as sign of strong growth trend


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


A fall in US unemployment was greeted by administration officials yesterday
as further evidence that the economy was set on a strong growth path.
Wall Street edged higher in response to the better-than-expected figures
which showed unemployment at 6.5 per cent last month compared with 6.7 per
cent in January, in spite of fears that freezing weather would halt hiring
in many sectors.
'Given the very severe weather conditions in January and February over much
of the country, this shows a continuous good, steady expansion of job
growth,' said Mr Robert Reich, labour secretary.
The Dow Jones industrial average finished 7.88 points up at 3,832.3. The
bond market fell at first on the basis of the jobs data. The benchmark
30-year Treasury bond ended up  1/16 at 92 5/8 to yield 6.829 per cent.
UK equities moved up behind gains in government securities of around a full
point at the long end of the scale. The FT-SE 100 Index closed 31.5 up at
3,278 on moderate volume. Leading continental bourses extended their
recovery with an average gain of about 1 per cent.
Increasing confidence that European bond markets can decouple themselves
from US Treasury securities underpinned hopes that UK base rates could soon
be cut further.
UK government bonds ended the day about  3/4 of a point higher. Gilts
shrugged off overnight weakness in the US Treasury bond market, dropped on
the US employment news at lunchtime, but rallied. German government bonds
rose by more than half a point.
The US Commerce Department said yesterday that its index of leading
indicators, designed to predict economic trends roughly six months ahead,
rose by 0.3 per cent in January, helped mainly by improved consumer
expectations. The leading index has risen steadily for six months, but some
of its components, such as share prices and consumer expectations fell in
February.
Strong US growth in the fourth quarter of last year has aroused inflation
fears. Revised figures this week showed annualised growth of 7.5 per cent.
But Ms Laura Tyson, the chief White House economist, said yesterday: 'Not
only is current inflation extremely modest, but the fundamentals, the things
that explain future inflation - wage patterns, productivity growth, import
prices, energy prices, for example - all remain well-behaved.'
On jobs, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said non-farm payroll employment had
recovered from January's weather-related weakness with 217,000 new jobs, far
stronger than most forecasters had expected. The biggest gains came in
services and retailing.
Taking stock, Page 10
London stocks, Page 17
World stocks, Page 23
Lex, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940305

