FT943-12810

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Heavy securities side losses hit
Salomon


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


Salomon yesterday reported a second-quarter loss of Dollars 204m, or Dollars
2.08 a share, following heavy losses at its Salomon Brothers securities
broking unit. In the year-ago quarter, Salomon earned a profit of Dollars
433m, or Dollars 3.32 a share.
For the first six months, the group ran up a net loss of Dollars 138m, or
Dollars 1.54 a share, compared with a net profit of Dollars 331m, Dollars
2.52, in the first half of 1993.
Although the group warned Wall Street about its poor second quarter results
two weeks ago, the scale of the losses at Salomon Brothers - Dollars 410m
before taxes - surprised analysts, who had been expecting a figure nearer
Dollars 300m. In the second quarter of 1993, the firm earned a pre-tax
profit of Dollars 783m.
The near Dollars 1.2bn difference between the results of this latest quarter
and the same quarter a year ago illustrates the extreme volatility of profit
flows on Wall Street. The big firms such as Salomon Brothers, which trade
actively for themselves and with large institutional customers, are
particularly vulnerable to large swings in their earnings.
The poor results are also the starkest indication yet of how the slump in
international financial markets this year, prompted by rising US interest
rates, has taken a toll in the securities industry.
Earlier this week, Merrill Lynch and Lehman Brothers, two other big Wall
Street houses, announced sharply lower profits for the second quarter, and
other big firms are expected to follow suit when they report their results
later this month.
Salomon said that the bulk of the losses at its brokerage unit - Dollars
291m of the Dollars 410m total - were attributable to client-driven
business, where the value of its securities inventories plunged and trading
and underwriting activity dropped sharply.
The inventory losses are believed to have been particularly heavy in the
mortgage-backed securities area, where a precipitous drop in prices this
year has led to liquidity problems and big losses at several Wall Street
firms.
Salomon Brothers has also struggled with its proprietary trading business,
where losses totalled Dollars 119m.
The one bright note in Salomon's results was the performance of its Phibro
oil trading unit, which took advantage of volatility in oil prices to record
a pre-tax profit of Dollars 82m, up sharply from the Dollars 3m profit of a
year ago. The Phibro USA oil refining business, however, made a loss of
Dollars 10m, up from Dollars 2m in 1993.
Dean Witter Discover, the securities broking and credit card group, reported
second quarter net income of Dollars 206.9m, up 32 per cent from a year ago
due primarily to a big increase in earnings at its credit services division,
which includes the highly successful Discover card business.
The group's securities unit bucked the industry-wide trend of declining
earnings, posting profits growth of 11 per cent in the quarter as rising
asset management fees offset lower commission and investment banking
revenues.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940722

