FT941-12913

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (25): When the experts falter - Ian Hamilton
Fazey, who acted as moderator in a series of regional forums for UK
businessmen and bankers, says they revealed widespread uncertainty about the
nitty-gritty of export financing / The Natwest Bank/FT Exporter Forums


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


The questioner was annoyed. He had an agent in Nigeria who would only accept
payment in cash and in dollars. The exporter had opened a dollar account at
his clearing bank branch in Manchester but had been told if he wanted dollar
bills, he would have to buy them separately and pay in sterling from his
normal account.
What was the point of having a foreign currency account if he could not
withdraw foreign currency from it?
The answer - that foreign currencies are not legal tender in the UK, that
any money in them is not 'real', and the banks do not keep a supply of
dollars, marks, francs, lire or whatever to service them - did not go down
well with the questioner.
Nor did it impress many of the other exporters present at the forum
organised by NatWest Bank, the FT Exporter and the Institute of Export.
Geoff Able, a senior NatWest manager who had gamely stood up in the audience
to try and explain, got a rough ride.
Foreign currency accounts, which can sometimes reduce exposure to exchange
rate fluctuations if a currency is bought when cheap against sterling, are
for 'book' transactions only, he explained. Bank managers should make this
clear when customers concerned opened them.
But, as many members of the audience made clear, some bank managers - and
this applies to all the UK clearers - clearly do not.
They are generalists, not specialists, and some of them are more attuned
than others as to whether they should refer exporting customers to experts
employed in other parts of any bank's array of business banking services.
The issue illustrated a general point that emerged from the seven forums
held in October and November in Leeds, Manchester, Newcastle, Bristol,
Birmingham, London and Belfast. They were attended in total by more than 500
people actively involved in exporting.
At the end of the seven forums, the inescapable conclusion was that there is
a worrying degree of ignorance throughout industry and commerce, mainly
about the mechanics of exporting and many of the banking, legal, taxation
and other financial issues associated with it.
My own role in the forums was to be a neutral chairman and questionmaster,
ensuring audiences were not intimidated by the experts on the platform. Each
forum covered six areas: VAT and the single market; customs planning;
currency risk management; export trade finance; agency and distribution law;
and international marketing.
Some experts, like Barry Price, from Her Majesty's Customs and Excise, Andy
Nemes, of NatWest's international trade and banking services, Mike Thorpe,
an international marketing specialist, and Ian Campbell, director-general of
the Institute of Export, spoke at each forum. Others from KPMG Peat Marwick,
NatWest Treasury, and Laytons, specialists on export law, shared the task
between them.
Three 90-minute sessions were split between two 20-minute addresses by a
relevant expert and 50 minutes of questions. The format ensured audiences
were reasonably able to get what they wanted out of each day, with much of
the real learning coming from questions, answers and ensuing discussions.
Questions - and sometimes fierce arguments - ensued about such topics as:
registration for VAT in other EU countries;
appealing against customs decisions in the UK and abroad, particularly in
Japan;
whether the banks are greedy or not;
why companies dare not tell their bank managers how much export debt is
hidden in their overdrafts;
foreign currency accounts;
the role of correspondent banks;
problems over letters of credit (90 per cent of which are wrong on first
presentation);
the variable speed of monetary transmission through the world banking
system;
the shortage of credit insurance for exports to placers such as Mexico,
Tunisia and China;
how to trade in non-convertible currencies;
the cost and implications of changes to UK agency law;
the usefulness or otherwise of government departments and agencies;
how to do basic market research abroad - and many other topics more specific
to individual companies.
NatWest's senior managers, who attended each seminar in force, were uneasy
at what emerged, since it not only revealed widespread ignorance among some
of its customers, but also among branch managers.
By the time the London and Belfast forums were taking place, Andy Nemes was
already assuring audiences that training programmes for bank managers and
other staff would take lessons learned into account to try and improve
things in the future.
To me, as the person responsible for getting the questions out of the
audiences and answered properly, without evasion, by the experts, it seemed
clear that much export policy and supporting services - including the
media's own coverage - is sometimes too erudite.
While this may be fine for big companies which have experts of their own,
many medium-sized and smaller companies - the bulk of business and, indeed,
exporters - need a much more 'nuts and bolts' approach, with lots of 'how
to' information and simple explanations of the implications of trade and
foreign policy, changes in the law, and European union, for their finances.
International trade appears to be a minefield for most managers. The advice
they can get from their banks and the government is patchy in quality, and
sometimes wrong.
Although the experts at each forum knew their stuff and generally proved
well able to help, other members of the audience often gave better answers
and more practical advice.
For example, a good way of doing business in a non-convertible east European
currency may well be to open an account with one of the main Austrian banks
in Vienna. These banks have long experience of successful trade with the
former Soviet bloc countries around them and how to help their customers
finance it.
This course might well not be recommended by a British clearing bank because
it would lose business in doing so. Even trying to arrange things through a
UK bank with its Viennese correspondent bank might not work. At one forum an
exporter said that his most effective approach had been to open the relevant
account with the Viennese bank's branch in London, which then treated it as
though it were based in Austria.
Other exporters had useful advice on the foreign currency issue: open the
account with your bank's branch in the country where the currency is legal
tender; that is, New York for dollars, Frankfurt for marks, and so on. If
your bank has not got a branch, use the relevant correspondent bank in the
country concerned.
Generally, the need is for export education and training. Ian Campbell sees
the Institute of Export playing an increasingly important role in this,
particularly as regards industry and commerce recognising the institute's
own exams and training programmes more widely.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940127

