FT941-17077

FT  06 JAN 94 / Book Review: Vision of heaven in their own kind of hell


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


THE NEW MIDDLE EAST By Shimon Peres with Arye Naor Element. 224 pages.
Pounds 16.99
Mr Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, has had a busy, successful year
and is obviously in celebratory mood. On the eve of his 70th birthday in
Norway he completed the negotiations with the Palestine Liberation
Organisation which, on September 13, brought him to the White House lawn for
the historic signing of the declaration of principles.
Now, even before the two sides have agreed on the first stage implementation
of that outline agreement, Mr Peres has sketched out an extraordinary vision
of what peace could mean to the region. 'The world has more money than
ideas. The new Middle East is an idea whose time has come,' he declares.
Both propositions deserve to be treated with the deepest scepticism. But so,
only a few months ago, would the suggestion that Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO
chairman, was about to shake the hand of Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime
minister of Israel. Mr Peres's part in making that breakthrough possible
gives him more justification than most for adopting the role of visionary,
even though rather more residents of the Middle East would be tempted to
characterise his musings as verging on fantasy.
With negotiations still so delicately poised, it was probably unrealistic to
expect Mr Peres to provide much detail on the process which led to the
Israel-PLO agreement. His account is impressionistic, imprecise on timing,
but peppered with useful interpretations of Israeli and Palestinian
motivation, particularly that of Mr Arafat.
He views the Palestinian leader as a man determined, above all else, to
retain control of the PLO. Any agreement reached without Mr Arafat's
personal involvement would have eroded his authority. So, according to Mr
Peres, every time the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in Washington looked
as if they were making progress, Mr Arafat would issue instructions that
blocked further movement. Meanwhile the real work was being done in Norway,
with the great advantage for Israel of not needing to acknowledge Mr
Arafat's ultimate auth-ority until after a deal was struck.
But that, too, may have been one of the flaws in the agreement. Mr Arafat's
autocratic behaviour, then and now, has cost him valuable support within the
PLO, while also delaying the creation of procedures and administrative
structures which are urgently needed if the Palestinians are to assume
greater control over their own affairs in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. At
the same time it is increasingly obvious that Mr Arafat's interpretation of
the dec-laration of principles is seriously at odds with that of Mr Peres.
This makes it all the more difficult to be carried along by Mr Peres's
vision of a Middle East developing on similar lines to Nafta, Asean or the
European Union. The conceptual leap is just too vast to be contemplated by
anyone with much experience of the Arab world. An Israel-Palestinian deal,
still five years from consummation even if all progresses smoothly, is just
one element in a complex mosaic of issues and relationships over which
Israel has little or no influence.
Mr Peres says that Israel cannot dictate the conditions for peace, but he
should also recognise that for many Arabs the present moves towards a
settlement are the final confirmation of their failure.
While it may be his finest moment, it is their acknowledgement that the
struggle of the past four decades has proved largely fruitless. Israel's
continued determination to prevent the creation of an independent
Palestinian state, and to retain full control over Jerusalem, is a powerful
reaffirmation of its regional dominance.
Against such a background, Mr Peres suggests that the Arab oil-producing
countries should donate 1 per cent of their revenues towards regional
development that would stretch from Eritrea and Yemen, through the Gulf to
Egypt, Lebanon, Syria and, of course, Israel. New trans-national motorways
would be built, ports shared, water piped, canals constructed, oil
distributed, the Hijaz rail-way reopened, deserts turned from brown to green
and, even more fancifully, dictatorships transformed into democracies.
To support his argument, Mr Peres cites what has happened in Egypt since it
made peace with Israel. Cairo and Alexandria, he claims, have been
transformed beyond recognition in the past decade, and President Hosni
Mubarak is likely to go down in history as one of the great builders of
Egypt. Even those with the deepest attachment to Egypt and its leader might
have difficulty in recognising Mr Peres's description, which typifies an
endemic problem for Israelis whose received perceptions of their Middle
Eastern neighbours inevitably far outweigh their personal experience.
Mr Peres might do well to listen to his deputy, Mr Yossi Beilin, who told
Palestinians recently that, if they genuinely feared Israel wanted to
dominate them economically, he would prefer to drop all further talk of
closer links between the economies.
There might, just, be a brighter economic and political future ahead for
countries in the Middle East, but it must be remembered that they include
Iran, Iraq, Algeria, Sudan and Libya, and a raft of others with problems
almost as grave.
If Israel is able finally to conclude peace treaties acceptable to its
neighbours, it would represent a significant contribution to Middle East
stability. But beyond that, the countries in the region will go to heaven,
or to hell, in their own way. Mr Peres has already left a personal mark on
the history of the region and should be wary of damaging that achievement by
now appearing to reach too far.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940106

