FT941-3997

FT  14 MAR 94 / Support for S American free trade area


   By ANGUS FOSTER


   BRASLIA


Brazil's proposal to create a South American free trade area has won the
backing of the country's three partners in Mercosur, the regional common
market planned to come into effect next year.
Brazil and its partners Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay agreed last week to
begin negotiating the proposal with other countries in the second half of
this year, after final arrangements for Mercosur are agreed.
Mr Jose Arthur Denot Medeiros, responsible for Mercosur at the Brazilian
foreign ministry, said the idea for the free trade area, first suggested
last year, is an extension of Mercosur and designed to increase trade in the
continent: 'This should be seen as a further trade liberalisation move to
make South America eventually ready for some kind of convergency with an
expanded North American Free Trade Agreement.'
The free trade area is expected to go into effect over ten years from 1995.
It will be defined to cover 'substantially all' goods, or at least 80 per
cent of trade. Unlike Mercosur, the area would aim to create a customs
union, although some countries may be invited to join Mercosur at a later
stage.
Mr Denot Medeiros said the proposal was not designed as a response or
competitor to Nafta. Brazil believes the two entities could be complementary
and that some countries could be members of both. Chile, expected to be the
next invited to join Nafta, would also be an important member of the South
American area, he said.
Brazil's idea has received so far only a lukewarm response from other South
American countries. Some were awaiting a formal decision on whether to
proceed from the four Mercosur countries.
There have also been occasionally confusing signals from Argentina on its
commitment to Mercosur, after disagreement with Brazil over the rate of
common external tariffs to be applied. Tariffs on about 85 per cent of goods
have already been agreed and the two countries have until June to agree
tariffs on the remainder.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940314

