FT941-16936

FT  07 JAN 94 / Top Tories on defensive in wake of Yeo affair


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Leading Conservatives rushed to defend the government against charges of
hypocrisy yesterday as party members in Suffolk began moves to force Mr Tim
Yeo, the former environment minister, to quit the Commons.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, said the government's campaign for a
return to traditional family values would continue, in spite of Mr Yeo's
resignation over an extra-marital affair that produced an illegitimate
child.
Mr Major, speaking outside Number 10 Downing Street, said: 'Back to basics
isn't a crusade about personal morality and it was never presented as such.
'It has been about policy issues of concern to everyone in the country -
issues like fighting crime and making punishment more effective.'
Mr Major's view was supported by a raft of senior Conservatives, including
Mr David Hunt, employment secretary, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health
secretary, and Sir Marcus Fox, the influential chairman of the backbench
1922 committee.
There were signs, however, that ministers may have underestimated the
appetite of grassroots party members for fundamental moral values.
Mrs Aldine Horrigan, vice-chairman of the South Suffolk constituency
association's Haverhill branch and a key member of the group which forced Mr
Yeo's resignation, said Mr Yeo should also quit as an MP.
The branch said in a message to the association's executive committee that
it would not support Mr Yeo in any future re-selection.
The growing inclination of local activists to flex their political muscles
was dismissed as 'a one-off' by senior ministers. However, it was seen as a
worrying development by backbenchers. 'The prime minister has allowed the
constituency association to make the decision for him. I think that is a
very unsettling precedent,' said a senior backbencher.
It also emerged yesterday that Mr Yeo's attempts to avoid resignation were
given strong private support by senior ministers, including Mr Major, Mr
Richard Ryder, the chief whip, and Mr John Gummer, environment secretary.
Senior party officials said public support given to Mr Yeo by Sir Norman
Fowler, the party chairman, and Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary,
'reflected government policy'. The disclosure contrasts with earlier
suggestions from officials that Downing Street had remained aloof from the
affair.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940107

