FT941-5491

FT  05 MAR 94 / Sport: On the fast track to success - Rugby


   By DEREK WYATT


We call them stadiums or pitches. Players call them tracks. And the fastest
track in Europe is the Parc des Princes, Paris. The reason? The French
national stadium, being a council-owned ground, is used for soccer and
rugby. The soil and the grass is specially prepared to cope with the
vicissitude of both games and one outcome is that the grass is considerably
shorter than at any of the other Five Nations venues.
Not only does this mean that the three-quarters have a chance to show their
pace, or lack of it, but the speed of the back-row to the break-down becomes
more important. One reason why so few away teams win at the Parc (Ireland
and Scotland have never won there; Wales did it last in 1975) is because the
game is much faster, and players succumb in the final quarter of the game.
It also explains why the scorelines are bigger than elsewhere.
England's brilliant wins in 1990, 1991 (World Cup quarter-final) and 1992
owe much to the way its forwards so dominated the scrums and line-outs that
France suffocated.
Parc des Princes has only a limited life. In 1999, the French Federation de
Rugby will move to a new stadium (also council-owned) being planned at St
Denis to house the World Cup soccer finals in 1998.
This is fortuitous, for it saves them raising the money to build or replace
stands, something which is currently exercising the Irish, the Scots and the
English.
St Denis will seat 80,000, an improvement of 25,000 on current capacity.
Bernard Lapasset, the French president, accepts that the enlarged capacity
may be a problem: 'We could have sold today's game out twice, but earlier in
the season we struggled with the Australians.'
Lapasset has helped change the face of French rugby since he succeeded the
ancien regime of Albert Ferrasse in 1992. The former Agen second row and
occasional No 8 (he won a championship medal in 1969 with the Under-21 side)
played most of his rugby in Paris - for Paris University Club and then for
the Custom Officials club which he helped found.
He still works for Customs, collecting tax debts. It was from this unlikely
rugby base that he made his way through the labyrinth of committees to
become assistant secretary, an honorary position, of the FFR, in the late
1980s. From there he challenged for the presidency in what he calls 'the
rugby wars of 1990 and 1991'.
Unlike England, where the tenure of the president of the Rugby Football
Union lasts a single year, Lapasset's term lasts four seasons and he is
likely to stand again in 1995. But, said Henri Bru, the rugby correspondent
of L'Equipe: 'It doesn't matter that for you the president lasts one year.
Dudley Wood (secretary of the RFU) is your president and everyone knows it.'
Two projects have exercised Lapasset's diplomatic skills. The first was
redefining 'amateurism' in the modern game.
'There is no definition of the word amateur. It is not a legal statute. For
us the word means the spirit of the game and that is what we must keep at
all costs,' he said. 'We do not want to play for money nor create a new
professional game. There isn't room in France with soccer, basketball and
tennis claiming so much of our attention and so much of the economic cake.
The critical element of rugby is its manner, its style, its traditions.'
Lapasset has forged a partnership with the players. Two months ago, after
eight months of negotiations involving all the international squad and using
great players such as Walter Spanghero and Jo Maso as a sounding board,
France became the first union to contract its players.
'Every player was asked to sign our player's charter. It sets out the terms
under which they are allowed to operate, including any commercial spin-offs.
Any player not willing to sign cannot be considered for national selection.'
Other countries have allowed players to have agents which has led in some
cases to national coaches and players sharing the same agent. This can lead
to conflicts of interest. The French have decided to run all the commercial
activities.
The charter enables players to earn money by promoting the game, a clear
contradiction of the International Rugby Football Board's laws on
amateurism.
Each squad player is allocated 200 kit bags which contain balls, jerseys,
videos and equipment to give to children. Players have visited schools in
Pau, Toulouse, Arras, Rennes and Paris. Targeting schools is new for rugby
in France, where sport is not part of the curriculum. These visits have been
a resounding success.
Meanwhile, the RFU has its own problems. It has called an emergency meeting
of the coaching committee for next Thursday. The successor to Geoff Cooke as
England coach should be announced at the executive meeting the following
day.
Over the past decade my old club Bath, under Jack Rowell, has managed to
change personnel while remaining successful. If the RFU hesitates over
choosing Rowell, English rugby will return to the hesitant years of 1970s
and early 1980s.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

940305

