FT942-14956

FT  18 APR 94 / Taylor reforms Barclays' structure: Chief executive moves to
replace divisional system


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


Barclays is to announce this week that it is creating a management group to
handle relationships with large companies as part of reforms intended to
bridge the divide between its commercial and investment banking arms.
Mr Martin Taylor, Barclays' new chief executive, is thought to have opted to
replace the bank's divisional structure with a set of management groups
based on different sets of the bank's customers.
The reform, the first implemented by Mr Taylor since his arrival in January,
builds on changes under which the BZW investment banking division has taken
charge of large corporate accounts in the US, Asia and Europe.
Mr Graham Pimlott, head of merchant banking within BZW, is expected to be
appointed as head of the new corporate banking group. He is to report to Sir
Peter Middleton, Barclays' deputy chairman, on the board.
Mr Taylor is also expected to announce measures to strengthen Barclays'
central group function. This is intended to create a clear separation
between the Barclays group, and the new set of management groups.
Under the existing structure, created in 1991, Barclays tried to balance
responsibilities between the executive chairman and the chief executives of
its three divisions - BZW, banking and service businesses.
But Mr Taylor, who was recruited last year when Mr Andrew Buxton split the
roles of chairman and chief executive, thinks the group function has been
too weak, and the split between BZW and the banking division too strong.
Mr Taylor believes Barclays should model its structure around different
groups of customers. The new large corporate banking group will try to sell
a range of other services as well as lending money.
Barclays confirmed yesterday that Mr Buxton's basic pay is to rise by Pounds
50,000 to Pounds 350,000 this year, while Mr Alastair Robinson, who heads
the banking division, will receive basic pay of Pounds 220,000, a rise of
Pounds 30,000.
The details were disclosed in directors' contracts made available in advance
of the annual general meeting. They were disclosed for the first time
although they run for only 364 days, and so could be kept private.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940418

