FT941-5482

FT  05 MAR 94 / South Africa's right wing registers for polls


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


Conservative Zulu and Afrikaner political leaders last night registered for
South Africa's April elections just ahead of a midnight deadline, reversing
an earlier decision to boycott the poll and reducing the chances of
widespread violence during the campaign.
But both the Freedom Front and the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom party of Chief
Mangosuthu Buthelezi stressed their decision was 'provisional', and that
they would withdraw from the poll if their constitutional demands were not
met through international mediation or negotiation.
White right-wing leader Gen Constand Viljoen registered a previously unknown
party called the 'Freedom Front' just 15 minutes before the deadline. Two
hours earlier, Chief Buthelezi had registered his Inkatha Freedom Party for
the April 26-28 all-race election.
Gen Viljoen heads a white right umbrella body called the Afrikaner
Volksfront, which includes moderate Afrikaners as well as hard-right groups
such as the Conservative party and the paramilitary Afrikaner Resistance
Movement (AWB). It was not clear last night whether the Conservative party
was included in the Freedom Front, as its leader Ferdi Hartzenberg had said
earlier in the day his party would not register.
The emergence of the Freedom Front could mark a split in the white right,
with moderate CP members of parliament, eager to participate in the poll,
siding with Gen Viljoen against their hardline leader.
If Mr Hartzenberg does decide to stay out of the new Front, its chances
could be weakened. Without the Conservative party's seasoned political
machine, the Front would struggle to mount a campaign for elections now only
seven weeks away.
Gen Viljoen defended his decision to register, saying the Afrikaners'
freedom to exercise strategic options 'would be severely restricted if we
did not register provisionally'. But he noted: 'Due to the limited time
available, this decision could not be approved in advance by the Afrikaner
Volksfront.'
The right's decision to register could mean a move away from confrontation,
although it has set many conditions including international mediation.
The ANC is understood to be considering former Nigerian head of state
Olusegun Obasanjo and former British ambassador to South Africa, Sir Robin
Renwick, as possible mediators.
Businessmen wooed, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940305

