FT942-16343

FT  11 APR 94 / Biotech Trust falls far short of Pounds 100m goal


   By DAVID WIGHTON


Rothschild Asset Management has raised less than half the original target
for its International Biotechnology Trust with the placing of shares with
institutions attracting only Pounds 35m to Pounds 40m.
The poor uptake came close to scuppering the launch but Rothschild is
pressing ahead with the issue. The public offer opens this week.
Rothschild and sponsor Robert Fleming originally set a target of up to
Pounds 100m with a quarter of the issue available to private investors.
The poor response is the latest sign of 'investor fatigue' in the face of
the continuing flood of new issues and follows a number of disappointing
investment trust launches.
Morgan Grenfell managed to raise only Pounds 64m for its Latin American
Companies Trust, compared with a target of Pounds 100m, and the total for
Edinburgh Fund Managers' similar Inca trust was also below expectations.
Many biotechnology stocks have fallen sharply in recent weeks, leaving
several recently floated companies trading well below their offer prices,
and at least one biotechnology flotation has been postponed indefinitely.
But the disappointing response to the Rothschild launch appears to be the
result more of general market conditions than sentiment towards the
biotechnology sector.
In spite of the Rothschild team's good record with its existing
Biotechnology Investments fund, the amount raised for the new trust in the
institutional placing was barely above the minimum needed for its strategy
to be viable. The trust plans to take stakes of Pounds 5m-Pounds 10m in
biotechnology companies by injecting new capital and aims to make between 15
and 20 separate investments.
The low uptake threatens the managers' ability to create a reasonably
balanced portfolio, which was presented as one of its key attractions for
investors in an inherently risky sector. This could still be achieved by
raising bank borrowings, although the pathfinder prospectus states that 'the
directors do no intend that the company should borrow to finance portfolio
investments on a long-term basis'.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940411

