FT944-10937

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (11): Here comes the real competition -
Foreign banks


   By PAUL TAYLOR


The foreign bankers have arrived.
Bombay's business district is buzzing with tales of the six-figure dollar
salaries being paid by some Wall Street investment banks, luxury hotel
suites booked for six months at a time and soaring office rental costs in
the Nariman Point business district.
In India's financial capital, merchant banks from around the globe are vying
for a share of the fees and underwriting opportunities generated by the
Indian government's liberalisation programme and the opening up of the
economy.
Many Wall Street and London investment banks have already established a
presence in India, often through formal, or informal, links with their
emerging Indian counterparts.
Foreign fund managers and stockbrokers are chasing the business generated by
the growing number of registered foreign institutional investors and are
busy establishing operations in Bombay to service their new clients. Among
those which have won regulatory approval to handle foreign portfolio
investments in Indian stocks are Kleinwort Benson, Credit Lyonnais
Securities and Australian-owned Marlin Partners.
Other stockbrokers who have established a presence in India include James
Capel, the HongKong and Shanghai Banking Corporation subsidiary, Nomura
Securities from Japan and Smith New Court which is negotiating to acquire a
majority stake in an unidentified Bombay-based firm.
Jardine Fleming, which also has an Indian domestic merchant banking licence,
has rapidly expanded its operations in Bombay since they were set up in
April 1992 and now employs 100 people including 24 analysts. Mr Mark
Bullough, managing director, is bullish on the prospects. 'We believe that
international investors in emerging markets are still dramatically
underweighted and we believe the size of the market, both domestic and
international, is going to grow very rapidly in part because the private
sector is raising new money onshore and offshore, in part due to
privatisations.'
Meanwhile the foreign commercial banks are also targeting the
sub-continent's increasingly sophisticated corporate customers and the
rapidly growing middle class with its appetite for credit cards, automated
teller machines and western-style personal banking.
By encouraging foreign banks to establish or expand their Indian operations
 -and by licensing new private banks with up to 20 per cent foreign equity -
the finance ministry and the Reserve Bank of India are gambling that the
increased competition will kick-start a long overdue modernisation of
India's antiquated and inefficient state-controlled banking and financial
sectors.
The authorities believe that foreign commercial and investment banks, with
their international experience and wide usage of information technology,
will help broaden the range of services for corporate and retail bank
customers and accelerate the introduction of new technology into the Indian
public banking sector.
The former British colonial banks, Standard Chartered Bank, HSBC, and
Grindlays Bank - now ANZ Grindlays - together with Citibank of the US have
had a long-standing presence in India and were allowed to remain under
foreign control when the domestic banks were nationalised, although their
growth was severely restricted. Nevertheless they were able to provide a
broader and better range of services than most domestic banks and carved out
a niche at the top end of the market making healthy profits thanks in part
to India's highly regulated interest rate structure which guaranteed large
spreads.
More recently interest rate deregulation - introduced as part of the
financial sector reforms - has reduced those margins and forced the foreign
banks to turn to new areas such as providing custodian services to foreign
institutional investors, credit cards for domestic retail consumers and
treasury management services and sophisticated derivative products for their
corporate customers.
'Since deregulation, margins have come down but compared with international
levels they are still above the norm,' says Mr Ravish Chopra, HSBC's deputy
chief executive in India.
Meanwhile, competition is increasing. Since November 1991, the government
has approved requests from eight foreign banks, including Germany's Dresdner
Bank and Chase Manhattan of the US, to open maiden branches while permitting
branch expansion by existing foreign banks on a case-by-case basis - most
existing foreign banks have been given permission to open one or two new
branches.
Last month, National Westminster bank became the first foreign financial
institution to announce that it was taking advantage of the new private
sector bank ownership rules to acquire a 20 per cent stake in HDFC Bank, a
commercial bank being set up by the Housing Development Finance Corporation.
Most of the newcomers will target the wholesale and corporate banking areas
since they lack the branch network needed to support an assault on the
Indian retail sector. But this constraint does not apply to some of the more
well established banks which are now actively expanding their branch and
retail banking operations.
For example, Standard Chartered has recently announced plans to restructure
its existing 24 branches and add new branches in six key cities. Citibank,
which has had operations in India since 1902, is also targeting the retail
sector, although its limited branch network of six branches in four cities
means it has had to find other ways to tap the market. It was the first bank
in India to introduce car-loans and the first to introduce credit cards in
1990 when it acquired Diners Club. Since then it has added Visa and
Mastercharge.
HSBC added a new branch in Bangalore in 1992 and now has 23 branches in
seven cities. 'We would like to expand further,' says Mr Chopra who notes,
however, that the Reserve Bank of India is proceeding cautiously. 'Licenses
are being given out in ones and twos,' he says.
Many believe the process has been slowed by the 1992 Bombay securities
scandal which implicated a number of foreign banks. In the wake of the scam
the Reserve Bank has imposed fines of Rs1.47bn including Rs1.24bn against
foreign banks, prompting some foreign bankers to complain privately that
they were made scapegoats in the affair and that their fines are
disproportionately large. Mr D R Mehta, deputy governor of the RBI, rejects
this suggestion and insists that once in India the foreign banks receive
equal treatment with their domestic counterparts.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

941108

