FT942-12178

FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: A saga that goes on for life -
Alison Smith with a question and answer session on life insurance agents and
the disclosure of information to customers


   By ALISON SMITH


The saga of forcing life insurance sales agents to volunteer more
information to their customers has now been running for longer than some of
the life policies being sold when the Office of Fair Trading first urged
disclosure in 1987.
But progress is being made. In last Thursday's episode, the Securities and
Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog, published the rules for how
and when sales agents must volunteer this information, along with examples
of what material they should provide to prospective customers.
Research which SIB published at the same time, estimated that the move to
commission disclosure would benefit customers by Pounds 1bn a year when the
full effects were felt - more than the extra costs faced by the industry.
What did the SIB actually do?
It published examples of the short, stand-alone paper which sales agents
will be obliged to give their customers, along with whatever other sales
material they hand out.
On the first page, this paper must state the aims and risks of the policy,
as well as the commitment the customer has to make.
It also tells customers what happens if they give up early on a long-term
policy, and what the sales agent is getting paid for advising the customer
to buy the policy.
What difference will this make to me, the customer?
At the moment, sales agents do not have to volunteer some of the information
set out in the paper. It should mean that you are better placed to decide
whether you really want the policy or whether you think it is too expensive
for how you might benefit.
But isn't life insurance too complicated for everyone except accountants and
actuaries?
Not in terms of the sort of information that would be helpful in deciding
whether you want to buy life cover. This new paper - the 'key features'
document that sales agents will have to provide - is pretty jargon-free, and
has no small print or footnotes. It has been devised after three rounds of
market research to see what is the best way of giving people this
information, and is relatively straightforward.
Most recent research showed that even people who classed themselves as not
good with numbers - or who admitted they found buying life insurance a bit
nerve-wracking - found they could understand most of the paper's main
points. And that is before the final revision to make it clearer still.
Will I be able to trust the figures in this paper about what the policy I
might buy would yield?
No. They simply give examples of what you would get back from your policy
after, say, 10 years assuming particular rates of growth. They are not a
guarantee. What you get back would depend on how your investments had grown.
Life companies will have to use the same rate of growth for these
illustrations, so you should be able to make a reasonable comparison, but
the performance of different life companies' investments can vary.
Sales agents will doubtless be only too happy to explain how well the
investments they are recommending have performed in the past, although they
should make the point that past performance is no guide to the future.
Do I have to do anything to get this key features document?
You do not have to do anything when you are talking to the sales agent - he
or she is meant to give you this information without you asking. But, if the
system is to work in terms of putting pressure on life companies to cut
their charges, then you should be prepared to shop around and compare
prices.
Many life companies have argued that their policies have to be sold and are
not just bought, because people are so reluctant to think about making
provision for what happens when they die or when they retire. Regulators
believe that people are sophisticated enough to make informed choices about
what policies they buy. If the new regime of disclosure is to have its
intended benefit the regulators will have to be right.
When will I get this information?
During the course of a sale, you should be given the key features paper as
soon as you are seriously considering taking out a policy. If, for example,
you have come as far as discussing a particular company's product with a
sales agent, then you should have been given this paper. It should not wait
until you are just about to sign a form agreeing to buy the product.
As for when the new regime itself will come in - well, there is still a bit
of a wait. Life companies have been given until the beginning of next year
before all of this becomes compulsory, and until the middle of next year
before they are obliged to give you detailed figures which are entirely
related to your own circumstances and the policy you are thinking of buying.
In theory, companies can adopt the new requirements from the beginning of
July, but do not hold your breath expecting that most will meet that
deadline.
Why has it taken so long?
Many in the life industry have vigorously resisted disclosure proposals,
saying that they would lead to 'underprovision' - a drop in sales - lower
charges, and asserting that customers did not want the information.
They also said it would be unfair to make only independent financial
advisers provide this information, and that it would be too difficult to do
the calculations for a fair comparison with, for example, banks and building
societies selling life products.
It was only when the Treasury started banging heads together last July, and
insisting that all sales agents should disclose commission, surrender values
and other information, that the proposals seemed inevitable and much of the
serious task of making them work started.
So what are the life companies going to do about it now?
On past form, they will carry on moaning about how unnecessary it is even
after the new regime has been introduced. They are also likely to re-design
at least some of the policies they sell, to make them more attractive in the
regime of glasnost.
For the most part, this will mean finding ways of spreading the commission
more evenly over the life of the policy, so the customer's initial payments
are not so taken up just with paying for the advice. It has the added
advantage of giving the sales agent more of an interest in selling policies
that are less likely to lapse early.
Will I get a better deal?
Perhaps. Products will not become any less risky just because the way of
paying for those who sell them has changed. But you should be able to get a
clearer idea of the extent of the risk you are running - and see how much
you lose if you give up early on a long-term policy, or give up in the
penultimate year, just before a bonus is paid.
According to research commissioned by SIB, the new regime's impact will make
competition fiercer. This should mean that commissions will come down -
although they could fall a long way and still be higher than when there was
an industry-wide agreement about the maximum commission that could be paid.
It should also mean that some of the less efficient companies find it too
difficult to survive in this new environment and close, leaving the market
to the organisations that are better-run.
If it is going to have such a good effect, why haven't the life companies
adopted this approach before?
Why not ask them?

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940430

