FT944-2727

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Bonds: Euroyen deals meet strong Japanese
demand


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY


Strong Japanese investor demand for yen-denominated assets brought a further
flood of issuance to the euroyen sector yesterday as the Republic of Austria
launched two offerings of yen-denominated bonds, totalling Y120bn.
Elsewhere, two borrowers revived the asset-backed sector of the sterling
market, with deals by Bristol & West, the UK building society, and a group
of UK housing associations.
There was also a rush of new issuance by Brazilian borrowers in the dollar
sector to beat the feared imposition of higher capital requirements and
higher taxes on capital coming into the country, which would significantly
increase the cost of raising capital on international markets, dealers said.
Austria launched a Y60bn offering of six-year bonds priced to yield 2 basis
points over Japanese government bonds, and Y60bn of 10-year bonds priced to
yield 11 basis points over Japanese government bonds.
There has been a significant amount of issuance in yen over recent months,
as borrowers have taken advantage of strong demand for yen assets.
Japanese investors have shunned foreign currency assets this year to avoid
foreign exchange loss. Financial liberalisation in Japan has also had an
impact, allowing the primary placement of euroyen paper directly into Japan.
'There is also a feeling among Japanese investors that there is no upward
pressure on interest rates, so they are happy to invest at these levels,'
said one trader.
Austria's two offerings were placed almost entirely with Japanese investors,
joint lead manager Daiwa said.
The offering's two-tranche form was a result of distinct patterns of demand
from different investor sectors, a Daiwa syndicate official said.
The six-year issue was placed with Japanese non-life insurance companies and
regional co-operatives, while the longer-dated offering was sold to
life-insurance companies and public sector funds.
'Some of the big life insurers have significant cash positions and they are
looking very aggressively to invest these funds,' he said. The proceeds from
the offering were not swapped, sources said.
Clips No 1, a special-purpose vehicle set up by Bristol & West, launched a
Pounds 150m offering of bonds of varying maturities backed by a portfolio of
commercial loans originated by the UK building society.
The main tranche was a Dollars 123.75m issue of 15-year bonds offering a
discounted margin of 31 basis points over Libor.
Lead manager Goldman Sachs said the offering was sold to investors in the UK
and France, predominantly banks but also insurance companies and money
funds.
UK Rents No 1, a special-purpose vehicle set up by a group of medium-sized
housing associations, launched Pounds 36.598m of bonds due April 2025,
backed by future rental income.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941216

