FT944-14429

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: From cosy reassurance to urban terror - Children's
books


   By ANTHONY BROWNE


Warm reassurance permeates many young children's picture books this autumn.
The best of these sanguine stories is So Much, written by Trish Cooke and
illustrated by Helen Oxenbury (Walker Books Pounds 8.99). The unpretentious,
poetic text tells the story of a mother and baby who await the start of
father's birthday party. Various lively members of the family arrive and
they all want to squeeze the baby, kiss him and fight with him because they
love him 'so much'.
Cooke's text is an inspiration to Oxenbury, who uses three different styles
throughout the book. Instead of her usual pencil and wash, there are soft
black and white drawings of the baby, almost monochrome studies of
stationary groups, and large, expressive gouache paintings of vigorous
colour and movement. It is always a delight to see an established artist
taking risks, breaking new ground, and succeeding brilliantly.
Another book dealing with a similar theme is Guess How Much I Love You,
written by Sam McBratney and illustrated by Anita Jeram (Walker Books Pounds
7.99). Little Nut Brown Hare and Big Nut Brown Hare compete to see who loves
each other most. ''I love you as high as I can hop,' laughed Little Nut
Brown Hare, bouncing up and down. 'But I love you as high as I can hop,'
smiled Big Nut Brown Hare - and he hopped so high that his ears touched the
branches above.' I find the story too knowingly cute. But it is charmingly
illustrated in a nostalgic English style and printed on beautiful cream
paper. It should do well in the US.
Colin McNaughton seems to have updated Pat Hutchins' Rosie's Walk in his
hilarious new book Suddenly (Andersen Press Pounds 8.99). Here a pig
cheerfully walks home totally unaware that a Big Bad Wolf is stalking him.
Just when it seems that the pig must be caught he changes direction and the
wolf is thwarted, again and again. There is a funny reassuring ending when
the pig finally gets home to see a wolf-like shape at the sink who turns out
to be his mother. The story flows through the pictures like a silent Buster
Keaton film, but as always with Colin McNaughton the words are never
superfluous - he cleverly avoids mentioning the wolf at all. Children will
love this book.
The Bear by Raymond Briggs (Julia McRae Pounds 9.99), is a huge book with
familiar echoes. The story opens as a girl is tucked into bed with her teddy
bear. As she drifts into sleep we see through the window a small grey shape
looming towards her. In Briggs's characteristic soft crayon picture-strip
the shape gets nearer and nearer until we see a large paw opening her
window. On turning the page we are confronted, like the girl, with the
massive head of a polar bear. The beast comes in and, as she persuades it to
get into her bed, the teddy bear is kicked out.
The book hovers between reality and imagination; the bear is very real and
wonderfully drawn, and the girl has to clear up its mess, but the silvery,
ghostly shimmer of the creature gives a dream-like feeling to the story. We
have seen many books where a large furry animal comes into a child's
bedroom. And there are similarities to The Snowman and The Man, but the
superb drawings of the bear and the cinematic use of light and scale
transform well-worn material into a delightful and satisfying picture book.
There is no cosy reassurance in Way Home written by Libby Hathorn and
illustrated by Gregory Rogers (Andersen Press Pounds 8.99). From the
crumpled paper endpapers and the stark ripped black and white title-page we
know we are in very different territory. This is the dangerous inner city at
night and we travel with Shane as he takes home a stray kitten, running
terrified from a gang, leaping through screaming traffic, escaping a fierce
dog and finally arriving 'home' - a street shelter made from rubble. The
stunning artwork and brilliant design of this dark book make it an exciting
read for older children. I have the feeling, though, that not many will get
the chance to see it.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941022

