FT943-12724

FT  23 JUL 94 / Ministerial committees of the cabinet


Committee on economic and domestic policy
Terms of reference: strategic issues relating to economic and domestic
policies. Prime minister (chairman); chancellor of the Exchequer; home
secretary; trade and industry secretary; Lord Privy Seal; Lord President of
the Council; environment secretary; Welsh secretary; Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster; Scottish secretary; Northern Ireland secretary; employment
secretary; chief secretary, Treasury.
Other ministers will be invited to attend for items in which they have a
departmental interest.
Committee on defence and overseas policy
Terms of reference: defence and overseas policy. Prime minister (chairman);
foreign secretary; chancellor of the Exchequer; trade and industry
secretary; defence secretary; attorney general.
The chief of defence staff and the chief of staff will attend when
necessary.
Ministerial committee on the Gulf
Terms of reference: to review developments in the Gulf region and to
co-ordinate any necessary action.
Prime minister (chairman); foreign secretary; defence secretary; attorney
general.
The chief of defence staff and the chief of staff will attend when
necessary.
Committee on nuclear defence
Terms of reference: government policy on nuclear defence. Prime minister
(chairman); foreign secretary; chancellor of the Exchequer; defence
secretary.
Committee on European security
Terms of reference: defence and security in Europe.
Prime minister (chairman); foreign secretary; chancellor of the Exchequer;
defence secretary.
Committee on Hong Kong and other dependent territories
Terms of reference: implementation of agreement with China on future of Hong
Kong and the implications of that agreement for the government of Hong Kong
and te wellbeing of its people; policy toward other dependent territories.
Prime minister (chairman); foreign secretary; chancellor of the Exchequer;
home secretary; trade and industry secretary; defence secretary; Lord
President of the Council; Foreign Office minister of state.
Others including the attorney general, governor of Hong Kong and the British
ambassador in Peking may be invited as appropriate.
Committee on Northern Ireland
Terms of reference: policy on Northern Ireland issues and relations with
Ireland on these matters.
Prime minister (chairman); foreign secretary; home secretary; defence
secretary; Northern Ireland secretary; chief secretary, Treasury; attorney
general.
Other Ministers will be invited as the nature of the business requires.
Committee on science and technology
Terms of reference: science and technology policy. Prime minister
(chairman); foreign secretary; trade and industry secretary; transport
secretary; defence secretary; minister of agriculture, fisheries and food;
environment secretary; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; Scottish
secretary; education secretary; health secretary; chief secretary, Treasury.
The chief scientific adviser is in attendance.
Committee on the intelligence services
Terms of reference: policy on the security and intelligence services. Prime
minister (chairman); foreign secretary; chancellor of the Exchequer; home
secretary; defence secretary; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
The Lord President of the Council and the attorney general may attend as
appropriate
Committee on industrial, commercial and consumer affairs
Terms of reference: industrial, commercial, and consumer issues including
competition and deregulation. Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
(chairman); Lord Privy Seal; chancellor of the Exchequer; home secretary;
trade and industry secretary; transport secretary; Lord President of the
Council; minister of agriculture, fisheries and food; environment secretary;
Welsh secretary; Scottish secretary; Northern Ireland secretary; employment
secretary; chief secretary, Treasury.
Committee on the environment
Terms of reference: environmental policy. Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster (chairman); Lord Privy Seal; foreign secretary; trade and industry
secretary; chancellor of the Exchequer; transport secretary; minister of
agriculture, fisheries and food; environment secretary; Welsh secretary;
Scottish secretary; national heritage secretary; Northern Ireland secretary;
chief secretary, Treasury.
Committee on home and social affairs
Terms of reference: home and social policy issues. Lord President of the
Council (chairman); Lord Privy Seal; Lord Chancellor; home secretary; trade
secretary; transport secretary; environment secretary; Welsh secretary;
social security secretary; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; Scottish
secretary; national heritage secretary; Northern Ireland secretary;
education secretary; health secretary; employment secretary; chief
secretary, Treasury; parliamentary secretary, Treasury.
The minister of agriculture, fisheries and food, the attorney-general, the
Lord Advocate and the captain of the gentlemen-at-arms receive papers and
are invited to attend as necessary.
Committee on Local Government
Terms of reference: issues affecting local government including the annual
allocation of resources. Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (chairman);
Lord Privy Seal; chancellor of the Exchequer; home secretary; transport
secretary; Lord President of the Council; environment secretary; Welsh
secretary; social security secretary; Scottish secretary; national heritage
secretary; education secretary; health secretary; chief secretary Treasury;
minister for local government.
Ministerial Committee on Regeneration (EDR)
Terms of reference: regeneration policies and their co-ordination.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (chairman); Lord Privy Seal; home
secretary; trade and industry secretary; transport secretary; environment
secretary; employment secretary; education secretary; chief secretary,
Treasury; environment minister (housing and inner cities).
The secretaries of state for Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales should be
invited to attend as appropriate.
Ministerial Committee on Public Expenditure (EDX)
Terms of reference: the allocation of the public expenditure control totals,
make recommendations to the cabinet. Chancellor of the Exchequer (chairman);
home secretary; trade and industry secretary; Lord Privy Seal; Lord
President of the Council; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; chief
secretary, Treasury.
Committee on Queen's Speeches and future legislation
Terms of reference: to draft Queen's Speeches to parliament and the
government's legislative programme for each session of parliament. Lord
President of the Council (chairman); Lord Chancellor; Lord Privy Seal;
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; attorney general; Lord Advocate;
parliamentary secretary, Treasury; financial secretary, Treasury; captain of
the gentlemen-at-arms.
The foreign secretary should be invited to attend or be represented for
discussion of Queen's speeches.
Committee on legislation
Terms of reference: to examine draft bills; to consider the parliamentary
handling of government bills, European Community documents and private
members' business and other related matters, and to review the government's
policy in relation to issues of parliamentary procedures. Lord President of
the Council (chairman); Lord Chancellor; Lord Privy Seal; Welsh secretary;
Scottish secretary; attorney general; Lord Advocate; parliamentary
secretary, Treasury; minister of state, Foreign Office; minister of state,
Home Office; financial secretary, Treasury; captain of the
gentlement-at-arms.
Sub-committee on health strategy
Terms of reference: the development, implementation and monitoring of the
government's health strategy; to co-ordinate policies on issues affecting
health and report to committee on home and social affairs. Lord President of
the Council (chairman); transport secretary; environment secretary; social
security secretary; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; Scottish
secretary; Northern Ireland secretary; education secretary; health
secretary; minister of agriculture, fisheries and food; Welsh secretary;
paymaster-general; ministers of state for trade and industry, employment and
health; parliamentary undersecretaries at Home Office and Department of
National Heritage.
The chief medical officer is in attendance.
Sub-committee on public sector pay
Terms of reference: to co-ordinate the handling of pay issues in the public
sector, report to committee on industrial, commercial and consumer affairs.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (chairman); Lord Privy Seal; chancellor
of the Exchequer; home secretary; trade and industry secretary; transport
secretary; defence secretary; environment secretary; Scottish secretary;
education secretary; health secretary; employment secretary; social security
secretary; chief secretary, Treasury.
Sub-committee on European questions
Terms of reference: questions relating to membership of the European
Community, reports to committee on defence and overseas policy. Foreign
secretary (chairman); chancellor of the Exchequer; home secretary; trade and
industry secretary; transport secretary; Lord President of the Council;
minister of agriculture, fisheries and food; environment secretary; Welsh
secretary; Scottish secretary; Northern Ireland secretary; employment
secretary; attorney general; parliamentary secretary, Treasury; minister of
state, Foreign Office.
Other ministers invited to attend as the nature of the business requires.
The UK permanent representative to the European Communities is also in
attendance.
Sub-committee on eastern Europe
Terms of reference: Britain's policy of assisting change in former Soviet
republics and other former Communist countries in Europe, reports to
committee on defence and overseas policy. Foreign secretary (chairman);
chancellor of the Exchequer; trade and industry secretary; defence
secretary; minister of agriculture, fisheries and food; environment
secretary; employment secretary; minister of overseas development; minister
of state, Foreign Office.
Other ministers may be invited to attend as the nature of the business
requires.
Sub-committee on terrorism
Terms of reference: arrangements for countering terrorism and dealing with
terrorist incidents and their consequences, reports to committee on defence
and overseas policy. Home secretary (chairman); foreign secretary; defence
secretary; trade and industry secretary; transport secretary; Scottish
secretary; Northern Ireland secretary; attorney general.
Sub-committee on London
Terms of reference: to co-ordinate policies in the capital. Environment
secretary (chairman); minister of state, Home Office; minister of state for
trade and industry; minister for housing and inner cities; minister for
local government; minister for social security and disabled people; minister
of state for education; minister of state for health; minister of state for
employment; economic secretary, Treasury; minister for transport in London;
parliamentary under-secretary for national heritage; parliamentary
secretary, Office of Public Service and Science.
Sub-committee on drug misuse
Terms of reference: to co-ordinate national and international policies on
drugs misuse, reports to committee on home and social affairs. Lord
President of the Council (chairman); solicitor-general; paymaster-general;
minister of state, Home Office; minister of state for the armed forces;
minister of state, Scottish Office; minister for health; parliamentary
undersecretaries from Foreign Office, Welsh Office and for schools
Others, including the minister for overseas development and parliamentary
under-secretaries from the departments of environment and employment may be
invited to attend as appropriate and should receive papers.
Sub-committee on women's issues
Terms of reference: policy and strategy on issues of special concern to
women, reports to committee on home and social affairs. Employment secretary
(chairman); minister of agriculture, fisheries and food; paymaster-general;
minister of state, department for Education; minister of state, Scottish
Office; minister of state, Welsh Office; parliamentary under-secretary for
consumer affairs and small firms; parliamentary under-secretaries from
environment, social security, health and employment departments and Northern
Ireland Office; parliamentary secretary, Office of Public Service and
Science.
The minister of state, minister for the armed forces, parliamentary
secretary, Lord Chancellor's Department and the parliamentary
under-secretary at the Home office will also receive papers and be invited
to attend as necessary.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940723

