FT942-15599

FT  14 APR 94 / UK Company News: New look Nurdin & Peacock 7% ahead at
Pounds 32m


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


Nurdin & Peacock, the cash and carry operator, yesterday announced a 6.5 per
cent increase to Pounds 32.1m in 1993 pre-tax profits.
It also boasted that its first discount warehouse shopping club had drawn
almost 30,000 members in less than a month of trading.
Compared to the traditional cash and carry, 'Cargo Club is a much sexier
proposition,' said Mr David Poole, Nurdin & Peacock's chief executive.
The programme had proved to be extremely successful so far, with membership
increasing at the rate of 1,000 a month.
N&P planned to open a further two warehouse clubs before the end of the
year.
The group also announced it was buying 10 cash and carry outlets in the
north of England. N&P is paying Pounds 21.9m for M6, previously owned by
Ireland's Fitzwilton group, where Mr Tony O'Reilly is chairman.
Mr Nigel Hall, N&P's finance director, said the acquisition was likely to
result in some restructuring costs, which would depress profits. However, it
was too early to quantify the levels of spending needed.
The benefits of the acquisition were expected to come through next year,
when increased buying power and cost reduction began to feed through. N&P
would also benefit from a full year's inclusion of sales against eight
months this year.
For the year to December 31 sales fell by 3 per cent to Pounds 1.4bn, while
like-for-like sales were down 6.6 per cent. Operating profits rose by 7 per
cent to Pounds 30m due to marketing campaigns and strict cost cutting.
The rise was held back by a series of charges which came to Pounds 5.3m.
The final dividend is increased from 4.16p to 4.44p, for a total 6 per cent
higher at 6.5p. Earnings rose 4 per cent to 17.6p per share.
COMMENT
Fair dues to Nurdin & Peacock's management for squeezing out this advance
after the exceptional costs and falling sales. Praise also for drawing in
new customers as the independent sector comes under pressure. Yet, looking
forward, there seems to be a big question mark over the latest acquisition.
Without knowing the true scale of the write-offs and provisions, it is
almost impossible to judge whether N&P is actually getting a good deal.
Forecasts of Pounds 32.9m pre-tax before exceptionals leave little doubt
that an advance will be a struggle this year. The picture might become a
little clearer at the interim stage.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940414

