FT944-10885

FT  09 NOV 94 / Basque steel plant's retreat raises fears: A new threat not
linked to terrorism


   By TOM BURNS


Cheaper energy in France has prompted a leading steel company in Spain's
Basque country to cross the frontier and invest Pta11.2bn (Pounds 55m) in a
new plant in Bayonne.
The decision by the family-owned Marcial Ucn group, which makes rods and
long bars for the construction industry, adds a new dimension to Spanish
fears about falling competitiveness. These concerns were fuelled earlier
this year by the relocation plans of the loss-making Spanish subsidiaries of
Gillette, the US consumer products multinational, and of Suzuki, the
Japanese vehicle maker.
The move also has political overtones for the Basque government, led by the
local nationalist party. Yesterday, it accused the Madrid authorities of
forcing companies out of the area by failing to frame a coherent industrial
policy.
The Bayonne plant, one of the largest single production investments for many
years by a Spanish private company, will produce 900,000 tonnes of crude
steel a year. This may prove troublesome to the Spanish government, which is
planning to build a mini-mill of roughly similar capacity in the Basque port
city of Bilbao, an hour's drive away.
'This is a very serious development because we are losing business instead
of attracting it,' said Professor Ignacio Marco of Deusto University, the
Bilbao business school, and former chairman of the Basque Energy Board. 'It
is a very big investment by a leading local company that has always been
closely identified with the Basque steel industry.'
But Mr Enrique Portocarrero, an executive of the Circulo de Empresarios
Vascos, a Basque employers' association, said the investment was more a
psychological than an economic blow. 'I doubt we are going to see a flight
of Basque industry to the other side of the Pyrenees,' he said.
Marcial Ucn opted for Bayonne despite strong pressure from local
authorities. The latter were willing to subsidise up to 30 per cent of the
investment if the plant remained in the Spanish Basque province of
Guipuzcoa, alongside the French border, where the company has its
headquarters and where four of its seven Spanish plants are located.
The steel manufacturer said the attraction of Bayonne lay in the fact that
electricity in France costs 20 per cent less than in Spain - mini-mills melt
scrap metal with huge charges of electricity. French scrap metal was also
cheaper and Bayonne had offered it a site near the harbour. It will begin
building the plant in 1996 in a venture with the Japanese Mitsui group,
which will provide 25 per cent of the money.
In order to soften the impact, however, Marcial Ucn said it would also
invest Pta4bn in its Guipuzcoa plants to increase productivity and maintain
the 850-strong labour force.
Spain's high electricity prices have been consistently criticised by
manufacturers based in the frontier zones of the Basque country and
Catalonia which are barred from hooking up directly to the French grid by
the government's monopoly over the import of France's nuclear-based energy.
The competitive disadvantage became a serious issue in the recent Basque
elections when the local nationalist party criticised Madrid.
Prof Marco says: 'We are being made to compete with Europe and we are
strapped by high inputs at every stage, from electricity tariffs to harbour
fees, and from high interest rates to labour costs.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941109

