FT943-13151

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (2): A navigator in the stormy Balkans -
Interview with President Sali Berisha


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON and LAURA SILBER


For President Sali Berisha, the cardiologist who led his Democratic Party to
a landslide victory in March 1992, the end of isolation coupled with price,
foreign exchange and trade liberalisation and the abolition of collective
farms, has transformed Albania's prospects.
'Isolating Albania was the greatest crime committed by Enver Hoxha, the
former dictator. At least the other communist countries had more or less
open borders with each other and trade and diplomatic relations with the
outside world. Albania had virtually nothing. Hoxha was the only European
leader who did not even sign the Helsinki Final Acts (the east-west European
security pact),' he says.
But after decades under a brutal and obscurantist regime Albania is now in
the hands of a younger generation determined to integrate the country into
the European mainstream. 'We are having to learn, apply new ideas and
implement them all at the same time,' he says.
The experience of the last two years has made him an impassioned supporter
of the fast-track approach to economic reform. 'Shock therapy is a bitter
pill, but it is a brilliant invention. We have been prepared to sacrifice
popularity by pressing ahead with reforms. The hardest of all was the
decision in July last year to liberalise bread prices three days before
local elections. We lost votes, but since then we have not had to worry
about the arrival of grain shipments from abroad and the granaries are
full,' he says.
'We are still the poorest country in Europe, but GDP grew by over 10 per
cent last year, personal consumption has doubled, inflation has dropped from
400 per cent to around 30 per cent and savings have risen too,' he adds.
His figures may be a bit rough and ready. But the evidence of well stocked
markets, busy fields, bustling streets and new cafes backs up the
president's claim of sharply rising living standards after decades of hunger
and poverty.
The state of contemporary Albania is a far cry from the desperate days of
1990 when the feared Sigurimi secret police are believed to have encouraged
an orgy of looting and destruction and thousands of would-be refugees
invaded embassies and clambered on to ships leaving the country.
But critics of Mr Berisha and the government he closely controls accuse him
of gathering too much power in his own hands and of building a new security
force to replace the Sigurimi. He is also accused of mounting political
trials against leaders of the former regime. Critics cite the case of Mr
Fatos Nano, the former prime minister and probably the most competent
politician in the opposition socialist party who is now serving a nine year
sentence on charges of embezzlement of Italian aid funds.
There is a greater consensus about the trials of other former regime
figures. Mr Ramiz Alia, the handpicked successor to Mr Hoxha, received a
nine year jail sentence earlier this month after he and eight other former
senior politicians were judged guilty of violating their own laws and
shooting dead Albanian citizens trying to flee the country.
'I don't like trials but I'm certainly following the Alia trial,' Berisha
said two weeks before the verdict was announced. 'More than 100 people were
shot and killed during the transition period alone. I see these trials as
necessary to prevent a wave of revenge sweeping the country.
'What has impressed me most is that none of the old regime leaders on trial
has ever uttered a word of regret. Even if you exclude all their other
crimes they were responsible for burying half of Albania under thousands of
concrete pill-boxes that consumed the sweat and resources of Albanians,' the
president added.
Mr Berisha is a Moslem from the mountainous north east of a country, a
region with a long history of blood feuds and intense personal rivalries.
After two years as the first post-communist president of Albania, he retains
substantial political support. A tall, imposing figure he has gained in
experience and confidence both domestically and on his foreign travels.
Diplomats concerned with stability in the volatile Balkan region appreciate
what they see as his growing understanding of the need for cautious
diplomacy.
Domestic political critics, however, including some who launched the
opposition movement with him but split from the Democratic Party shortly
after the March 1992 elections, criticise what they see as autocratic
tendencies and a desire to control all aspects of government. Foreign
investors, frustrated by delays and corruption in a still largely inherited
administration, tend to seek an audience at the presidential palace when
they need to cut through bureaucratic knots.
Mr Berisha rejects charges that he runs an essentially authoritarian system
and is seeking to establish a presidential republic. 'We had a one man
system for 50 years. We need time to promote and develop a parliamentary
tradition here,' he says, blaming opposition parties for delays in
introducing a new constitution with copious civil rights protection written
into it.
But navigating successfully through the treacherous shoals of Balkan foreign
politics is as important for the new democracy as defusing internal
tensions. With almost as many ethnic Albanians living in neighbouring
Kosovo, Macedonia and Montenegro as within the borders of Albania itself,
many Albanians are torn between the desire to support their kith and kin and
a growing awareness that borders cannot be changed without war. This
realisation has been heightened by the war in Bosnia and the pro-consular
advice of western embassies.
The president dismisses accusations that Albania is seeking to create a
'greater Albania' similar to the efforts of Serbia's Slobodan Milosevic to
create a greater Serbia. 'Albania's concept is very clear. All we are
seeking is a democratic space for Albanians wherever they are. That means
democratic institutions and elections. A solution cannot be achieved by
forcibly changing borders. But better trade and economic co-operation could
be a big element in improving relations,' says the president.
He recently returned from a successful visit to Macedonia where he and
president Kiro Gligorov discussed improved rail and road links to help
Macedonia overcome the embargo imposed by Greece on its southern borders.
After months of bad-tempered exchanges with Greece over a border incident in
which two Albanian soldiers were killed in April, President Berisha is
looking forward to closer relations with Europe and progress on the
country's desired EU association agreement now that Germany rather than
Greece occupies the EU presidential chair.
'Albanians are growing in self-confidence and a sense of responsibility. We
know that our future lies in Europe, with European style laws and democracy
and a dynamic market economy,' he concludes.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940721

