FT944-2369

FT  16 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Avoiding a poll tax on wheels


Critics of UK rail privatisation characterise it as a 'poll tax on wheels',
a project so unpopular it will have to be abandoned. Recent events give
credence to that verdict. But this need not be the outcome, provided there
is both more experimentation and more careful thought.
This privatisation is running into political buffers. First, a report by
railway experts to the transport select committee warned that inadequate
subsidies could lead to the closure of half the rail network. Second, the
franchising director unveiled his passenger service requirements, which
confirmed fears that services could be cut. Finally, a leaked Department of
Transport memo has revealed Whitehall concerns that the process is advancing
too fast.
These developments have increased the pressure on the government to back
down. This is hardly surprising since public support for rail privatisation
has never been more than lukewarm. One possible response is that no
privatisation was popular initially, but most seem justified in retrospect.
Yet this government is hardly in a good position to persist with an
unpopular policy. Furthermore, there are good reasons even for supporters of
the privatisation to be concerned.
This does not mean that the privatisation is a bad idea. The rail system
does urgently need an injection of private sector management, since British
Rail's performance was notoriously unsatisfactory. It could do with private
sector capital as well, since sufficient public funds will not be
forthcoming. Separating train operations from ownership of the track and
stations appears complicated. But it has parallels in the airline and
shipping industries and is being applied with success abroad. That the idea
is new is hardly a cogent objection.
Closer examination of what is happening shows that many fears are misplaced.
The minimum service requirements will allow train operators to cut services,
but there never was any guarantee of service levels under British Rail. In
any case, it cannot make sense to insist that the present network and
service be maintained in full. The new system will also provide commercial
incentives for operators to run more trains if they are profitable. In
addition, tight controls are proposed on commuter fares, which should
assuage the concerns of these politically influential, captive passengers.
Nevertheless, there is a strong case for proceeding with caution. There are
legitimate worries, for example, about the extent to which tickets will be
available for journeys across the rail system. The prospect that
long-distance tickets will be available only from a 'core' group of main
stations is also a concern.
Yet the really big mistake is to proceed with franchising most of the
inter-city network, and a large part of London's commuter services, in one
go. The first franchises ought to serve as an opportunity for learning, with
the inevitable mistakes avoided in future contracts. Among other things, the
level of subsidies - the indefinite continuation of which is justified by
the failure to charge the social costs of competitive modes of transport -
must be adjusted in the light of experience with the franchises. In
addition, the privatisation of Railtrack, which owns the stations and track,
is being pushed too fast.
If ever there was a case for trial and error, this privatisation is it. The
government must be more cautious. Otherwise, the great train privatisation
will go the way of the poll tax.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941216

