FT942-14939

FT  18 APR 94 / Emerging Markets: Focus on lower German interest rates -
Currency Markets


Foreign exchanges are likely this week to be concerned with the impact of
last Thursday's unexpected cut in official German interest rates.
Particular attention will be paid to the effect the easing of credit policy
has on the repo rate, which the Bundesbank uses to set the level of German
money market rates.
The pace at which Germany cuts rates is crucial in determining the pace at
which other European countries can ease monetary policy.
Some analysts predict that the repo could fall to 5.6 per cent or lower,
from 5.7 per cent, at this week's auction. Others believe that the
Bundesbank is not moving fast enough in lowering rates.
Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS, comments: 'The
Bundesbank's failure to signal any reduction in the key repurchase rate
indicates a reluctance to accelerate the pace at which (it) is guiding money
market interest rates lower.'
The concern is that high German rates maintains pressure on former hard core
ERM currencies, like France and Denmark, which have high unemployment and
low inflation.
The Bank of France is expected to cut rates, assuming a decent fall in the
German repo rate. Italian rates are also likely to come down once a new
government is in office.
The Italian lira could, however, come under selling pressure if there are
delays in forming a new government. A squabble last Friday about appointing
the speaker in the senate led to lira sales.
A number of important UK data will be released this week, including March
retail sales, the CBI's distributive trades survey, unemployment and
producer price inflation. The retail sales figure will be closely watched
for any hint which it provides of the impact of tax rises on consumer
spending.
Collectively, the data could provide support for a further lowering of rates
in the UK, but few observers expect a rate cut before mid-May.
Attention will also be focused on the political turmoil in Japan. There is
little clarity about who will be the new prime minister, or what the impact
of change might be for financial markets.
Continued lack of progress in resolving the trade dispute with the US has
led an increasing number of analysts to predict that the dollar will fall to
record lows against the yen, below Y100.
The failure of concerted dollar purchases by the Bank of Japan, bolstered
last week by the Bundesbank, to lend support to the US currency, has further
soured sentiment.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940418

