FT942-14951

FT  18 APR 94 / International Capital Markets: Fund managers moving to
gilts, survey shows


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


An increasing number of UK fund managers are planning to reduce their cash
positions, and a portion of those funds appears to be heading for the UK
gilt market, the latest Smith New Court/Gallup survey of fund managers
shows.
Whereas in March a balance of 17 per cent of fund managers planned to reduce
their holdings of gilts, this has now been replaced by a balance of 10 per
cent who are planning to increase their holdings.
This is the first time since September 1992 that the survey has shown a
positive balance of managers planning to increase their gilt holdings.
However, the consensus forecast for the level of gilt yields does not imply
much decline from current levels.
Redemption yields on high coupon 15-year gilts, which stood at 8 per cent at
the time of the survey, are only expected to have fallen to 7.7 per cent in
three months' time and to be at 7.8 per cent in a year's time, the survey
shows.
During the recent bond market upheaval which pushed long-term yields in most
markets sharply higher, many investors chose to keep out of the fray and put
their funds into less volatile short-term cash instruments.
However, according to the survey, a balance of 27 per cent of fund managers
now intend to reduce their cash positions, the largest recorded figure since
last September.
Among new investments, Japanese equities continue to be the favourite asset
class, though European and UK equities are also coming back into favour.
The balance of fund managers planning to increase their holdings of Japanese
stocks remains very high, at 46 per cent, while a positive balance of 10 per
cent of managers said they planned to increase their exposure to European
equities.
The equivalent figure for UK equities has moved up to 20 per cent from the
single-digit balances seen in the previous three months.
Gallup conducted the survey on April 11 and 12, polling 85 institutions
which handle some Pounds 720bn of funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940418

