FT941-4283

FT  11 MAR 94 / International Company News: US commercial banks feel the
chill of cost-cutting - Richard Waters examines the pressures which drove
Fleet Financial to implement a tough job reduction programme


   By RICHARD WATERS


In the US financial services jungle, commercial banks that harbour excessive
costs are liable to get eaten. That fear yesterday drove Fleet Financial,
one of New England's biggest banks, to announce plans to slash its workforce
by 5,500 - more than a quarter of the total 21,000 - by the end of next
year.
Fleet's cost-cutting programme may be the most radical yet attempted, but it
echoes efforts already under way at other banks. Aware that they face little
income growth in the US, many have also turned to expense reduction as the
primary means of lifting earnings this year and next.
There is plenty to be done. At nearly 1.5m last year, the number of people
employed in Federally-insured banks in the US was only around 80,000 less
than a decade before, when employment hit its peak. The automation of
banking operations and mergers between banks since the mid-1980s were meant
to make the industry more efficient, but have had little apparent effect;
the average cost/income ratio at most banks last year was around 63 per
cent, similar to the mid-1980s.
Adding to the pressure is competition from a burgeoning array of non-bank
institutions. Operating costs at GE Capital - the financial arm of General
Electric and the institution eyed by most senior US bankers as their most
threatening non-bank competitor - stood at around 56 per cent of revenues
(after interest costs) last year.
Companies like GE have brought to the financial services industry a new
lost-cost attitude, honed in a tough industrial operating environment in the
1980s, says a senior executive at one of the large New York-based banks. As
a result, banks have lost ground to lower-cost producers in everything from
leasing to credit cards.
For Fleet, the pressure to cut costs is more pressing than most. Its
expenses stand at 66 per cent of income - a ratio that looks increasingly
out of line with the most efficient commercial banks. Citicorp, for
instance, has already dragged its costs down from 70 per cent to 56 per cent
of income, and has its eye set on the magical 50 per cent barrier.
The drastic moves announced yesterday mark a belated attempt by Fleet to
vault back into the ranks of the industry's most efficient institutions. By
the late-1980s, the Rhode Island-based bank had forced costs to below 60 per
cent of income, making it a leader among US banks. Its takeover of the
failed Bank of New England in 1991, though, pushed the ratio back up to 72
per cent. Subsequent cost-cutting has failed to bring it back
Adding to Fleet's sense of urgency now is the fact that it is top of many
banks's takeover lists. With New England recovering from a prolonged
economic slump, Fleet would be a prize for any bank seeking a foothold in
the prosperous north-east corner of the country. The bank's name has been
linked with the acquisitive North Carolina-based NationsBank, among others.
For its part, Fleet says that it would prefer a merger with a bank of
roughly equal size.
Time may be running out. On Wednesday, the House banking committee voted
overwhelmingly for an interstate banking bill that would eventually abolish
restrictions on banks branching across state lines or taking over
institutions in other states. The US Senate has already backed a similar
bill, making legislation this year probable.
These changes will make the takeover market more competitive. NationsBank,
for instance, is currently constrained by a banking compact which prevents
banks based in the south-east from making big acquisitions elsewhere in the
US. They will also reduce the costs of banks which operate in more than one
state, further ratcheting down the cost bases of the best and biggest in the
industry.
In apparent recognition of this, Fleet has made its own cost targets
steadily more ambitious. Last summer, when it first announced plans to cut
expenses, the bank said it was aiming for a cost/income ratio of 60 per cent
by the end of 1994. Yesterday, it set the target at 55 per cent by the end
of 1995, to be achieved by cutting costs by Dollars 300m and increasing
revenues by Dollars 50m.
If achieved, it will represent a rapid pay-back on the costs of the
restructuring. Last year, Fleet set aside Dollars 125m for the anticipated
costs, and yesterday added Dollars 25m to this.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940311

