FT941-3579

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (26): How the others do it -
Business cultures


   By LINDA BILMES


The Seven Cultures of Capitalism
by Charles Hampden-Turner and Alfons Trompenaars
Doubleday, New York, Dollars 25
404 pages
This new study offers insight into how different business cultures and value
systems influence behaviour and success in the commercial worlds of seven
countries.
It stems from a questionnaire given to 15,000 managers from the US, UK,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and Japan between 1986 and 1993.
The framework used to compare their values and business cultures is a set of
seven 'valuing processes' that come into play when a society chooses how to
create wealth.
The first valuing process is 'making rules and discovering exceptions'. Each
country, and each organisation within it, must set generalised rules,
procedures and routines, while at the same time making special exceptions to
those rules.
The other six cover the extent to which a culture analyses or integrates;
relies on the individual (vs. the community); feels in control of its fate
(vs. control by external forces); does things in sequence (vs. in
synchronisation); expects status to be achieved (vs. ascribed); and desires
equality (vs. hierarchy).
Many of the responses are illuminating. For example: should a
poorly-performing subordinate, who you know has trouble at home, expect your
protection against others in the department? Most American managers (95 per
cent) said the subordinate had no right to protection. Attitudes were
similar in Germany (94 per cent), Sweden (91) and Britain (84). By contrast,
only 56 per cent of Japanese and 43 per cent of French managers agreed with
this view.
The book devotes three chapters each to the US and Japan, and some of the
most interesting material concerns the differences in the way they approach
almost every dimension of business. The analysis explains why the two
countries have found their trade negotiations so difficult.
The authors explain the more subtle reasons why things go wrong. The
American preference for analysis leads them to seek clarification of the
details first. After all, reason Americans, if the numbers don't add up,
there is no point in going to a lot of trouble to develop a relationship.
The Japanese, on the other hand, prefer 'integrating', which makes them
approach a situation cautiously. They need to sense whether a harmonious
working relationship is possible, and whether the potential partners are
trustworthy, before they bother with the numbers. The Japanese manager feels
he can deal with the details further down the road if the relationship has
potential to succeed.
The chapters on Germany, France, Britain, Sweden, and the Netherlands each
show a depth of understanding that is rare in the comparative genre. The
authors explain why the US, with its universalist, individualistic,
analytical, egalitarian mindset, has been so successful at producing
products with universal appeal - such as McDonalds, Levis and Coca-Cola.
These values, however, also handicap the US in important ways. They stifle
creativity and discourage managers from relying on mentors or caring for
employees. They encourage high executive turnover, reducing the incentive to
train anyone. They foster hostile takeovers and an over-reliance on
profitability as a yardstick of success.
The chapter on Britain offers a rich and complex explanation of why its
industry is in decline. One of the main culprits, say the authors, is that
Britain has been unable to resolve the seven value dilemmas.
'Wealth-creation is a function of the resolution of dilemmas facing a
national economy.' The problem with Britain is that it has a love affair
with words. It enjoys intelligent discourse, oratory, rhetoric - anything
other than solving the dilemmas.
The authors recite the familiar list of British inventions lost, sold, or
given away (the jet engine, steam turbine, penicillin, the computer, the
hovercraft) due to a lack of interest in the squalid business of exploiting
their commercial value.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940315

