FT942-12721

FT  28 APR 94 / Arts: Phoenix Dance Company - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


Phoenix Dance Company has so much in its favour - splendid dancers;
enthusiasm; a devoted public - that it is sad to find these advantages less
than well used. The fault, I suspect, lies in the choreographic material
that the company choses, and also in a doctrinaire attitude to the fact of
being a black dance troupe.
The ensemble is one of the most triumphant justifications for dance in
secondary education. In the early 1980s, Harehills School in Leeds offered
dance as part of its curriculum. Three Harehills boys decided to make dance
their career, and Phoenix resulted, growing in skill, in size, in public
acclaim, and acquiring women members as the years passed. Success and
attainment have been real and thrilling. But over the years I have noted
that the choreography, in the main, has lagged behind the dancers'
abilities.
Even half-way decent choreography is now at a premium, and the programme
which Phoenix offers this week at Sadler's Wells is testimony to this. As
always with indifferent dances, the dancers are minimised, trapped in
stereotypical attitudes, blinkered as performers. They are vastly better
than their material, and the identities their choreography imposes on them -
notably in a dire piece by Donald Byrd - show them as cliches rather than
the artists they so proudly should be. They are best challenged by Darshan
Singh Bhuller's Heart of Chaos, which deals with the emotionally and
physically brutalising effects of boxing and allows three of the men to
create positive characters.
I venture to suggest that instead of always staging new and sometimes
ill-conceived work, Phoenix acquire established or unjustly neglected
repertory pieces from the greatest names of modern dance. They have the
skills needed to tackle Graham or Taylor or Tharp, and might acknowledge
British dance's debt by presenting work by Robert Cohan. The image of
Phoenix proposed by Donald Byrd's Fatal Strategy is so blatant, and
ultimately so vulgar in its admixture of bad ballet and strutting, that we
ought not to leave the theatre with this as our final view of the ensemble.
(Its score, by Mio Morales, is also a nasty assault on the ear-drums).
Pamela Johnson's Face our own Face, which opens the programme, comes
burdened with a note about blackness, but the dance neither identifies nor
comments upon this in any cogent fashion. We merely see admirable dancers
posing on handsome metallic screens (by Christiane Ewing) and indulging in
predictable 'modern' activity.
I admire Phoenix and respect its attainments too much to want anything but
the best for its dancers. The troupe's identity should not depend on
leopard-skin knickers and gimcrack sexuality but on the grandest matters of
modern dance, which are the company's rightful heritage.
Sadler's Wells until April 30.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940428

