FT942-15938

FT  13 APR 94 / Insolvency proposals attacked by firms


   By ANDREW JACK


Leading professional bodies yesterday attacked the government's proposed
insolvency reforms as highly damaging to British business.
In a series of submissions just made public, accountancy firms and
practitioner bodies criticised far-reaching suggestions in a Department of
Trade and Industry paper.
The consultative document, issued last October and on which the deadline for
comments has just passed, called for US-style protection for companies from
their creditors.
Its most radical suggestions were that companies should be notified if their
bankers intended to appoint a receiver, and that the directors would be able
to apply for a moratorium protecting them from creditors for 28 days after
which the period could be further extended.
The Society for the Practitioners of Insolvency, the largest trade body,
said yesterday far more modest reform was all that was necessary. It
recommended that the directors' call for a moratorium should be granted only
if it were approved by a licensed insolvency practitioner.
Mr Mark Homan, outgoing president of the society and head of insolvency at
accountants Price Waterhouse, said: 'If it ain't broke, don't fix it.' He
dismissed as 'lightweight' some of the proposals suggesting that
receivership needed radical reform.
The comments reflected recent criticism from the banks, which said a
dilution of their rights would threaten their ability to lend money to
businesses.
They are in stark contrast to the initial comments last year which welcomed
the proposals, at a time when there were calls for action to protect small
companies from collapse.
Mr Nigel Hamilton of accountants Ernst & Young, which has also made a
submission to the DTI, said in reference to giving extra powers to protect
directors: 'Without proper safeguards this could easily be some sort of
fraudsters' charter.'
The firm said insolvency procedures should be designed to protect the
underlying business. The recommendations wrongly focused instead on
preserving the existing corporate shell or company with its incumbent
directors.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

