FT944-2507

FT  16 DEC 94 / Berlusconi prepares showdown with Bossi


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and ANDREW HILL


   ROME, MILAN


Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the embattled Italian prime minister, was yesterday
preparing for a showdown early next week in parliament with his troublesome
ally, Mr Umberto Bossi, leader of the populist Northern League.
Mr Berlusconi indicated he would be the one to impose a vote of confidence,
rather than leave the initiative to the opposition. His aim is to force Mr
Bossi and his 105 deputies to decide finally whether they back the
eight-month-old, right-wing coalition.
The issue was raised at a meeting yesterday between President Oscar Luigi
Scalfaro and Mr Berlusconi. The debate could be staged on Tuesday or
Wednesday, depending on when the 1995 budget clears its last parliamentary
hurdles.
The president has indicated he has few illusions about the durability of the
government. Last month he voiced open disagreement with Mr Berlusconi over
the advisability of calling early elections. However, Mr Berlusconi regards
the threat one of his main cards, believing Mr Bossi risks being one of the
main casualties.
Mr Bossi, for his part, declined to say if he was willing to formalise a new
alliance with the centre-left that would place the League with the former
communist Party of the Democratic Left (PDS) and the Popular party (PPI) of
Mr Rocco Buttiglione.
Suggestions that almost half the League's 105 deputies were not willing to
follow Mr Bossi in a break with the government were denied yesterday.
Italian ministers should decide today whether to relax the terms of Telecom
Italia's monopoly over certain telephone services, in order to offset the
impact of increased competition in the lucrative mobile telephone sector,
Andrew Hill writes from Milan.
In an indication that a compromise may be found to satisfy the
state-controlled company, the Telecoms Ministry said yesterday that, after
the ministerial discussion, Telecom Italia was likely to sign the joint
convention governing digital mobile phone services.
Telecom Italia has withheld its signature pending a satisfactory reply to
its demands for full liberalisation of mobile phone tariffs and a cut in the
fee it pays the government for its monopoly over other services.
The final ministerial decision could be complicated by the obvious
ill-feeling stirred up this week between Mr Berlusconi and his old business
rival, Mr Carlo De Benedetti.
Olivetti, the computer group chaired by Mr De Benedetti, is one of the
leading partners in the consortium which will operate Italy's new digital
mobile phone network.
The consortium, Omnitel-Pronto Italia, won the licence in competition with
a consortium including Fiat, the automotive and industrial group, and
Fininvest, Mr Berlusconi's media group.
Mr De Benedetti angered Mr Berlusconi by indicating in an interview that his
administration should be replaced by an institutional government.
On Tuesday, Mr Cesare Previti, defence minister and former Fininvest lawyer,
said that the licence had been granted 'unjustly' to Omnitel-Pronto Italia.
Curtain rises on the final act, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

