FT942-12345

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (2): Pursue total
return and heed inflation - Gillian O'Connor introduces a sequence of
articles for those seeking a regular income


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR


The collapse in interest rates has made pensioners' Catch 22 even more
horrendous. The catch is that few people needing to rely on investment
income can afford to adopt the most sensible long-term investment strategy.
Inflation is the biggest threat to people living off a fixed income. Unless
your income grows in line with inflation, you will find yourself getting
steadily poorer in real terms. Even 3 per cent inflation cuts nearly 15 per
cent off the buying power of a fixed income in just five years. And if your
capital has suffered similarly, there is no hope of boosting your income in
future years. You are caught in a vicious circle.
The theoretical answer to the problem of inflation-proofing your investments
is equities. Over the long term, equities have held up remarkably well
against inflation - unlike ordinary deposits or gilt-edged stocks. This
means both that the capital value of shares has risen over time, but also
that the income paid out has risen. So in a surprisingly short time the
income from a portfolio of shares will overtake that from deposits or gilts.
The snag, of course, is that many investors need a high income at once,
because they need to live on it. Even after their recent setback, UK shares
are yielding only 3.6 gross, ie the net yield to a basic-rate taxpayer is
under 3 per cent and slightly over 2 per cent to a higher-rate taxpayer.
Even instant-access building society accounts have gross yields of over 6
per cent. It seems obvious that shares cannot compete.
But that takes no account of the capital side of the calculation. Over the
past year, the FT-SE-A All-Share index has risen by some 15 per cent. So the
total return before tax has been around 18 per cent, far better than you
could have got from even the most competitive deposit account, because the
capital value of the deposit account is static.
It is important to see the capital and income as part of a single pool. How
that pool should be divided between re-investment and income is a different
question. No prudent adviser would recommend regularly stripping all the
capital gains off an equity investment as income. Share prices can fall, and
returns have been unusually good in the last few years. But, provided you
can afford some short-term upsets, your primary objective should be securing
the best long-term total return possible. And, provided that you make sure
you are not endangering your capital, there is no reason why you cannot cash
in some of your gains to provide an income.
Indeed, the tax system nowadays positively encourages people to take some of
their income in the form of capital gains. You can make capital gains of a
certain amount each year (currently Pounds 5,800) before having to pay any
tax on them - a particularly useful concession for people paying tax at the
higher (40 per cent ) rate.
So both inflation and tax efficiency suggest that pensioners should have at
least some of their capital in equities. In practice, many investors are
primarily influenced by their immediate income needs and their suspicion of
equities. In the last couple of years, as interest rates have tumbled, UK
fund managers have been concocting products to appeal to investors who have
never ventured outside bank and building society deposits before.
A similar collapse in savings rates in the US had already sent American
savers stampeding into mutual funds (the US equivalent of unit trusts).
British savers have been slightly more hesitant, partly because stock market
investment is still more alien to ordinary people in this country.
What should you look at if you are searching for the best available income?
Capital security. Some of the schemes aimed at income-seekers provide an
unusually high income by dipping into, or at least risking, your original
capital. It is crucial to know what the capital risk is before entering into
this kind of investment.
Some people will be reluctant to take on any capital risk - in which case
they can reasonably shun equities. Others are prepared to face the
possibility of capital risk, but not the certainty. Some of the income
shares of split-level investment trusts, for example, will have virtually no
capital value at the end of the day. The basic rule of thumb is that
anything which offers an unusually high income probably has a snag.
Taxation. Some types of income are more suitable for certain people. For
example, many National Savings schemes, which provide investors with
tax-free income, are most beneficial to people who would otherwise pay high
rates of tax.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940429

