FT942-12219

FT  30 APR 94 / International Company News: The US wakes up to a new aroma -
Frank McGurty charts the expansion of a coffee shop chain


   By FRANK MCGURTY


Arabian mocha with a 'pungent' aroma and 'fragrant, light-bodied' Mexican
altura are as different as night and day, according to the helpful 'barista'
serving coffee at Starbucks.
It was uncertain how many of the customers crowded into the gleaming
Manhattan coffee bar on its first day of business last week could actually
tell them apart, even after the barman's coaching.
What is clear is that many Americans are finally waking up to the pleasures
of fine 'arabica' coffee, thanks to Starbucks, the Seattle-based chain now
pushing into New York and Boston.
The company's expansion has been as robust as a potful of Sumatra Boengie.
From 11 shops and 100 employees in 1987, Starbucks has grown into the
leading retailer and roaster of specialty coffee in North America, inspiring
fierce loyalty in each new market it enters.
By any measure, Starbucks is one of the most successful new small companies
in the US. Its empire, which includes 317 shops and a mail-order business,
has generated revenue growth of at least 62 per cent over the last three
fiscal years. Net income tripled from 1991 to 1992, and doubled last year.
In its latest quarter, to April 3, the company's net sales rose 69 per cent
to Dollars 57m and net profit 51 per cent to Dollars 1.9m, or 7 cents a
share. On an operating basis, earnings were 91 per cent ahead at Dollars
3.4m.
The improvement reflects more than just expansion. In stores opened at least
a year, sales growth has exceeded 19 per cent over the past five years. It
recently slowed to about 9 per cent, but that compares well with the 2 per
cent gain last year by the average McDonald's restaurant opened at least 12
months.
In June 1992, the company went public at Dollars 8 1/2 a share, adjusted for
a two-for-one split in September. Yesterday, a week after Starbucks cut the
ribbon to open its flagship New York store, the stock was trading at just
under Dollars 30.
While its record is impressive, the potential of the company, as it begins a
long-awaited drive into the big markets of north-east, is still largely
untapped. Mr Christopher Vroom, an analyst with Alex Brown & Sons in
Baltimore, believes sales could exceed Dollars 1bn by the end of the decade.
One reason is that Starbucks sits on top of a market which is booming. The
Specialty Coffee Association expects US sales of pricey arabica coffees, as
opposed to cheaper robusta varieties, to double to Dollars 3bn between 1989
and 1999.
'If this was a 28-chapter book, we are probably at chapter three or four,'
says Mr Howard Schultz, the charismatic chairman and chief executive.
Yesterday he told institutional investors in Boston that customer response
to new shops was exceeding expectations. His ambition is to open 6,000
coffee shops in the US and to push into the UK and other international
markets. Currently, Starbucks operates a coffee kiosk in Harrod's in London.
Mr Schultz' vision came to him during a 1983 trip to Milan. He was
captivated by the ambiance and superb coffee available at almost every
street corner in the city. He vowed to recreate 'the romance and energy of
Italian cafe' in the US.
The story has assumed mythic proportions within Starbucks' corporate
culture. Mr Schultz, then a marketing executive at the company, failed to
convince his superiors to sell fresh-brewed coffee in addition to beans.
So he quit, put together Dollars 4m in financing and bought the business
with the intention of putting his ideas into action.
He began in Seattle and quickly moved into the other cities of the Pacific
north-west, setting off a trend which has brought hundreds of cafes,
espresso carts and coffee roasters in the area.
Next he pushed south into California, and west into Chicago and Washington.
Now Mr Schultz, who grew up on a Brooklyn housing estate, is bringing
Starbucks to his home town, where he expects to open 100 shops in three to
four years.
The 40-year-old chief executive grows animated when explaining the success
of Starbucks. He links it to the company's 'two guiding principles: a
passionate commitment to the quality of our coffee and to the quality of our
people'.
'The reason customers keep coming back - we are now serving 1.5m people a
year - is our service exceeds their expectations,' he says.
The staff are well-trained in lore and preparation of coffee, and most of
them have plenty of experience, since Starbucks enjoys a much lower
attrition rate than other retailers. It was the first private US company to
offer part-time workers equity and healthcare benefits.
The package is part of an approach which Mr Schultz calls 'the Starbucks
paradigm'. He argues that employee relations are the key to bolstering the
bottom line.
'If we are going to build long-term value for our shareholders and
customers, we first must build long-term value for our employees,' he says.
'It's a paradigm shift because most American businesses - and there are
exceptions - have not treated their workers well.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940430

