FT941-5542

FT  05 MAR 94 / Markets: Job figures trigger a sigh of relief - Wall Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


After an anxious wait, Wall Street breathed a sigh of relief when the
February employment report was released yesterday.
In the financial markets, the monthly jobs report is always the most keenly
awaited of economic indicators, but this latest set of figures was deemed
especially important because of what had preceded its release: four days of
frantic trading in which stock and bond prices fluctuated wildly amid
growing investor concern about inflation, rising interest rates, and a
possible US-Japan trade war.
Thus, as the Labour Department was preparing to announce the February jobs
figures yesterday morning, Wall Street was holding its breath. A bigger than
expected rise in non-farm payrolls and the Federal Reserve might decide to
put up interest rates again. (The last monetary tightening came on February
4). A smaller than expected rise and the threat of a rate increase would
recede, at least for another month.
Yet, as often happens, the report served initially only to confuse, rather
than clarify, the situation for financial markets. The headline number was a
217,000 increase in non-farm payrolls, which was well above analysts'
forecasts. Also, the decline in the national unemployment rate - from 6.7 to
6.5 per cent - surprised Wall Street, which had been expecting no movement.
First reaction came from the Treasury market, where the price of the
benchmark 30-year government bond quickly dropped three-quarters of a point,
pushing the yield above 6.9 per cent. The initial assumption was that,
because the figures were strong, the Fed would tighten monetary policy
again, and soon.
The sell-off in the bond market, however, did not last long. When analysts
took a second look at the employment numbers, they noticed that the January
payroll figure had been revised downwards. Originally, payrolls were
estimated to have risen 62,000 in the first month of the year. Now, the
Labour Department says payrolls actually declined in January, by 2,000.
The new figure means that, in the first two months of this year, growth in
payrolls has averaged little more than 100,000, which is below the two-month
average recorded in the second half of 1993. For investors worried that
accelerating economic growth and a rapidly-growing labour market would
prompt another interest rate increase, this was good news.
There was more good news when the Bureau of Labour Statistics (the office
which compiles the monthly jobs data) said it might have to revise the
February payroll number downward as well. The BLS said that, because of
recent severe winter weather, a smaller than normal number of companies had
responded to its January and February surveys. When those companies which
were unable to respond in February finally report their employment numbers,
said the BLS, it is likely that the increase in payrolls will be revised
downward - as happened in January.
This was all positive for the Treasury market and, in turn, pleased stock
market investors who have been watching with growing dismay the steady rise
in long-term bond yields. Consequently, share prices more than held their
own on Friday morning, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average sitting on a
20-point gain by midday.
Yet, the threat of another rate increase has not receded entirely. One of
the reasons the Fed tightened policy in February was that it wanted to curb
investors' inflationary expectations. By putting up interest rates earlier
than most observers had expected, the Fed hoped it could ease the market's
inflation fears and see a decline soon in long-term interest rates.
This theory, however, has proved invalid so far. Since the Fed's tightening,
long-term rates have climbed sharply. At the start of February, the 30-year
bond yield stood at 6.3 per cent. Today, it stands at well over 6.8 per
cent. If the Fed still believes it can lower long-term interest rates by
raising short-term interest rates, then logic dictates that the central bank
will try once again to dampen inflationary expectations with a rate
increase. Stock and bond market investors - yesterday's encouraging
employment report notwithstanding - must know this.
Then there is the little problem of a possible trade war with Japan. On
Thursday, President Clinton revived a provision that allows the US to impose
sanctions against countries with unacceptable trade barriers. Although this
was interpreted as a warning shot, the financial markets tremble at the
prospect of a trade war because sanctions would put up the price of Japanese
goods sold in the US. Given investors' obsession about inflation, this is an
unwelcome prospect.
 --------------------------------------
Monday           3832.02  -  6.76
Tuesday          3809.23  -  22.79
Wednesday        3831.74  +  22.51
Thursday         3824.42  -  7.32
Friday           3832.30  +  7.88
 --------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

940305

