FT941-12939

FT  27 JAN 94 / Yeltsin opts to appease hardlinersas Fyodorov quits:
Departing finance chief says economic coup has occurred


   By LEYLA BOULTON and PETER NORMAN


   MOSCOW, LONDON


Russian president Boris Yeltsin appeared yesterday to opt for an
inflationary economic policy to appease a parliament dominated by communist
and ultra-nationalists by accepting the departure of his reformist finance
minister.
Mr Boris Fyodorov resigned with a warning that an 'economic coup had taken
place' headed by Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, which would
plunge the country into disaster.
Mr Fyodorov said he was quitting after a half-hour meeting with President
Yeltsin, who reportedly told him 'you cannot leave at a time like this and
throw everything away', but made no effort to meet any of his conditions for
staying.
The new acting finance minister will be Mr Sergei Dubinin, a deputy finance
minister, who is unlikely to fight for his reformist views with the same
energy as Mr Fyodorov. The changes come before an International Monetary
Fund mission is due in Moscow to examine economic reform prospects.
The latest stage in the battle over Russian economic policy could further
undermine the west's readiness to step up financial support for Russian
reform.
Finance ministers from the Group of Seven leading industrial countries are
expected next month to discuss the economic crisis and political upheaval.
Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, has invited his colleagues from
the US, Japan, France, Britain, Italy and Canada to a meeting near of
Frankfurt.
The German minister has proposed that the meeting should be held on February
26 and that Mr Michel Camdessus, managing director of the IMF, should
attend. The ministers want, after the G7 talks, to meet Mr Alexander
Shokhin, the middle of the road reformer who last week was made economics
minister.
Mr Fyodorov said an inevitable rise in inflation, a fall in living standards
and a continuing drop in output would demonstrate there was no alternative
to the policies he had embraced. He warned that 'a dead-end reached at the
people's expense' could trigger a social explosion. 'Having in the cabinet
people who have caused the country colossal political and economic harm and
are opposed to reform is unacceptable.'
Mr Fyodorov told the Financial Times that his main reason for leaving was
President Yeltsin's refusal to fire Mr Viktor Gerashchenko, the central bank
chairman, whom he accused of undermining his attempts to institute fiscal
discipline and a tight monetary policy. He said: 'This was a must. If I
tightened (spending) in the government, they would go to Gerashchenko (for
money).'
Mr Yeltsin refused to offer Mr Fyodorov a promotion to first deputy prime
minister, meaning he would be under Mr Alexander Zaveriukha, the
pro-Communist deputy prime minister for agriculture whose departure Mr
Fyodorov had also demanded.
Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the neo-fascist leader whose Liberal Democratic
party scored a remarkable election victory last month, is to be prosecuted
for 'warmongering', the public prosecutor's office in Moscow said.
EU helps Russian banks, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1II

940127

