FT944-14533

FT  22 OCT 94 / Man in the News: Doyen of the lobbyists - Ian Greer


   By DAVID OWEN


It is a relaxed and convivial scene. About 20 men and women linger over
after-dinner coffee and drinks in a private room in the most exclusive
restaurant in Christchurch, a sleepy and well-heeled town on England's south
coast. They include some of the UK's best-known political journalists. It is
the eve of the Conservative party conference in Bournemouth, a few miles
away.
An impeccably dressed and dark-browed man slips easily from conversation to
conversation with practised grace. Discreetly attentive to his guests'
requirements, he exchanges views on the main political issues of the day
with knowledgeable affability. Mr Ian Greer is in his element.
Mr Greer is the doyen of UK political lobbyists. A spry 61, he and his firm,
Ian Greer Associates, have been the driving force behind the rapid growth of
professional lobbying in Britain.
Yet earlier this week, reports in The Guardian newspaper linked IGA to a new
'cash for questions' controversy involving alleged payments to MPs for
tabling parliamentary questions.
Mr Greer has strenuously denied the allegation that the firm acted as a
conduit to channel money from Mr Mohamed Fayed, owner of Harrods, to two
Tory MPs during the battle for control of London's premier department store
in the late 1980s. He has served a writ on The Guardian.
But the affair has prompted the resignation of one junior minister and
placed a question mark over the career of another.
It is all a long way from 1968, when Mr Greer - once a Conservative party
agent - helped set up Russell Greer, his first public relations venture. At
that time, he found little demand among industrialists for his insights into
Whitehall decision-making. The firm became primarily a financial PR
specialist. Mr Greer eventually sold his shareholding to other directors.
When he formed IGA in 1981, business was waking up to the benefits of the
services a specialist political lobbyist could provide. Since then, the
industry has grown rapidly, from next to nothing 20 years ago to a business
with an estimated annual turnover of Pounds 20m today. Its influence has
become pervasive: the work of lobbyists is discernible behind the scenes
almost whenever an important government decision is in the process of being
made.
From the government's legislative plans to politically sensitive takeover
bids and the contents of the Budget, lobbyists like Mr Greer will be
beavering away on behalf of clients, seeking early warning of forthcoming
events and trying to shape decisions to their best advantage.
IGA lobbied actively on Mr Fayed's behalf for a number of years in the late
1980s in return for an annual fee of around Pounds 50,000 - about the going
rate. It monitored Whitehall documents for him for a further period - a
service that would typically command a fee of Pounds 10,000-Pounds 12,000
per annum.
The signs are that IGA will have to work hard to retain its pre-eminent
position among professional lobbyists. His blue-chip client list includes
British Airways, Philip Morris, the government of Taiwan and Channel Four
Television. But one client has already indicated it is considering
dispensing with the firm's services, and predicted the furore could be 'very
damaging' for IGA's business.
The new allegations could not have come at a more sensitive time for the
lobbying business. The unfavourable publicity has increased scrutiny of its
activities and demands for tighter controls.
Lobbyists have reacted by taking steps to regulate themselves more
effectively, while renewing long-repeated calls for Parliament to draw up a
statutory code of practice. Five firms, including IGA, recently founded a
trade association and launched a code of conduct banning all financial links
with MPs. Mr Greer came out in favour of statutory regulation as long ago as
1985.
Even before the recent bad publicity, specialist firms such as IGA had been
under pressure. Since the recession in the early 1990s, clients have
increasingly tended to manage their public relations operations in-house and
to hire outside consultants for only short-term projects.
In addition, a new breed of practitioner is advising organisations on how to
do their own lobbying. One of the new breed, Mr Charles Clarke, once a top
aide to former Labour party leader Mr Neil Kinnock, argues: 'Too many lobby
companies claim that only they understand the machinery of Whitehall,
Westminster or Brussels power.' He accuses them of building up 'the mystique
of politics' to get commissions.
While Mr Greer acknowledges that lobbying once had such mystique, he
contends this has long disappeared. He says Mr Clarke is 'out of date, poor
man'.
Nevertheless, Mr Greer is likely to need all his tenacity and ingenuity to
maintain the steady growth of his company - which now has about 50
employees, including many former aides to top politicians, and an annual
turnover of Pounds 3.5m.
Until recently, Mr Greer had managed, for the most part, to avoid publicity,
popping up only sporadically in headlines. In 1990, he told MPs that he had
made six payments to three MPs over the previous five years for introducing
business. Later that year, he used his Daimler to chauffeur Mr John Major to
an engagement during his successful campaign for the Tory party leadership.
The closeness of his ties with the prime minister was underlined when Mr
Major, along with a number of other cabinet ministers, attended IGA's 10th
anniversary celebrations three years ago.
But these days, with the Tories trailing in the polls, it makes sound
business sense for IGA to be even-handed in its relations with the main
political parties. Earlier this year, the firm paid for the drinks at a
reception for some Labour European election candidates at London's Cafe
Royal.
As Mr Greer walks Humphrey, his poodle, in Richmond Park today, he could be
forgiven for feeling all of his 61 years. Thoughts of retirement are far
from his mind, however. 'Good God, no] What am I going to do?' he exclaims.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941022

