FT941-16963

FT  07 JAN 94 / Italian cabinet defends drug reform: Government will listen
to manufacturers' objections


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


The Italian cabinet has defended its reform of drug sales, despite
continuing confusion among the public and bitter attacks from pharmacists
and drugs companies.
Mrs Maria Pia Garavaglia, health minister, said the government would listen
to manufacturers' objections to the amended list of free medicines. But the
cabinet refused to suspend or substantially alter the new list, in which
medicines are divided into three categories based on being free, subsidised
or sold at full price. 'I am sure the long-term benefits are worth the
short-term difficulties,' she said.
Companies have a 30-day period to appeal against the removal of products
from the new free list, which came into effect on January 1. Mrs Garavaglia
said after a cabinet meeting on Wednesday night that officials would meet
soon to 'register difficulties and suggest remedies'.
The only change the cabinet made was to cut penalties on pharmacists and
doctors dispensing drugs without prescriptions. Maximum fines on pharmacists
selling drugs requiring prescriptions without a doctor's authorisation have
been halved; repeat offenders will no longer risk enforced closure of their
shops. Fines on doctors will be halved.
The confusion follows the simultaneous introduction last Saturday of two
reforms. The first imposed a new list of free medicines under the
government's plans to hold spending on drugs to L10,000bn (Pounds 3.95bn) in
1994. Pharmacists have also had to enforce much stricter rules on dispensing
drugs without prescriptions.
The reforms triggered bitter scenes at pharmacies as patients have reacted
angrily to having to pay for drugs previously free, or to being turned away
because they lacked prescriptions. Prof Luigi Frati, head of the committee
which drew up the list, said the new rules were not designed for
pharmacists, but to cover patients' needs.
Editorial comment, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940107

