FT941-3372

FT  16 MAR 94 / International Company News: Mutual fund takeover bid lights
up Wall Street - Richard Waters examines the implications of the uninvited
offer from GE Capital for Kemper


   By RICHARD WATERS


The prospect of a second big takeover in the mutual fund business in the US
in a matter of months lit up Wall Street yesterday.
Shares in Kemper, the Chicago-based asset management, life insurance and
broking company, leapt by 50 per cent, or Dollars 20 7/8 , from Monday's
close on an uninvited bid from GE Capital.
The sharp move pushed Kemper's market value up to nearly Dollars 2.5bn,
above GE Capital's offer valued at Dollars 2.2bn. It signalled Wall Street's
belief that either the General Electric subsidiary would have to offer more
or the approach would prompt a rare bidding war for the financial services
company.
The bid approach from GE Capital follows Mellon Bank's Dollars 1.8bn
acquisition of Dreyfus, which marked the most aggressive move yet by a US
commercial bank to enter the booming funds business. The share prices of
other mutual fund groups also jumped yesterday, on expectations of further
deals. Franklin Resources, for instance, rose Dollars 3/4, to Dollars 47
3/4.
GE's approach came in a letter from Mr Jack Welch, chairman of the US group,
to Mr David Mathis, his opposite number at Kemper. Although written on March
2, it was only made public by GE yesterday in an apparent move to put
pressure on Kemper's board to accept the deal.
It could also be designed to force a decision before any rival suitor has a
chance to make a move. The market has been rife with rumours of an approach
for Kemper since the Dreyfus deal.
Banco Santander, the Spanish bank which took a 3 per cent stake in Kemper in
the late-1980s, is one name frequently mentioned - although its potential
involvement in a rescue bid for domestic rival Banesto could give its
management more than enough to think about in the months ahead.
Other US domestic banks, seeking to emulate Mellon, are also seen as
possible bidders.
GE's approach has caught Kemper's management in an unenviable position. The
company is only just emerging from a period overshadowed by problem real
estate investments.
Last year, Kemper sold off its reinsurance operations, and earlier this year
completed its exit from the property/casualty business.
In the view of several analysts, it could be on the verge of a rebound in
earnings - although its stock price before GE's approach became public
seemed not to reflect this.
At around Dollars 40, the shares earlier this week were trading on a
multiple of around 12 to 13 times most analysts' expectations of earnings
this year, considerably lower than other companies in the sector.
Mr Michael Blumstein, of Morgan Stanley, estimates earnings this year of
Dollars 3.75 a share, rising to Dollars 4.40 in 1995 - a view echoed in a
recent research note from Allen Nadler at Merrill Lynch.
Ironically, it was the disposal of the reinsurance business which first left
Kemper vulnerable to a bid.
The sale involved the cancellation of most of the 38 per cent stake in
Kemper owned by the Lumbermen's Mutual Casualty Company, wiping out a
potentially supportive holding.
It is not surprising that Kemper's management team, having dealt with the
problems of the early-1990s, have not welcomed GE's bid. 'They hate the fact
that someone else will come in and take the credit (for their efforts),'
said one person close to the company.
Kemper's business now comprises three parts: a mutual fund business, with
Dollars 44bn under management; a life assurance operation specialising in
annuity business; and a regional securities brokerage. The company abandoned
efforts to sell its underperforming securities arm last year, after it
failed to attract a high enough bid.
For GE Capital, a Kemper acquisition would provide a springboard into the
fastest-growing areas of the US retail investment business - mutual funds
and variable annuities.
Kemper has Dollars 70bn in all under management, which together with GE's
Dollars 75bn would create one of the US's biggest fund management groups.
In a clear attempt to win the backing of Kemper's management, Mr Welch in
his letter dangled the carrot of a consolidation of all the asset management
activities under the Kemper umbrella, run by its existing managers -
although under the wing of GE Capital.
The all-cash bid of Dollars 55 a share values the group's outstanding
ordinary shares at Dollars 1.8bn, and would be worth Dollars 2.2bn after
taking into account convertible preferred stock and stock options.
While leaning heavily on Kemper's board before it meets this Thursday, GE
seems unwilling at this stage to launch an all-out contested bid.
Such an attack would be extremely rare in the financial services business.
An unwanted deal would run the risk of driving away Kemper's best people.
It would also have to win the backing of state insurance regulators. In
addition, mutual fund groups have a powerful poison pill at their disposal:
the boards of each fund run by the group could vote to have their assets
managed by another company.
If that were to happen, a contested GE takeover would become a hollow
victory.
 -----------------------------------
US MUTUAL FUND GROUPS
 -----------------------------------
Assets (end 1993)     Dollars bn
 -----------------------------------
Fidelity                   251.5
Vanguard                   134.9
Merrill Lynch              124.6
Capital Research           105.1
Franklin/Templeton          94.0
Dreyfus                     75.0
Federated Investors         68.6
TIAA-CREF                   61.1
Putnam                      61.1
Dean Witter                 60.7
Smith Barney Shearson       56.5
Prudential                  54.4
IDS                         45.7
Kemper                      44.4
T Rowe Price                37.4
Scudder                     35.1
 -----------------------------------
Source: Investment Company Institute
 -----------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940316

