FT944-2492

FT  16 DEC 94 / Row over rescues may dog Japan bank chief: Matsushita takes
over as governor of central bank tomorrow


   By GERARD BAKER


   TOKYO


Tomorrow Mr Yasuo Matsushita will take office as the new governor of the
Bank of Japan. He moves in to the central bank at a delicate time in
Japanese financial history.
Money market interest rates are rising, despite an anaemic economic recovery
and chronically weak demand for money. But his immediate concern will be the
fragility of the nation's banking system, and especially a growing political
furore over the bank's handling of it.
The problems began last week with an announcement by the outgoing governor,
Mr Yasushi Mieno, of a rescue package for two of the country's smaller
credit associations.
The scheme - a lifeboat to be launched in February for the two institutions
 -looked innocuous enough. Tokyo Kyowa and Anzen, like many of their larger
peers, waded far too deep into the waters of the bubble economy of the late
1980s.
They now have bad debts of more than Y100bn (Pounds 638m) and are virtually
insolvent. So the bank announced a rescue operation, funded partly by itself
 -with capital of Y20bn - and partly by private sector institutions, to take
over the troubled companies and dispose of the bad debts.
But this week the decision was publicly denounced by one cabinet minister,
and two others appear to have expressed concerns about it. Mr Ryutaro
Hashimoto, the minister for international trade and industry, said the move
was a dangerous precedent.
What has upset ministers is that the rescue breaks with past practice. Two
years ago the ministry of finance, principally responsible for banking
supervision, floated the idea of a publicly funded body to take over the bad
debts of the banking system, along the lines of the Resolution Trust
Corporation in the US savings and loans collapse. But there was immediate
hostility from the public, and the plan was quietly shelved. There is still
fierce opposition among the Japanese public to the idea that bankers should
be rescued from their own folly by the use of public funds.
When institutions have been in danger of collapse in the past , the bank and
the MoF have twisted the arms of larger companies and persuaded them to put
up the necessary funding for the rescue.
In Japan's intertwined financial world, most of the smaller institutions
have close links with larger, better-capitalised companies. Only two months
ago, Mitsubishi Bank was persuaded to take control of the ailing Nippon
Trust Bank, which had been brought near to collapse by the same bad lending
problems.
But in recent months, the larger banks have been telling the MoF they can no
longer justify the burden of rescuing ailing affiliates, without some
assistance from the authorities. Hence, analysts believe, last week's
unprecedented measure.
But this leaves a further puzzle. Just six weeks ago Mr Mieno, in what was
widely billed as one of the most significant speeches of his governorship,
signalled what many saw as a shift in Japanese financial policy. He stated
in unequivocal terms for the first time that banks and financial
institutions that got into trouble could not expect to be rescued.
'It is not the business of the central bank to save all financial
institutions from failure,' he said. Only where there was clear evidence of
'systemic risk' arising from the failure of an institution should the
authorities feel the need to act. 'Should a failure have the potential to
undermine stability as a whole, then that potential must be removed.'
These sentiments would not be unusual from the mouths of other central bank
governors who have tried to parry criticism that they are too soft on banks.
But in Japan, where the it represented a significant departure, and was
widely flagged as such by BoJ officials.
Yet it is difficult to argue that the failure of Tokyo Kyowa and Anzen, with
their combined deposit base of a mere Y243bn, represents any kind of
systemic risk to Japan's admittedly fragile banking system.
So why has the Bank, at the first opportunity to demonstrate its new,
tougher policy, retreated from it so spectacularly?
Some suspect that the plan represents the triumph of old MoF philosophy. The
MoF is much more instinctively sympathetic to the proposition that bank
collapses threaten financial stability.
The financial crises of the 1920s and 1930s were more severe in Japan than
elsewhere and there are many in the MoF who believe that any threat of a
repeat, however small, should be avoided.
Those suspicions are enhanced by the arrival of Mr Matsushita. Unlike his
predecessor, the new man is a former MoF official and is thought likely to
take a less independent line than Mr Mieno.
But this theory ignores the fact that the rescue was announced by Mr Mieno
before the end of his term.
A more likely explanation is that both Bank and the MoF are mindful of the
continuing difficulties faced not by the likes of Kyowa and Anzen, but by
the larger banks.
One senior banker suggested yesterday that the surprising move is intended
to test the waters of public opinion for a support operation that really
will be needed to ensure systemic stability if, as is possible, a leading
bank comes close to failing in the next year or so.
Although the total level of bad loans has probably peaked, banks' prospects
of eliminating the problem quickly are not assisted by declining
profitability and weak lending demand. The risk of a serious setback remains
strong.
In the meantime the political row will intensify in the period before the
lifeboat is formally launched - not the ideal start for Mr Matsushita's
tenure. But if the larger banks' health does deteriorate in the next year,
the new governor's position will get a lot more uncomfortable.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941216

