FT944-2989

FT  15 DEC 94 / Arts: Tony Kushner's 'Slavs]' - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Not only does the playwright Tony Kushner take on the most difficult themes
of the era we live in, he also links them together. In his new 90-minute
Slavs] (Thinking About the Longstanding Problems of Virtue and Happiness),
as in his widely-acclaimed two-part Angels in America, he somehow yokes the
collapse of Soviet communism to the new prominence of homosexuality and a
great deal else besides. And he manages to show the full seriousness of the
situation he is presenting while relieving it with humour and a range of
different characters. The sheer scope of his ambition is refreshing.
Yet to my mind Kushner is a lightweight. For all its massive historical,
political, socio-economic, psychosexual and metaphysical range, I never felt
that Angels in America was any larger in spirit than a soap opera, albeit
vivid and touching and entertaining. (My reaction did not change even when I
had seen productions on both sides of the Atlantic).
Slavs] is not soap-opera but satire. It does not flit between disparate
narrative threads, as did Angels in America, and it has a less gossipy
concern with what will happen next to whom. But here again his characters
have both the vitality and the shallowness of cartoons, and here again he
interconnects them in a way that rings hollow. We see that he has assembled
them to illustrate strategically the contrasting symptoms of the State of
Things Today.
Thus the alcoholic and nihilistic Katherina Sesafina Gleb, a warden of the
Pan-Soviet archive (guarding the bottled brains of Lenin and other
ex-comrades) in 1985 (Act Two), is here the lesbian girlfriend of socialist
Doctor Bonfila Bezhukhovna Bonch-Bruevich, who in 1992 (Act Three) reveals
the disastrous medical effects of Russian nuclear and chemical pollution
upon Siberia and elsewhere. Lesbians, alcoholism, Leninism, socialism,
pollution, medicine, the past, the future: yes, what a nexus] And how
perverse that, for all the vehemence Kushner gives these characters, he
cannot give either of them much substance.
Slavs] begins with the kind of hilarious stroke that we expect to find not
in a play but in TV satire. Two Muscovite street-cleaners - brushing away
the snow as they talk - are talking to each other, in lengthy and perfect
sentences, of what political conclusions to draw from studying history from
Marx and Engels. Peculiar, however, is the way Kushner keeps this joke going
throughout the play.
It would be hard to make a better case for this British premiere of the play
than is being made at the Hampstead Theatre, where Matthew Lloyd directs a
generally superb cast. Design, by Ultz, is economical and effective. Lloyd
keeps Kushner's satiric tone keenly to the fore while stressing humanity
where he can.
Imelda Staunton's performance is more real than the words she speaks. She
shows us the quiet, caring, troubled mind and nervous system of the lesbian
Doctor Bonch-Bruevich. A wonderful actress. Annette Badland is just as fine
as Mrs Shastlivyi Domik, blasting with great sincerity through an oration
that starts forcefully and climbs in intensity from there.
Paul Jesson is excellent as Ippolite Ippopolitovich Popolitipov, a Soviet
official who has the misfortune to be in love with the same woman as Dr
Bonch-Bruevich. Peter Copley and Richard Mayes are first-rate as Aleksii
Antedilluvianovich Prelapsarianov (the world's oldest Bolshevik) and Serge
Esmereldovich Upgobkin. Ron Cook has to play Yegor Tremens Rodent, the kind
of weak character whom Kushner needs in his plays so that every more
right-thinking character can worst him in argument. Only Aisling O'Sullivan
lets the side down as the alcoholic lesbian Katherina Gleb. Presence and
force, sure, but no coherent detail. (I never believed in her alcoholism.) A
cast like this should reach the West End; a play like Slavs] should not.
At the Hampstead Theatre, NW3.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941215

