FT942-16270

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (20): Funds flow into
options - Derivatives


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


The huge investment flows into Latin American securities over the past few
years have fuelled rapid growth in the use of derivatives in the region and
beyond.
Bankers who have been involved in the development and marketing of these
structured fixed-income and equity products, mainly in the form of options
and warrants, say their main attraction is that they provide investors with
a highly-leveraged exposure to Latin America at a fraction of the cost of
buying the underlying securities. At the same time, they offer investors a
certain amount of protection against the inherent volatility in these
markets.
'If you want to delve into Latin America with limited risk then options are
the way to do it,' says Mr Louis Hanover, a specialist on emerging market
debt derivatives at Merrill Lynch in New York.
However, others have reservations about the risks associated with
derivatives on such volatile underlying securities. They point to the lack
of a recent price history to allow one to judge volatility of the underlying
security - a critical factor in its pricing. A further concern is the
relatively high chance of liquidity drying up in the event of a price
collapse or the repatriation of international funds which have been invested
in Latin America over the past few years.
Mr William F. Truscott, an equity fund manager at Boston-based fund manager
Scudder, Stevens & Clark, says of derivatives: 'We haven't made active use
of them. You have to look at them very closely to make sure that you're not
overpaying - particularly if you're buying over-the-counter options.'
Nevertheless, the early success of the industry has drawn attention away
from the risks. Derivatives fans point to the mushrooming trading volumes in
derivatives on Latin American debt following the restructuring of Latin
American sovereign bank debt through the issuance of Brady bonds. Mr Hanover
estimates that around 200m options on notional bonds are now traded on a
daily basis.
Mr Jordi Wiegerinck, head of asset trading at the Dutch bank, ING, in Sao
Paulo, expects the trading volume in derivatives on Brazilian debt alone to
rise threefold this year to Dollars 40bn to Dollars 50bn from Dollars 18bn
last year. 'The liquid underlying market has enabled the derivatives market
to develop,' says Mr Wiegerinck.
He adds that warrants offer best possible leverage to a volatile market.
'You can buy the underlying security and get a yield of 12 to 13 per cent
but you run the risk that the country will not be solvent in two years'
time,' he says.
On the equity side, bankers say that the derivatives business has been given
a significant boost by the wave of privatisation which has swept through the
region since the late 1980s.
Mr Jeremy Campbell-Lamerton, managing director of Inverlat International,
the London-based European operation of Grupo Financiero Inverlat, Mexico's
fourth largest financial institution, says that the progress has been
substantial in three fields.
First, the options exchange in Chicago now has contracts on 10 Latin
American companies, providing international investors with exposure to
companies in Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Argentina. These include Telmex, the
Mexican telephone company; Ica, the Mexican construction company; Panamco, a
US-listed Panamanian company which has Coca-Cola interests in Mexico;
Aracruz, the Brazilian pulp and paper company; CTC, Chile's telephone
company and YPF, the Argentine oil group.
Second, most countries in Latin America now have thriving options exchanges
for local investors. Although the life of the options is short, around 28
days, trading volume in the instruments is significant, particularly in
Argentina and Mexico where the market's capitalisation is estimated at
Dollars 100m.
There have also been issues of domestic over-the-counter (OTC) warrants on
Brazilian and Mexican stocks denominated in local currencies, though
foreigners are less interested in these products, mainly due to the currency
risk.
As a result, there has been a third area of growth in Latin American
derivatives for which international investors have shown a formidable
appetite, namely the dollar-denominated OTC market in so-called 'synthetic'
warrants.
These warrants, which for the most part are exercisable into the American
Depositary Receipts (ADRs) of Latin American companies, are 'synthetic'
since they have not issued by the companies but by banks which have
identified a pool of demand from their clients. The warrants can also be
cash-settled.
Since the warrants are priced in dollars, the holder does not need to worry
about capital controls or currency risk. In addition, trading in many of the
warrants can be settled through Cedel and Euroclear, Europe's two main
clearing houses.
Mr Campbell-Lamerton says that this market has grown rapidly over the past
12 months and estimates that there are now 120 issues compared with fewer
than 10 issues one year ago. Volume is thought to be around Dollars 2bn.
Although the market is at an early stage, its future development will be
limited by the finite pool of ADRs which can be used, Mr Campbell-Lamerton
says.
The warrants are not 'covered', that is the issuing bank will not actually
own the underlying securities. However, the issuing bank will have hedged
itself by taking out a series of options so that if the warrant holders
exercise their rights, the bank can deliver the goods.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940411

