FT942-15283

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Turkey (1): Europe links questioned - At a
watershed in its relations with Europe, the secular republic has been shaken
by the election success of an Islam-based party. Turkey is suffering an
economic crisis, and the economic promised land is not yet in sight


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


Three little words - 'Turkey in Europe' - create surprising convulsions
among academics whenever they come together to discuss the subject. For many
Turks may feel themselves to be European, but in terms of geography if
nothing else, Turkey is also an Asian, Middle Eastern, Levantine even a
Balkan country.
Today some inhabitants are beginning to question their claims to be European
as the country grapples with its worst economic crisis in a decade, a
growing Kurdish rebellion and the fall-out from the electoral challenge to
Turkey's political mainstream of last month's dramatic gains by the
Islamic-based Refah party (RP).
Ask a Turk today where he comes from, and his answer is as likely to be
Bosnia or Azerbaijan as Istanbul or Ankara. And this is not a reflection of
Turkey's mounting refugee intake. 'There are Kurds and non-Kurds' is how one
Turkish diplomat described his country's ethnic breakdown - and only half in
jest.
The confusion over identity is certainly sharpened by the unhappy experience
of the Turkish workers in Germany who have been the subject of extremist
attacks. Seeing itself as both European and Moslem, Turkey is also outraged
by the west's indifference to the suffering of Bosnia, where Turks have
links of both history and kinship.
However, the real challenge is closer to home. The twin cocktail of a
Kurdish and Islamic threat is shaking the foundations of the secular
republic carved from the ruins of the Ottoman Empire.
Turkey has come a long way from the dark days of the military coup in 1980.
Some Turks may even feel they are in sight of the economic promised land.
However, recent events have dented that self-confidence. If the mounting
economic and political problems are left untackled, there is a real danger
that these could deepen the sense of self-doubt and give sustenance to
Islamic and nationalist forces, putting in peril the whole pro-western
thrust of Turkish policy.
Such a prospect is deeply worrying for the west, since Turkey is an
important ally and an increasingly big commercial partner. However, it is no
longer enough just to be in the right place at the right time. The end of
the cold war has changed strategic priorities. The US is reviewing its role
as it downgrades its military presence across Europe as agreed at last
year's Nato summit.
Turkey's relations with Europe are also at a critical turning point. Ankara
is due to enter a customs union with the European Union next year. However,
there must now be doubts whether the deadline will be met given the current
economic turmoil.
Turkey applied for full membership in 1987 and was politely rejected two
years later. But today there is little realistic prospect of early
accession. Indeed, Turkey is not even considered in the current round of
enlargement talks, a point which makes it all the more important that Turkey
does not slip up on its customs union commitments.
Diplomats also point out that with the accession of Nordic and Scandinavian
countries, the European Union is likely to become more, not less, sensitive
to the issues of human rights, an area where Turkey has made too little
progress. In February, Turkey's friends in the west looked on in amazement
as parliament lifted the immunities of six MPs from the radical Kurdish
party, five of whom could now face the death penalty for publicly espousing
the Kurdish cause. The incident provided a sharp reminder of the draconian
military laws limiting freedom of speech which are still in place in a
country seeking full EU membership.
Turkey certainly has little room for error. In Mrs Tansu Ciller, the country
has a youthful and energetic prime minister. However, her political
inexperience has been starkly exposed by the ongoing crisis.
The prime minister's decision to adopt a hard line towards the Kurds may
have a certain logic, since a more moderate policy might unleash the growing
nationalist fervour. But Turkey's refusal to countenance any kind of reform
is jeopardising its foreign policy prestige at a time when its ability to
influence regional events is greater than ever. With 4,000 civilians,
soldiers and guerrillas killed last year in a war costing Turkey an
estimated Dollars 7bn a year, the present bloody stalemate cannot be
sustained.
On the economy, many blame Mrs Ciller's policies for precipitating the
collapse of the currency, which forced her to announce the austerity package
unveiled earlier this month. Mrs Ciller still has to steer through a raft of
legislation on privatisation and tax changes to underpin the programme. She
also has to accommodate an increasingly vociferous union movement which
feels under threat from the package. A period of social unrest seems
inevitable if the measures are to be adopted in full.
In some important respects, the Turkish economy is already diverging from
European norms. Inflation is more than 70 per cent, and will probably rise
to more than 100 per cent as the recent price increases take their toll. The
public sector borrowing requirement is now running at 16 per cent of gross
national product.
Neither the republic - nor even its private sector - can go to the
international debt markets in the current uncertainty. Turkey's credit
rating has already been downgraded twice this year by both Moody's and
Standard & Poor's. The day when foreign correspondent banks cut off lines of
credit is fast approaching.
With basic commodities such as tea and sugar, as well as petrol and
household gas prices rising by up to 100 per cent as part of the package,
the Turkish public will soon begin to feel the pinch. Workers at the
Zonguldak coalworks and the Karabuk steel mills - state companies earmarked
for possible closures - are both poised for industrial action to protest
against the austerity package.
But the view from Brussels is that Turkey's private sector can ride out the
storm, although with labour being stood down and production flat, if not
declining, it will certainly be difficult to make the investments required
to upgrade technologies so as to compete with European imports.
For the politicians, the danger is that some private sector companies will
demand a reprieve from the deadline, which commission officials warn would
unravel the whole process.
The government's own task is to see if it can staunch the huge losses
suffered by the public sector, without which much of the real benefits of a
customs union will be dissipated.
A successful implementation of the stabilisation measures is vital to
restore international confidence in Turkey's economy, and in Mrs Ciller's
leadership. It is also crucial to ensure that the economic problems do not
deepen, thus playing into the hands of Refah, who have successfully
projected themselves as patrons of the dispossessed.
For the local election result on March 27 underscores a stark demographic
fact. In Istanbul and, equally dramatically, in Ankara, the RP came to power
backed by the 'sans culottes' of Turkey's newly-spawned big city slums -
much the same section of voters who backed the fascists and the communists
in the 1970s.
'It's no longer a financial crisis. It's no longer an economic crisis. It's
a political crisis,' was how one Istanbul banker put it.
The Turks are a long-suffering lot. Faced with such a maelstrom, many less
resilient and less phlegmatic societies would probably have cracked under
the strain. Yet for Turkey to survive the crisis, the government must grasp
the nettle of reform.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940415

