FT944-6007

FT  01 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Indonesian trade policies chided in Gatt
report


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


High trade barriers and lack of competition in domestic markets are
hindering growth of Indonesia's economy, the secretariat of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade says in an unusually critical report
published yesterday.
In particular, it highlights concentration of decision-making on trade and
industrial policies in the hands of President Suharto and highly
discretionary use of policy, including financial assistance, to aid certain
industrial sectors.
Indonesia, host last month to the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation summit,
which endorsed regional free trade by 2020, remains one of the most
protected economies in south-east Asia. Though average tariffs have been cut
from 37 per cent to 20 per cent over the past decade, recent reforms have
been inadequate 'to overcome the anti-export bias of the trade regime and
stimulate domestic competition'.
Choosing its words carefully, Gatt echoes criticism of widespread cronyism
in the presidential circle. Trade policy-making, directed by the president,
'is highly informal and centralised' while 'close ties also exist between
the government and large business groups or conglomerates'.
Details of government assistance to strategic industries 'remain obscure'
while 'transparency is undermined by the substantial off-budget funding
apparently provided by the government to aid certain public enterprises'.
The report singles out aid to PT IPTN, the state-owned aircraft company,
'which also benefits from interest-free loans financed from a reforestation
fund'.
Though Gatt does not say so, the company is managed by Mr B J Habibie,
minister of research and development and a close friend of President
Suharto. Use of reforestation funds is subject of a legal challenge by
environmentalists.
Gatt also criticises Indonesia's widespread use of export controls which
affect more than half the country's non-oil exports, especially wood
products. The industry has benefited from cheap logs but Indonesia's
processing of plywood - the second biggest non-oil export after textiles -
'is technically inefficient by world standards, wasting timber and appearing
to contribute little to forest conservation'.
While Indonesia has made 'great strides' in lowering import barriers, the
report says tariffs vary widely; up to half all imports enter at
concessional rates for specific projects or for exporters.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941201

