FT943-12644

FT  23 JUL 94 / The Long View: Throgmorton throes


   By BARRY RILEY


Last week the London Stock Exchange gained a new chairman, John Kemp-Welch.
This week it made the switch to rolling settlement, initially over a
leisurely 10 days, which is more like strolling settlement, but next year in
five days and eventually just three. The venerable Throgmorton Street
institution, for over 200 years a pillar of the City of London, along with
the Lloyd's insurance market, is attempting to face the future: but does it
have one?
The latest changes tell us something about the pressures upon the exchange.
Rolling settlement is a response to the requirements of international
institutional investors, who like to trade on a standardised basis, in
roughly the American style. The interests of domestic private investors are
therefore being sidelined; speculators who have been accustomed to dealing
within the account are instantly inconvenienced and the general public will
find it hard to adjust to three-day settlement, when that eventually comes.
John Kemp-Welch's appointment is also significant. He has just retired as
joint senior partner of Cazenove, London's leading corporate broker.
Cazenove does have wealthy private clients, but it has been best known over
many years as a somewhat rough and tough promoter of the interests of its
many corporate clients.
Sir Antony Hornby, a former senior partner, declared after a controversial
1960s dawn raid for a client company that equality among investors was an
illusion. If someone decides more quickly, or has a better broker, this is
not unfair.
It is hard to imagine that in the past a leading light of such an
uncompromising if prestigious firm could have become chairman of the
exchange, when it was seeking to fulfil a broad public interest mandate. The
chairmen have tended instead to come from medium-sized firms, and from that
more modest base have been better able to pursue consensus policies.
But a different argument now seems to apply. Cazenove is the only big
independent firm which is fundamentally committed to the London market place
(apart, perhaps, from the market maker Smith New Court).
Most of the other main firms are parts of global investment banking
operations which can (and do) belong to markets all over the world. Without
Cazenove the London Stock Exchange would have an even bigger identity
crisis.
In its recent history, dominated by the consequences of the 'Big Bang'
changes of 1986, the London Stock Exchange has reflected the long-term
strengths and weaknesses of the City. Entrepreneurial and outward-looking
London-based firms have seized opportunities for the international trading
of equities and bonds that sleepier and domestically-oriented Continental
bourses have been slow to recognise.
Meanwhile the planning of the back office technology has often been poor,
leading to disaster in early 1993 when the expensive Taurus paperless
settlement system was abandoned. Responsibility for its replacement, the
simpler Crest, has been snatched away by the Bank of England; if settlement,
once a core activity, is to be controlled elsewhere, can any of the
exchange's activities, from price dissemination to control of listings, be
sacrosanct?
Originally, the Stock Exchange thought electronic settlement was all about
facilitating transactions, which of course is what its members make their
living from. But the key issues have turned out to be those of holding
rather than trading securities, and of maintaining contact between companies
and shareholders. Taurus could not cope with the complex issues involved.
The rather less ambitious Crest will force others to make some of the
choices. Crest could help drive a wedge between institutional and private
investors, for instance, because small shareholdings will not be included
except through nominee accounts. The latter, in turn, tend to drive a wedge
between companies and their small shareholders, unless the nominee
arrangements are carefully and expensively designed.
This underlines the possibility that the Stock Exchange will be torn between
the global firms (with their international clients) and the small companies
and private clients of the domestic market place. There are precedents in
the American markets, where the New York Stock Exchange lists the big
companies, and is increasingly seeking foreign company listings, while
thousands of small US companies are traded on the quite separate Nasdaq
system.
Certainly, the London Stock Exchange is a popular market. Hundreds of
companies have sought listings in the past year or two, admittedly at a
favourable time of the cycle.
To an extent, the market place will decide. Rival dealing systems are
beginning to nibble at the central market. The power of the big London
market makers, who were vastly profitable in last year's bull market, will
be one of the biggest challenges for John Kemp-Welch. Money talks, and they
have prospered mightily from the relatively opaque trading system, which
makes it fairly easy to trade their way out of large positions. Investors,
though, will tend to drift towards more transparent systems where they can
find them.
Once, a lot of the problems could be solved within the framework of an
effective monopoly over secondary share trading and a fixed commission
structure. The holes could be plugged through cross-subsidisation.
Fierce international competition requires awkward decisions to be made,
however. The exchange has already shed many of its activities, including
private investor support and the professional regulation of market
practitioners. The question, perhaps, is whether the viable core would still
merit the name London Stock Exchange. But unlike Lloyd's it has at least
retained its dignity.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940723

