FT943-916

FT  27 SEP 94 / Letters to the Editor: Lottery must aid smaller arts
applicants


   From Mr PETER S GUMMER


Sir, Antony Thorncroft's article on the lottery ('The lottery: will it end
in tears?', September 26) and the financial help it will provide for the
arts rightly highlights the need for cautious optimism. However, it fails to
make several important points about the management and policy of the Arts
Council of England, which is responsible for the distribution of these funds
to arts organisations.
First, ACE is determined to provide a significant proportion of its lottery
funds for small applications. They must not be disadvantaged. This would be
against both the spirit and the letter of the lottery legislation. From
these applicants we will not be looking for matched funding but for real
evidence that they have rigorously sought funds from private sources. If
they can only raise 10 or 15 per cent of the total required then so be it.
Indeed, we would consider revenue funding commitments from local authorities
or the private sector, for example, as part of that 10-15 per cent.
Second, so important are the smaller applications that a flexible, lower
limit for funds will be set at around Pounds 5,000 to encourage a balance
between the size of successful applications.
Third, we are happy for those applying, but particularly smaller arts
organisations, to come to the lottery first before going outside for funds.
We can tell them whether they qualify; and, if so, give a conditional grant
and thereby a head start in raising private finance for the balance.
If all the lottery does is fund the large arts organisations, vital and
important though they are in the UK, then the lottery will not have been a
disaster. However, it will have failed to fulfil its real potential in
providing money for small arts organisations in villages, towns and cities
up and down the country.
Peter Gummer,
chairman,
National Lottery Advisory Board for the Arts and Film,
61 Grosvenor Street,
London W1X 9DA

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940927

