FT942-12691

FT  28 APR 94 / Williams' cash call prompts share fall


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


Williams Holdings shares fell 9p to 379p as the industrial conglomerate
called on shareholders for Pounds 267m to carry it through the next raft of
acquisitions.
The rights issue confirmed months of speculation over how Williams would
fund its strategy to build up its three core divisions - fire protection,
security and building products.
The group has spent Pounds 205m on acquisitions in the past 16 months and
was perceived to be constrained by a balance sheet weakened through goodwill
write-offs and increasing debt. Analysts feared that without a rights issue
Williams would be forced into a series of vendor placings to fund
acquisitions.
'Even a small acquisition could have resulted in a substantial increase in
gearing,' said Mr Ian Hilliker of brokers NatWest Securities. 'They now have
flexibility and . . . can utilise the cash flow which will be coming through
from recovery.' After the issue, debt as a percentage of shareholders' funds
will fall from 75 per cent to 7 per cent.
Proceeds from the call, a one-for-seven issue of 82.9m shares at 330p, will
fund the Pounds 64m purchase of a building products business in Europe. Mr
Nigel Rudd, Williams' chairman, said the balance would be used for bolt-on
acquisitions particularly in continental Europe.
The acquisition of the woodcare and adhesive businesses of the Belgian
chemicals group, Solvay, marks Williams' first major purchase on the
continent and is its third in four months. Williams last month paid Dollars
50m (Pounds 34m) for a burner management systems company in the US.
The businesses returned pre-tax profits of Pounds 7.9m, before a series of
one-off items such as pension costs which will not be incurred by Williams.
Sales for the combined businesses were about Pounds 90m.
The Pounds 64m price, which represents about 13 times after-tax earnings,
could be adjusted to between Pounds 54m and Pounds 74m, depending on due
diligence. The UK group is expected to take a goodwill hit of about Pounds
44m.
Analysts said the acquisition was likely to dilute earnings this year, after
restructuring costs of between Pounds 5m and Pounds 10m.
The rights issue is underwritten by Schroders. Brokers to the issue are de
Zoete & Bevan and S G Warburg Securities.
Lex, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940428

