FT941-12888

FT  28 JAN 94 / UK arms in Saudi deal exempt from export regulations


   By DAVID OWEN, JIMMY BURNS, and DAVID WHITE


Saudi Arabia is under no obligation to give details of the end users of
defence equipment supplied by Britain under the Pounds 20bn Al-Yamamah
defence deal, the government said yesterday.
The potentially embarrassing disclosure, came in a parliamentary written
answer by Mr Jonathan Aitken, defence procurement minister.
Mr Aitken said defence equipment exports under the Al- Yamamah deal had
'Crown status', in common with all government defence exports, and were
'therefore not subject to export licensing requirements'.
It also emerged last night that the disclosure had earlier been brought to
the attention of Lord Justice Scott who is conducting the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry.
Evidence before the inquiry shows that the government pressed ahead with
defence deals with Saudi Arabia in spite of being warned by intelligence and
some officials that the country was possibly being used to divert military
equipment to Iraq.
Mr Paul Regan, a spokesman for the Scott inquiry, said the judge was looking
at the potential loopholes inherent in Crown status arrangements, which are
believed to cover a number of other potentially sensitive defence deals, and
the extent to which the government had adhered to restrictions on exports to
Iraq directly or through a third country.
Al-Yamamah is a two-stage government-to-government deal covering supplies of
British arms, infrastructure, and defence services worth more than Pounds
2bn per year.
Mr Jim Cousins, the Labour MP who tabled the parliamentary question, said
yesterday that the government's answer was 'of very considerable
significance' in the light of evidence given to the Scott inquiry.
Mr Cousins said the answer showed there was 'a great hole' in the export
licence control system.
The Ministry of Defence said last night that there was no requirement for
transactions with Crown status either to have export sales licences or for
end-user details to be provided.
Mr Aitken said sales under Al Yamamah were subject to 'the normal foreign
and defence policy considerations'.
The Al-Yamamah deal dates from 1985 and was reinforced in 1988. Although
signed by defence secretaries Mr Michael Heseltine and his successor Mr
George Younger, now Lord Younger of Prestwick, it had from the outset the
strong personal backing of Lady Thatcher, the then prime minister.
A year ago, Mr John Major, the prime minister, secured the latest order for
arms estimated to be worth Pounds 4bn-Pounds 5bn total.
Full details of the deal have never been disclosed. British officials and
industrialists have said this was at the insistence of the Saudi
authorities.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940128

