FT942-15384

FT  15 APR 94 / The axemen slumber: UK public spending is being curbed. Or
is it, asks James Blitz


   By JAMES BLITZ


A year ago, UK government ministers were promising a furious fight to cut
public expenditure any way they could. What happened to this much-heralded
review of the welfare state?
Last April, as official forecasts projected a public sector borrowing
requirement of Pounds 50bn for 1993-94, the Treasury announced one set of
Budget tax rises and prepared to unveil another in November. Departments
were told to curb running costs and pay levels, and in November's Budget,
which combined tax and spending decisions for the first time, a total of
about Pounds 15bn was lopped off the spending commitments of Whitehall
departments for the three financial years starting 1994-95.
But the ambitions of Mr John Major's government did not stop at a one-off
balancing of the books. It launched a campaign to reverse the growth in
public spending over the longer term, with 'fundamental expenditure reviews'
of departmental spending that would go well beyond traditional attempts to
match revenue and expenditure.
The reviews, announced with panache by Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary
to the Treasury, would think the unthinkable about departmental policies,
starting with the departments of social security, education and health, and
the Home Office.
Their task was to test whether a particular programme should remain the
state's responsibility and whether waste could be squeezed. The goal, as Mr
Peter Lilley, the social security secretary, put it, was to ensure that the
growth in the welfare state did not outpace the nation's ability to pay for
it.
One year on, the review system is waning. No conclusions have been published
and few ministers talk about the process. There is a rolling programme of
departments under scrutiny - employment, transport, and trade and industry
were among those ministries added this year.
But this week, as cabinet ministers held their first meeting of the current
spending round, Treasury officials warned that public spending would still
easily overshoot projections made for the current financial year. Mr Norman
Lamont, the former chancellor who helped set up the reviews, speaks as if
they have already been buried, saying 'they should not be forgotten'. And
rightwing Tory backbenchers believe the government has lost its willingness
to use the reviews to cut deep into public spending.
'There is a feeling among colleagues that the reviews have run out of
steam,' says one Tory backbencher. 'If you look for where the cuts in
spending came in the last Budget, they were in holding down running costs
and public sector pay. There weren't enough signs that the need for services
was being questioned.'
Ministers take pride in some aspects of the review process. They claim that
the review of the social security department is playing a significant role
in containing the long-term growth of an Pounds 80bn annual budget.
Legislation next year to replace unemployment benefit with a 'jobseekers
allowance' will help social security officials target benefits more
precisely. So too will the replacement of invalidity benefit with incapacity
benefit (bringing a more objective test of applicants' fitness) and the
abolition of the subsidy paid to large companies to cover the cost of
statutory sick pay.
'These reforms were already in our sights,' says a Treasury official. 'But
we had not got them worked out properly, certainly not to the extent that
they would yield so much to the Exchequer. The review took these ideas and
worked them through in full.'
But it is far less clear what has been achieved elsewhere. The education
review has encouraged a shift from student grants to loans; the Home Office
review has studied whether private finance could be used to help build
prisons - a move that found its way into recent proposals by Mr Michael
Howard, the home secretary. But both these examples represent an extension
of existing policies, not radical departures. And many areas of heavy
spending appear untouched - for instance, the National Health Service drugs
budget.
As the Treasury official explains, many of the ideas in the reviews 'have
helped us to be more demanding over running costs rather than producing
identifiable policy changes'.
Why has the impact been so variable? Partly it is because the reviews are
led by the department concerned. Treasury officials on review steering
groups can insist that radical, cost-saving options are studied. But
departments are not forced to meet pre-set targets and can approach the
reviews in their own way.
Results, therefore, depend on the political outlook and skills of the
cabinet minister heading each department. As a Thatcherite minister with a
clear cost-cutting agenda, Mr Lilley has been keener on securing results.
But elsewhere the Treasury has met obstacles from departments reluctant to
force difficult measures through a House of Commons where the government has
a slim majority. Mr Lilley himself has encountered problems, for instance,
over the operation of the Child Support Agency, which is intended to cut the
cost of state support for single parents.
What can realistically be expected from the reviews over the coming year?
There are some obvious targets: the Treasury is scrutinising the cost of
running Britain's courts, looking for ways to reduce the time spent in
handling divorce petitions, civil liability cases and insurance claims. A
job-saving merger of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise operations is
being considered. But these budgets make up a small part of the overall
spending cake.
Whether more sweeping cuts can be achieved in this November's Budget, or
over coming years, will depend on the determination of Mr Kenneth Clarke,
the chancellor, to push his cabinet colleagues into renewing their
commitment to reduce public spending.
In a recent speech, Mr Clarke said he was seeking a tough spending round
this year, and threw his weight behind the reviews.
With speculation about a leadership contest in the autumn, the centre-left
Mr Clarke may be appealing for support from rightwing Tory backbenchers. But
the chancellor also knows that the fragility of the economic recovery means
he cannot loosen his grip on public spending - particularly if he is looking
for tax cuts before the next general election.
Those who believe the UK's public spending has spun out of control must hope
that the prize of tax reductions will concentrate the minds of ministers and
officials, as they scrutinise the minutiae of departmental programmes.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940415

