FT944-2841

FT  15 DEC 94 / Russian democrats at odds on Chechnya


   By JOHN THORNHILL


   MOSCOW


The crisis in Chechnya has sharply divided Russian society. It is also
splitting the parliamentary democratic movement which appears torn between
principle and political advantage.
There is little argument among politicians about whether Chechnya is
anything other than an integral part of Russia which must be brought back
into the fold; the differences emerge over how this can be best achieved.
In the Duma, the lower house of parliament, a curious alliance of communists
and liberals has opposed armed intervention. Conversely, Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky's ultra-nationalist Liberal Democratic party has unusually found
itself sharing the same platform as the radical pro-reform December 12
Union, headed by Mr Boris Fyodorov, the former finance minister, in support
of force. This may prove only a temporary re-orientation of parliamentary
forces which will quickly dissolve when the Duma returns to routine
politics, such as the 1995 budget.
But a more permanent change appears to be overtaking the Duma's biggest
faction, Russia's Democratic Choice, led by Mr Yegor Gaidar, the former
prime minister, which has broadly supported President Boris Yeltsin's
policies. Mr Gaidar has been one of the most vocal advocates of a peaceful
solution to the Chechen problem. But his stand has alienated Mr Yeltsin,
jeopardising Russia's Choice's standing in the Duma.
'Until this crisis Gaidar still had one foot in Yeltsin's camp and one foot
out. That has now changed and Russia's Choice will have radically to rethink
its outlook,' says one political analyst.
Mr Gaidar has come under attack within his own faction, too. Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the foreign minister, has quit the party over its stance on
Chechnya. Mr Oleg Boiko, chairman of its executive committee, has also
criticised the leadership.
Russia's Choice yesterday issued a statement papering over the differences,
stressing the distinction between personal and party views. But few
observers doubt that tensions could re-surface if unrest drags on in the
Caucasus.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941215

