FT942-12161

FT  30 APR 94 / How to Spend it: Bags of fashion


What does it take for a handbag to move from the mundane world of the merely
useful to cult status? What is the mysterious ingredient that makes one bag
internationally desired while its near relation, which seems identical,
languishes on the arms of the unfashionable? We know that quality comes into
it, but so, too, does clever design.
But above all, there is a mysterious ingredient that nobody can explain,
that drives otherwise sane women to plunge into debt merely for a few scraps
of fashionable leather.
Cult handbags can come at all prices - from the Kelly bag (Pounds 1,850 for
small calf and three months waiting - after that as prices rise so does the
length of the waiting list) to the Herve Chapelier at under Pounds 50. They
can be French (Chanel, Hermes, Louis Vuitton); they can be true Brit (Bill
Amberg, Anya Hindmarch), they can be Italian (Gucci, Prada, Bottega Veneta)
or transatlantic (Judith Leiber).
Some cult handbags retain their status for many years - others move in and
out of fashion as tastes change. Here, for the summer, are just a few of the
most fashionable handbags around.
                       *      *      *
Do not worry if you do not yet own a Bottega Veneta handbag. Until recently
it has been very difficult to do so in the UK. A small, family-owned company
based in the Veneto, Bottega Veneta has some of the most delicious small
handbags around. Fashionable women who travel have been seeking them out in
Italy, France or America but it was not until last October that Harvey
Nichols of Knightsbridge began to stock a few in their ground floor handbag
department - so successful has it been that last week a big new concession
entirely given over to Bottega Veneta was opened.
The handbags' chief hallmarks are exquisitely fine leather, often woven (the
pillow bag is its all-time best-seller and a small version costs Pounds 255,
the large one Pounds 375), the almost obsessive lack of gilt, and delicious
touches such as beautifully braided handles and tassle-pulls. The evening
bags are especially desirable but for those who, like me, are congenitally
unable to organise their life without something as large as a carrier bag to
rummage in, there is the famous drawstring bucket at Pounds 525 which should
do nicely.
The black woven leather handbag photographed here is typical of the Bottega
Veneta look - coming in later in the summer it will sell for about Pounds
500.
For summer there is a hemp (hemp, you will have gathered, is about as smart
a colour as you can get this summer) version of the pillow bag that will
sell for Pounds 150.
                       *      *      *
Herve Chapelier is the big name among the young and hip. It has much of the
cachet of Prada and costs a fraction of the price. As a young colleague put
it: 'After all, what is Prada at the end of the day but a bit of nylon?'
Herve Chapelier, too, is just a bit of nylon but a very fashionable and a
very practical bit of nylon. The bags first became a vogue in France when
Herve Chapelier started importing a line of duffel bags from Los Angeles.
These were very successful but it is the tote bag collection (photographed
here) that really took Herve Chapelier to cult status - every hip young
French student needed them in every size, for school, for carrying togs to
the gym, bikinis to the beach, notebooks to work. Carried by people such as
Kylie Minogue, Ronit Zilkha (the dress designer), Edina in Absolutely
Fabulous, Zoe Wanamaker and Alain Prost - the bags are used by men and women
alike. For those who like something smarter there are version in suede and
leather but the classic, signature design is the tote bag. In six different
sizes and masses of different colour combinations, the price ranges from
Pounds 12 for a small purse to Pounds 40 for the larger 'cabas'. Rucksacks
(still very popular) are Pounds 55. For those who are addicted to relaxed
briefcases (the sort that do not send out loud messages about the importance
of the carrier) there is a handy nylon briefcase. The range is sold in
Harrods of Knightsbridge, Heals of Tottenham Court Road, London W1, Moon in
Glasgow, Troon in Cambridge, Sage in Old Amersham Bucks, and Graham & Green
of 4-7 Elgin Crescent, London W11.
                       *      *      *
Cult carriers have, for a long time, been slicked-up, smartened-up versions
of the rucksack or carry-all. Almost every smart name from Gucci and Chanel
to Mulberry, Etienne, Aigner and Mulberry has done a version of the
ruck-sack. Every model seems to have one (which is worn on just one
shoulder, never two) and besides being modish they are very practical,
solving the career girl's problem of how to carry her life around with her
without ending up on the osteopath's couch. As the years go by, companies
take up the original design, dust it down and freshen it up - this year has
produced the hold-all in a slightly rougher, pale, back-to-nature,
eco-conscious look. Made by Desmo of Florence in cream suede, it has masses
of pockets and is Pounds 185 at Harrods.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940430

