FT944-6068

FT  30 NOV 94 / New Delhi restaurateur finds corruption put on the menu: A
story of enterprise and bribery in India


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


Francis Kuok, a second-generation Chinese living in New Delhi, thought he
had mastered the fine art of bribery or, to put it more politely, getting
around Indian red-tape when he decided to open his third Chinese restaurant.
The 30-year old entrepreneur, his elder brother Gregory, and two friends, Ms
Anu Bakshi and Jerry Wong run two successful take-away shops in a
middle-class Delhi suburb.
They thought they knew the ropes well enough to start a small sit-down lunch
and dinner place.
Mr Kuok and his team had already learnt that the best way to stay in the
restaurant business was to keep the grease out of the noodles for the newly
converted health-conscious middle classes and to spread it instead on the
palms of petty bureaucrats and police officials.
But he claims that what they encountered when they started setting up a
restaurant in the heart of the city was a web of institutionalised
corruption that threatened to stall their enterprise if they did not bribe
government officials every step of the way.
'Once you get used to the broad daylight robbery, it's a dream,' says Mr
Kuok, whose restaurant started on September 5 and is already doing well.
He says he has had to pay more than Rs200,000 (Dollars 6,370) in bribes over
the last three months, about 10 per cent of his Rs2m investment in the
restaurant.
'It's the initial shock of discovering how well organised the set-up is that
throws you,' he says.
Finding a defunct printing plant in a stylish part of town and transforming
it into a pretty restaurant in shades of green and white with gurgling
water, swaying bamboos and soft piped music was the least of their problems.
The plant had not been painted in more than 50 years, and drastic renovation
was required. The eight-year lease with the owner allowed for the tearing
down of walls, but he alleges that municipal officials suddenly appeared in
the middle of construction work and told the masons to lay down their tools.
'Permission' to renovate the plant was needed and this could easily be
obtained by visiting Mr X, the official concerned, after seeking an
appointment at his office.
'There is a fixed price for each 'permission' or licence needed, but I tell
you it works, it's not money down the drain,' claims Mr Kuok. 'Though there
is no paper-work involved, and nothing on the record, it's all very
above-board when it comes to actually delivering what has been promised you
for a certain non-negotiable sum.'
The only time there could be a problem is when a particular official being
dealt with is suddenly transferred, and the bribing process has to be begun
again.
There is an acute water shortage in the area but he says the authorities
allowed a tubewell to be dug - for a price.
There was no toilet or connection to the sewer in the printing plant so the
extra digging called for a further bribe. The kitchen could be extended
after still more money was paid.
'They keep an eye on our every move, and there's no option but to pay your
way through,' says Mr Kuok.
He is amazed at the apparent transparency with which deals are concluded,
and the nonchalance of officials accepting illegal pay-offs. They are often
part of India's elite civil service and the system is so well entrenched,
and involves such a lot of money, that even the gate-keeper at the door of a
bureaucrat's office is part of the game and knows exactly what the boss
inside will deliver for what sum.
'I can bet there is no restaurant in Delhi that hasn't paid all the
departments concerned,' says Mr Kuok.
A 'fastidious' health inspector could point out a cockroach in your kitchen
to close down your restaurant if he were not paid. Health officials certify
that kitchen staff is not suffering from a communicable disease such as
tuberculosis.
A fire certificate is required and even a death-trap could be certified safe
for a fee. Quite separately, the police will extract their pound of flesh
for turning a blind eye to that small encroachment on the pavement, for
allowing customers to park where pedestrians are supposed to be walking and
for registering the restaurant in case of a law and order problem.
'We think nothing of policemen walking in on a daily basis, ordering chilli
chickens and Cokes or whatever else strikes their fancy on the house,' says
Ms Bakshi, who was a journalist before she ventured into the food business.
'It's a very lop-sided value system here,' says Ms Bakshi. 'These are no
gentlemen you are dealing with, and yet, they keep their promises.'
An official once told them helpfully: 'We hold the gun to shoot you, but you
have the bullet.' The bullet of course, is money, and once you've coughed
up, you're home and dry - until you need to get your licence renewed next
year, that is.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

941130

