FT942-15287

FT  15 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Heavy turnover in Clyde


   By JOEL KIBAZO, PETER JOHN, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON


Oil exploration group Clyde Petroleum was the centre of attention for much
of the session as the Seaq ticker revealed that some 13.4m shares, equal to
3.4 per cent of the issued capital, had been sold into the market. The
shares were sold at 29 1/4 p, a discount of around 10 per cent to the then
ruling market price, and 12.5m were subsequently placed at 30 1/4 p. Clyde
was one of the market's most active stocks on Wednesday when a block of 3m
shares was believed to have changed hands. Clyde shares yesterday closed a
penny off at 33p.
There was no confirmation regarding the possible identity of the seller
yesterday. Recent hints that George Weston Holdings might have been
unloading stock was dismissed by oil specialists, but there were strong
suspicions that Fidelity, the US investment group, which recently sold a
small block of stock, could have been the big seller.
Clyde was the star of a busy oil sector inspired by oil prices moving
towards the Dollars 15 a barrel level. However, they later slipped back as
news of the downing of two US helicopters over Iraq came into the market.
Sentiment was given a further boost by news that Salomon Brothers, the big
US investment bank, had increased its current year oil price forecasts to
above Dollars 16 a barrel. A line of 5.5m nil paid ex rights shares in Lasmo
were chased by at least four leading marketmakers and placed at 18 1/2 p
premium.
Results largely in line with expectations from hotel group Forte produced a
mixed reaction among analysts - although the more positive view prevailed in
the market pushing the shares up 3 to 242p. There was a strong performance
from London hotels and slightly firmer trading in the provinces. But there
was some disappointment at the size of the write-down in assets, as well as
continued concerns over the group's debts.
BZW moved the stock from a hold to a buy, arguing that concerns such as
those of sale and leasebacks of hotels had now been aired and that the
company's overall strategy was now in place. But Smith New Court remained a
hold, arguing that despite the recovery in London trading, the shares are
fully valued.
Long-term bears NatWest Securities agreed, adding that with no dividend
yield to speak of and little support in the asset backing, the shares are
likely to undergo a continued derating. Profit forecasts for 1995 remained
in the Pounds 125-30m bracket.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

940415

