FT942-12703

FT  28 APR 94 / A problem aired . . .: Bruce Clark previews a portrait of
the UK Foreign Office


   By BRUCE CLARK


As western politicians work themselves into a moral frenzy over Bosnia,
there is something refreshing about a senior western diplomat who is dubious
about the role of ethics in foreign policy.
The diplomat is Mr David Gore-Booth, British ambassador to Saudi Arabia, and
former head of the Middle East department at the Foreign Office. His
world-weary musings on the rights and wrongs of arms sales provide one of
many startling vignettes in a documentary series on the British diplomatic
service entitled True Brits, to be screened on BBC2 over the next six weeks,
starting tonight.
'You have to factor in the morality because that is what British public
opinion and the British value system demands,' believes the ambassador. 'But
it cannot be the overriding factor because Britain has to survive by
exporting.'
Mr Gore-Booth is talking about the Scott inquiry, which is considering
allegations that Britain avoidably abetted Saddam Hussein by selling him
weapons and components. He sees no case to answer. 'I'm not embarrassed or
ashamed of British policy at that time; it was in fact as close to being
honourable as international circumstances permitted.'
The series is billed by its producer Stephen Lambert as the closest British
television has come to the heart of government. It provides hilarious
insights into the horse-trading before a European summit; follows a consul
into a Thai prison; depicts the opening of lonely outposts in ex-Soviet
cities; and follows the dreaded cost-cutting inspectors to Washington.
It is the existence of the latter which explains the sudden onset of
glasnost at the Foreign Office. Like everybody else, the diplomats want to
show that they provide value for taxpayers' money. But in throwing open
their doors, the diplomats have been remarkably bold.
In one episode, we see the pragmatic Mr Gore-Booth, who speaks for British
policy at its most hard-boiled and mercantilist. In another, we meet two
women diplomats who are blazing idealists.
There is the formidable, elegant Ms Gwynne Evans, head of the UN department,
who is unmarried, a self-confessed workaholic, who has devoted her working
life to what she calls 'public service'. We see her visiting Sarajevo, where
she sits stoically through an artillery battle, makes some proposals about
how to defend aid convoys and attends Mass in a local church. She is too
clever to think there are easy answers in Bosnia, and that makes her all the
more likeable.
That said, most viewers will relate more easily to the engaging, vulnerable
personality of Ms Frances Guy, a young Scotswoman who deals with Iraq. One
moment she is saying goodbye to her husband and baby daughter in a modest
London home; the next she is helping the Kurds of northern Iraq rebuild
their villages under cover of the 'no-fly' zone.
The two women seem at times to live on a different planet from Mr
Gore-Booth. On reflection, however, the worlds of all three are closely
intertwined. Ms Guy may represent a gentler school of diplomacy than Mr
Gore-Booth, but she too has realpolitik to consider. With disarming
frankness, she explains the reason why she cannot be too zealous in
promoting self-government among the Kurds or in any other part of Iraq:
neighbouring countries would see it as a bad precedent.
'You have the Iranians who are scared of democracy, you have the Saudis who
are scared of democracy . . . and they control a lot of the British
economy.'
Which brings us back to Mr Gore-Booth. The Saudis may not like western
political systems, but they do care about their co-religionists in Bosnia
and they expect Britain to care about them too. We see Mr Douglas Hurd,
foreign secretary, telling his man in Riyadh: 'We have to show also that
we're not just sitting back being careless of Moslem lives.'
On the subject of Moslem lives: one of the 'international circumstances' to
which Mr Gore-Booth refers is the fact that five years ago, most of Iraq's
partners did not see the use of poison gas against the Kurds as grounds for
cutting off arms sales. So a unilateral UK boycott would arguably have hurt
Britain more than Iraq.
This 'circumstance' was certainly regrettable, for it was soon apparent that
Saddam was capable of much 'worse' acts than poisoning his citizens - such
as invading Kuwait. If the west had 'factored in the morality' a little
earlier, perhaps the Gulf war, and the human tragedy of the Iraqi Kurds
which Ms Guy is trying to alleviate, could have been avoided.
Nor is Mr Gore-Booth a mercantilist all the time. Confronting a delegation
of British businessmen who want better relations with Iran, he tells them
bluntly: 'We believe the Iranians are trying to acquire a nuclear bomb.'
So there are, it seems, some circumstances when countries need to be kept at
arm's length, even when business opportunities beckon. Defining those
circumstances has never been easy for professional diplomats, and it is not
easy for the ordinary tax-paying citizen either.
Even allowing for the interest of the Foreign Office in self-promotion, it
is still extraordinary that it has allowed the viewer quite such a candid
glimpse of its own dilemmas and the differing ways in which its staff
respond.
The Foreign Office apparently wants its dilemmas to become the public's
dilemmas too; and that is a worthy aspiration. It also makes for gripping
television.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940428

