FT942-16299

FT  11 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Pundits split over second quarter start -
London


   By TERRY BYLAND


Whatever deeper economic fundamentals may still overshadow UK stocks, one
significant feature of the market background has shifted. The UK tax-year
deadline has come and gone, and with it the close of a painful 1994
first-quarter performance by UK equities. Fund managers have presumably
taken the pain, cleared the decks, and must now decide whether to follow the
bulls or the bears.
The second quarter opens with investors clearly uncertain and market
strategists sharply divided in their views. The bears would argue that the
stock market did well to survive the Easter weekend without something like a
repetition of autumn 1987. Even without such alarms, the market ended the
first quarter some 12 per cent below its peak and the problems which brought
that setback - rekindled inflation worries and a tightening credit regime at
the US Federal Reserve - are still with us.
For the near term, there are signs that the European markets, having become
bored with minor adjustments to repo rates, are looking keenly for a
significant cut in rates in Germany when the Bundesbank meets on Thursday.
But analysts suggest the UK market may now concentrate on its own concerns.
There is general, if reluctant, agreement that UK base rates are likely to
be cut as consumers face up to the Pounds 8bn or so tax increases to be
implemented this month. Mr Nicholas Knight, at Nomura Securities, believes
investors may see this as a signal to sell equities, since it will imply
harsher treatment in the second half of the year. His forecast of a Footsie
at 2,800 in the near future has not been forgotten by the stock market.
But there is a case for the bulls. The strongest factor for equity optimism
is that dividend yields on equities are rising steeply, and have already
taken the yield relative to bonds below its 10-year average. Strauss
Turnbull puts the prospective yield on equities at 4.1 per cent, based on
forecast dividend growth of about 10 per cent. This is the aggregate
dividend rise so far this year.
The dividend argument is particularly significant for the water companies
The sector has underperformed by about 10 per cent since the turn of the
year, partly because impending regulatory developments have inhibited
investors and because rising gilt yields have reduced the attractions of
utilities.
BZW and Kleinwort Benson agree that Ofwat's pricing review, not due until
July, will continue to cast a shadow. But BZW predicts a major revaluation
of the sector, pointing out that regulatory risk will at least be reduced
dramatically after July. Kleinwort believes the sector will turn in higher
profits and dividend growth of around 8 per cent, albeit at the cost of
dividend cover.
At least part of the potential upside could arrive soon, according to BZW,
which discounts any further threat from gilts in the near term. The firm
focuses on water companies offering the significant dividend growth which
will be associated with equally significant cost-cutting programmes.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940411

