FT942-15943

FT  13 APR 94 / Discrimination seen in Bar training


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


Racial discrimination in the selection of trainees at the Bar is a big
disincentive to ethnic minority students and partly responsible for their
high failure rate in its finals course, according to a report published
yesterday.
An inquiry into allegations of racial discrimination at the Bar's law school
found no evidence of direct or indirect discrimination against ethnic
minority students, but said there was 'a significant link' between those who
found traineeships and success in the Bar's final exams.
The inquiry, chaired by Dame Jocelyn Barrow, concluded that discrimination
by barristers' chambers in selecting trainees was partly to blame for the
racial disparity in success and failure rates in the exam.
The inquiry was set up last year by the Bar Council to discover why ethnic
minority students taking the Bar's finals exam in 1992 had a failure rate
nearly three times that of white students.
In the 1991-92 academic year, 44.7 per cent of ethnic minority students
failed the exam, compared with only 16 per cent of white students. The pass
rate of ethnic minority candidates improved to 70 per cent in 1992-93, but
still compared badly with the 88 per cent pass rate of white students.
The Bar Council said it was 'concerned' at the inquiry's conclusions and
would examine the recommendations carefully. But the Association of Women
Barristers said there was now an urgent need to standardise the timing of
selection of trainees.
Many black students arrived at the Bar's law school only to find chambers
had already selected trainees for the following year and had no vacancies
left, it said.
More than 70 per cent of white students secured a traineeship compared with
48 per cent of ethnic minority students in 1992/93.
Discrimination by chambers was not the only cause identified by the inquiry
for the poor pass rate of ethnic minority students. The report says lower
prior academic achievement and the failure of the Bar's school to meet the
social and cultural needs of ethnic minority students were also to blame.
It recommends reforms including clearer pass and fail criteria, external
examiners, double marking, and the appointment of an equal opportunities
officer for the Bar's school.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

