FT942-14558

FT  20 APR 94 / CBI chief hits at 'risible' Euro laws


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


The Confederation of British Industry plans to develop a Europe-wide
business agenda to unite EU business leaders in resisting intrusive social
legislation, Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of
British Industry, said last night.
Attacking 'ill-conceived', 'disappointing', and 'risible' policies in
Brussels and among EU member governments, Mr Davies told the annual dinner
of the Yorkshire and Humberside regional CBI that EU legislation on social
policy was being brought into disrepute.
It was time for the European business community to act in its common
interest and force politicians to take notice. The CBI's business agenda
would be published next month.
Mr Davies said recent 'disappointing developments' in Europe include:
EU member governments' discussions of a white paper on growth,
competitiveness and employment by Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission
president, were focusing on new social policy initiatives and running
counter to the document's original themes.
A green paper on social policy which had focused on ways of increasing the
cost of employing labour instead of how to get Europe's 20m jobless back to
work.
Failure by the EU and the Council of Ministers to prevent a proliferation of
state aid for steel, telecommunications, energy and air travel, putting
British companies at a disadvantage. The failure of the EU to get to grips
with its spending. Auditors had produced 'dismal catalogues of fraud and
waste', yet the commission took little interest.
All large European employers opposed the European Works Council Directive -
discussed yesterday by the Council of Ministers - said Mr Davies, because it
would cut across existing satisfactory consultation arrangements, impose new
administrative burdens, push up costs and slow down decision-making.
Britain was not obliged to follow it because of its opt-out from the
Maastricht social chapter, but 90 UK companies would be affected in mainland
Europe and the EU was funding a union campaign to persuade companies which
were not affected by the directive to follow it voluntarily.
He dismissed the commission's claim that the directive would increase
identification of employees with their companies and increase productivity.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940420

