FT944-2870

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (6): Prospering despite problems -
Trends in Kuwait and Bahrain


   By ROBIN ALLEN


The legacy of regional instability continues to haunt some financial
institutions in Kuwait and Bahrain, but there are banks in both states which
continue to prosper.
Kuwaiti private sector indebtedness from the collapse more than 12 years ago
of the Souk Al-Manakh, the unofficial stock exchange, continues to cast a
pall over the banking system and the entire economy.
Two problems remain after the passage of the second and final deadline, last
October 31, for the registration and authentication of bad debts under the
government's Difficult Debts Settlement Programme (DDSP).
The good news is that 8,889 debtors out of the original 10,391, just over 85
per cent, have either fully settled or have registered for settlement under
the DDSP's discount options.
Together, they were responsible for 96.8 per cent or some Dollars 23.4bn, of
the total debt of around KD7bn (Dollars 24.2bn). It is reckoned that most of
the 1,502 debtors who failed to register by the end of October 'are either
bankrupt and therefore don't care,' in the words of one senior banking
official; or they have already left the country and do not intend to come
back. Collectively, they owe KD228m (Dollars 788.9m), and will, in due
course, be taken to court.
More serious is the prospect for those 5,500 people who have registered and
who chose the first option for settlement - to repay their discounted debts
by September 7 next year, the end of a two-year period since the DDSP law
became operative.
Even after taking into account the generous discounts, which vary from 54.36
per cent to 75 per cent, depending on the size of the debt, these people
still have to find a total of KD2.5bn (Dollars 8.6bn).
Many of these individuals would have to sell their Kuwait-based shares and
property in order to raise the money. Such a massive sale of private sector
assets could well tear the heart out of Kuwait's fragile economic recovery
of the last two years; and the government is now said to be thinking of
asking the national assembly to amend the law to give these debtors more
time.
Despite these problems, the two leading banks, National Bank of Kuwait (NBK)
and Gulf Bank, each increased their profits by 22 per cent last year and
maintained profit growth through the first half of this year.
NBK in particular, the winner this year of Euromoney's award for 'The
world's best smaller bank,' stands out for never losing sight of the three
ingredients essential for any bank: a solid capital base; a clear strategy
from its board; and quality management which is allowed the freedom to
manage without interference.
NBK's return on equity, 15.98 per cent, and its tier-one capital adequacy
ratio of 22.75 per cent, are higher than many larger banks from politically
more stable areas. It not only stayed clear of the Souk Al-Manakh casino; it
also anticipated the regional economic downturn after 1982 and built up its
assets and business overseas so that today these represent some 35 per cent
of the total, and contribute more than that to overall profits.
Kuwait is also the home to Gulf Investment Corporation (GIC), owned equally
by the six GCC governments - Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and
the UAE.
In its turn, GIC is the outright owner - since 1991 - of Bahrain-based Gulf
International Bank (GIB), whose part-Iraqi ownership prior to that was
dispensed with in the absence of Iraq after the Gulf war by the simple
expedient of writing down all existing shares to zero; followed by the GCC
governments re-capitalising the bank. GIC is an investment and merchant
bank; GIB a wholesale commercial bank. Both were set up for the primary
purpose of promoting economic growth in the GCC.
For different reasons both have been slow towards achieving this purpose. In
the case of GIC, its focus has been blunted by GCC governments which up to
now have had the revenue to finance their own economies' development. GIB,
in common with many other Bahrain offshore banking units (OBUs), incurred
losses in Saudi Arabia; as well as in Latin America and Iraq. For all these,
provisions, sometimes full provisions, had to be made.
In both cases last year's profits were largely dependent on interest and
gains on investment and trading securities. For the first six months of this
year, GIB reported a three per cent fall in profits, largely because of a
fall in 'other income,' trading and investment securities, from Dollars
32.5m in 1992 to Dollars 14.4m this year.
Two other institutions stand out among the 69 OBUs and exempt companies in
Bahrain. Both are the antithesis of GIC and GIB.
The first, Arab Banking Corporation (ABC), has developed in just 17 years to
become the biggest commercial bank in the Gulf and one of the largest bank
holding companies in the Arab world. By the end of last June the ABC group
had built up assets to just under Dollars 19bn.
ABC's strategy and growth was synonymous with the vision and energy of its
founder and chief executive, Mr Abdullah Saudi, a Libyan national, who felt
compelled to resign last May as a result of political pressure exercised
through the US Treasury's Office of Assets Control.
His replacement, Mr Ahmed Abdullatif, formerly deputy governor of the Saudi
Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) and now managing director of Jeddah-based
Riyad Bank, will mean a radically different style of leadership.
The second, Investcorp is a more recent creation even, than ABC, and no less
successful. It was founded in 1982 in Bahrain by Iraqi-born US citizen Mr
Nemir Kirdar with Dollars 50m capital paid in by a few wealthy Gulf
individuals. His aim was to marry the capital export potential of the Gulf
with investment opportunities in north America and Europe.
By the end of last October, Investcorp had arranged 52 corporate and real
estate investment transactions worth over Dollars 6.5bn.
The few shareholders have become more than 10,000; paid-in capital is now
Dollars 373m on total assets of Dollars 1.4bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 43

941215

