FT941-3569

FT  16 MAR 94 / Britain blocks agreement on EU voting rights


   By DAVID GARDNER and ROLAND RUDD


   BRUSSELS, LONDON


European Union foreign ministers failed last night to break a deadlock over
voting rights in an expanded union after the UK held out for yet another
meeting to settle the issue.
The 12 are expected to resume talks in Brussels next Tuesday but angry
ministers said they had in effect given the UK and Spain an ultimatum on the
voting rights issue and were not prepared to make any further concessions.
The UK and Spain are resisting any dilution of their right to block
decisions in the EU Council of Ministers when Austria, Finland, Norway and
Sweden join the EU next year.
Senior negotiators said Britain and Spain had been offered a compromise
solution which would allow them to delay decisions to which they objected.
But they made clear there could be no question of a small minority of EU
states indefinitely holding up decisions.
Mr Jacques Poos, the Luxembourg foreign minister, said last night the
ministers had settled membership terms for Norway after resolving a row over
fishing rights, putting even more pressure on the UK and Spain to reach an
agreement. Entry terms for Finland, Sweden and Austria have already been
agreed.
The EU foreign ministers' meeting next Tuesday would be their fourth attempt
to resolve the crisis over enlargement of the Union to 16.
'Positions have hardened rather than moved closer together,' said Mr Alain
Lamassoure, French European Affairs Minister. There are fears that further
delay on the voting rights dispute might sink the chances of the four
newcomers joining the EU in January as planned.
A senior British government official made clear yesterday that the UK could
not yet work its way around the voting rights dispute, which it acknowledges
may jeopardise prospects for the 'wider Europe' London says it espouses.
'You have to realise how (any weakening of UK veto rights) could play in
Westminster' among rightwing, Europhobic members of the British parliament,
the official said.
Mr John Townend, chairman of the powerful Tory backbench Finance Committee,
said opposition to watering down Britain's rights was spread right across
the party. 'This is a case of blackmail, to put it bluntly. The Commission
is proposing watering down voting rights to have enlargement of the
Community.'
Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, asked in parliament to clarify the
government's negotiating position at the foreign ministers' meeting, said:
'What we need to ensure is that democratic legitimacy and the rights of
minorities are sustained within the European Union.'
One rightwing backbencher said privately: 'The prime minister has been told
that he risks his majority in the Commons if he allows the Foreign Office to
agree to any compromise over our blocking veto.'
In Brussels, enormous pressure was placed on the British, including calls
for a vote that would expose them as the obstacle preventing the move from a
Europe of 12 to 16.
The UK wants to change the proportion of weighted votes in the Council of
Ministers needed to block EU laws. Currently, 30 per cent of the votes can
form a 'blocking minority'.
Brussels to keep close eye on telecoms ventures, Page 2
Ian Davidson, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940316

