FT943-12639

FT  23 JUL 94 / Markets: A week of bread and circuses - London


   By RODERICK ORAM


The Conservatives delivered bread and circuses this week, their first double
act in a long time.
First came the Cabinet shuffle which elevated to party chairman Jeremy
Hanley, a man promising livelier leadership. He is well qualified. A son of
show-business parents and a one-time child screen star, he is known as a
good communicator and raconteur.
His first party political pronouncement came but a day later. The Labour
Party had elected Tony Blair leader 'for his looks, not his policies.'
Catchier quips could come later from the pen of Hanley's new deputy, Michael
Dobbs, a political novelist with the double-edged billing as a 'second
Jeffrey Archer'.
Then yesterday came the bread. Gross domestic product grew by 0.9 per cent
during the second quarter, its fastest rate since the recovery began in the
spring of 1992. Output is now 1.2 per cent above the pre-recession peak of
four years ago. News earlier in the week of favourable consumer spending and
government borrowing figures were butter and jam.
With a strengthening dollar helping to stabilise European bond markets,
gilts and equities savoured the good news. The FT-SE 100 index of the 100
largest UK companies rose four out of five days to end the week up a net
39.9 points at 3,114.7. The Footsie yesterday broke through the important
resistance level of 3,100 and held the high ground.
Many in the market gleaned a degree of confidence in calmer medium-term
trading from the comments of three central bankers. Alan Greenspan, of the
US Federal Reserve Bank, and Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England,
indicated that US and UK interest rates would have to rise later but not now
to check inflation. Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, left open the
possibility of German rate cuts later this year.
George, in the minutes of his June 8 meeting with Chancellor Clarke released
this week, indicated he was watching three main indicators of when price
pressures would demand a rate increase: the rate of monetary growth;
inflationary expectations; and cost increases particularly of labour.
Monetary growth is 'uncomfortably high' with the volume of cash and notes in
circulation running 8.1 per cent higher over the last three months than a
year earlier. The other two indicators are favourable.
But one other set of figures has been disquieting. Industrial raw material
prices are running at an annual rate of about 10 per cent while the
companies' output prices are only edging ahead at the general inflation
level of just over 2 per cent. Surely margins, profits and dividends must be
under pressure? If they are, how can the market be looking for further
growth in earnings to fuel the next rally?
S G Warburg Securities points out that profit margins were under equally
dramatic pressure in late 1992 and early 1993. Raw material prices rose as
sterling fell following departure from the ERM yet earnings per share rose
substantially last year.
One explanation is that raw materials are typically only a third of total
costs while labour costs, which have been much more subdued, account for a
far higher share. Moreover other costs, notably of money, have fallen
sharply.
Some sectors, such as paper and packaging, have enjoyed improved margins
thanks to better trading conditions as witnessed by the results of David S
Smith Holdings this week. Pre-tax profits for the year to April were up 56
per cent to Pounds 42.2m.
But the main story behind most margin improvements continues to be cost
reductions and corporate restructuring, Warburg argues. It forecasts further
widening of margins for the Footsie companies, as the chart shows. From a
recent low of 13.3 per cent in the financial year 1991-92, it estimates a
margin of 15.38 per cent this fiscal year and 15.8 per cent next year.
It identifies a mixed bunch of companies offering the best margin growth
next year relative to their average 1989-93 margins. They range from
newly-privatised utilities such as National Power (up 41 per cent) and
Eastern Electric (up 38 per cent) with plenty of scope to cut costs, to
corporate restructuring cases such as ICI (up 47 per cent) and British
Aerospace (up 233 per cent).
The worst performers are equally mixed. Mature utilities facing increasing
competition and the tightening of regulatory screws are among the weaker
stocks. British Telecommunications' 1995 margin is forecast to fall 13 per
cent from its 1989-93 average while British Gas's will drop 11 per cent.
Consumer stocks are some of the most adversely affected given the tough
pricing environment in which they operate. Food manufacturers and retailers
are particularly vulnerable. Shoprite, a Scottish discount grocer far too
small to be a Footsie stock on Warburg's list, testified to the trauma on
Thursday. Its second profits warning in two months halved its share price to
30p. It had peaked in February at 243p. It has cut its costs and stabilised
its margins but it cannot generate adequate turnover.
One Footsie retailer Warburg does identify is Argyll Group, the Safeway
supermarket chain. It forecasts Argyll's margin will be 8 per cent lower
next year than the group's five-year average. The trading news from Argyll
this week was more positive than that. Sir Alistair Grant, its chairman,
told the agm that first quarter like-for-like sales and pre-tax profits were
ahead of last year's. Similarly, Sir Christopher Benson, at Boots agm, could
speak of better sales in all divisions except DIY.
Shareholders at neither agm were happy. Complaints from them about the
impressive bread executives had made turned both meetings into a bit of a
circus.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940723

