FT942-12474

FT  29 APR 94 / Management: Designer canteens - Superior staff cafes feed
morale as well as the body


   By SANTA RAYMOND and ROGER CUNLIFFE


Wolff Olins's staff cafe in London has a wonderfully attractive view - on to
the canal at the back, complete with ducklings in the spring.
Colour is the delight of the Designers Guild cafe: blue walls, with magentas
and oranges setting off delicious food displayed on a stainless steel
counter.
At Imagination, a design and communication company, employees eat at tables
spilling out into an atrium, surrounded by exotic objects and plants.
The trend of designer food in designer surroundings for staff is spreading
to banks, accountants, law firms and computer companies. But these staff
restaurants are not just internal and external shop windows  - the more
creative are using them to encourage communication and bonding.
Gary Hawkes, chief executive of caterers Gardner Merchant, confirms that the
staff canteen should be 'an experience, a genuine change from the office,
and friendly, so that people may be relaxed and be brought together. The
lunch facility demonstrates that people's well-being matters - that what
they do matters - that they are important to the firm'.
The layout, decor, furniture and lighting of the successful staff cafeteria
have to be put together with the same care, and with many of the same
criteria, as the most successful restaurant in a city centre.
As more people eat out, go abroad, have new experiences, so they also expect
more if they are to use - and benefit from - corporate catering. Ethnic or
theme food - haggis and whisky trifle on Burns Night, for example - may fill
the house on special occasions but however seductive the facility, no more
than half of any workforce will normally eat in-house, unless it is raining.
Hugh Cade, a partner in Touche Ross, confirms a tendency for companies to
cut costs by reducing subsidies, although food is still a tax-allowable
perk. Normal practice is for the staff to pay the cost of the raw food plus
VAT, amounting to about Pounds 2.50 for a three-course meal.
In North America, where employment has been historically seen as partnership
rather than patriarchy, workers pay around Dollars 11 (Pounds 7.50) for
perhaps better food in a nicer environment.
Breakfast at work is now common in international companies, with some
providing it free, but generally food is served during quite restricted
periods and not at the end of the day, except for special occasions.
A few organisations offer a 24-hour service; others say they intend to at a
later date.
Although it sounds an expensive option, food - good food - can keep the
motor going and the morale high.
Coopers & Lybrand, feeding more than 1,000 people a day, with 60 different
menu items a week, is particularly conscious of trends. The self-service
restaurant caters daily for about 700, with 60 formal or buffet meals being
served in the surrounding dining or meeting rooms. A further 400 people buy
sandwiches or other snacks from the adjacent 'deli'.
Smoking is allowed in the beautiful coffee area in the atrium, with street
cafe furniture, white canvas umbrellas, and a waterfall to drown the noise
from the Underground 5m below. Although the restaurant is licensed, alcohol
is served only in the dining rooms.
Among many workers in general, however, casual feeding, 'browsing' and
'brown bagging' are on the increase. Even the French are following the
international trend of convenience foods and unstructured eating habits.
Vending machines are taking over, with 'heat your own' microwaves joining
the soft and hot drinks and candy bars.
In future there may well be machines delivering the baked potato direct to
the dealer's desk, complete with favourite topping.
This is feeding faces, though, rather than nourishment; the well-designed
and well-serviced cafe should provide nourishment of the mind, body and
spirit. On some days, at least, workers should be encouraged to pause, sit
down and get to know each other better, in a setting where the food and the
surroundings help the pressured worker to unwind.
As Jane Scruton, a founder partner of Wolff Olins, observes: 'Our cafe shows
the staff that we care for them, and the client that we have high standards,
a single level of excellence, and generosity without extravagance. Our food
reflects our work ethic: simple ingredients, not dolled up, good looking,
wholesome, creative.
'Our way of eating is a training programme for our staff, demonstrating the
sort of work we aim to do.'
Santa Raymond is an architect and Roger Cunliffe a management consultant.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940429

