FT942-16063

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Soaring Peregrine seeks central
role in Asian bond market - Merchant bank is the envy of Hong Kong


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


If the brash and aggressive merchant banking style of the 1980s survives
anywhere, then it is in Hong Kong. And one bank which represents the style
best is Peregrine Investments, the brokerage Hong Kong's financial community
envies and likes to hate.
Since 1988, when it was just an idea in the minds of its two founders,
Peregrine has become one of the colony's leading merchant banks. Not content
with Hong Kong, it sees itself as a regional merchant bank and is opening
offices as far afield as India.
Yesterday, it reported a 27 per cent increase in net income to HKDollars
855.5m (USDollars 110.8m) from HKDollars 676.5m. Turnover, bloated by the
introduction of London-based debt securities trading, almost trebled to
HKDollars 11.4bn from HKDollars 4.3bn. A final dividend of 35 cents a share
was declared which, with 25 cents paid at the interim stage, makes 60 cents
for the year - up 14 per cent.
Peregrine is an uncommonly successful marriage of the English and the
Chinese. Mr Philip Tose, formerly chief executive of Citicorp Scrimgeour
Vickers and the son of a Vickers' partner, is chairman. Mr Francis Leung, a
corporate finance expert from Mr Tose's days at Citicorp, is the company's
managing director.
While merchant banks and brokers such as Barings and Jardine Fleming, two
long-established British houses, represent an establishment that is rapidly
passing, Peregrine is part of the establishment in waiting. Its name is
always associated with what the colony's leading 'red chips', such as Citic
Pacific, do, as it is with the big local Chinese companies such as Mr Li
Ka-Shing's Cheung Kong or Mr Gordon Wu's Hopewell.
Last year Peregrine was the lead broker in nearly HKDollars 25.5bn of new
issues, rights issues and placements in Asia. It acted as financial adviser
to another clutch of deals worth more than HKDollars 26bn in the region. The
company took the lead for companies in South Korea, India and the
Philippines, but the vast majority of deals were done in Hong Kong, where it
dominates the market.
In 1993, Peregrine was responsible for more than 60 per cent of the new
listings (by value) on the Hong Kong stock exchange; it accounted for about
one third of all rights issues and a quarter of placements, again by value.
The fees are good. The company made USDollars 10m from the flotation of Mr
Wu's Consolidated Electric Power Asia last autumn.
Says Mr Tose: 'We think the ability to commit to deals quickly is very
important . . . we have no intention of giving up our market share without a
fight.' Yesterday he forecast that the company's capital base would grow
from its present USDollars 500m of net assets to USDollars 2bn in four
years. That would make Peregrine a 'serious player' on a global scale.
Mr Leung says the idea of a merchant bank like Peregrine began germinating
in both executives' minds during 1988. Citicorp was retreating from equity
markets in the wake of the October 1987 stock market crash and Mr Leung
thought it was only a matter of time before the bank decided to retrench in
Hong Kong.
'I thought about what I did for clients - doing deals, raising money and
investing it,' he said. 'I thought I could do the same for myself. What I
had in mind was a corporate finance boutique with a small number of clients
to help make deals. Philip wanted to set up a brokerage and said 'why not
put them together?'.'
Peregrine was born in the autumn of 1988 when Mr Leung severed his ties with
Citicorp; by the end of the year Mr Tose had finished with Citicorp as well.
Among the company's initial 18 backers were Mr Li Ka-shing, Mr Wu, and Citic
Pacific - today three of Peregrine's most important clients.
Initially Mr Tose and Mr Leung wanted to raise between HKDollars 100m and
HKDollars 150m in capital, but HKDollars 300m was eventually raised. 'KS Li
said we should raise more money,' recalls Mr Leung. 'He said with more
capital at least we could live off the interest.'
Through a series of transactions - the first of which entailed investing
HKDollars 300m in 34.5 per cent of Kwong Sang Hong, a cosmetics and property
company which Mr Li used to control - Peregrine became listed on the stock
exchange.
Mr Tose and Mr Leung exercise their control over the company through
Peregrine International, a privately held investment company, which owns 20
per cent of Peregrine's issued capital and in which they have nearly a 30
per cent interest. Mr George Soros, the US financier, recently took a near 5
per cent stake in this private company. With the raising of USDollars 200m
late last year it has recently been reactivated to engage in long-term
China-related investment.
The public company has also taken advantage of historically low US interest
rates and raised USDollars 200m in long-term debt. This will be used partly
to expand in Asia and to get Peregrine into Hong Kong's emerging debt market
as a trader and originator of deals. It recently hired a fixed income team
from Lehman Brothers in Hong Kong.
Mr Leung said getting into fixed income trading served two purposes.
Peregrine was positioning itself for the day when it could participate in
the bond markets of Asia, especially China. It will also help smooth the
company's earnings profile, as profits from stock market and corporate
finance are quite volatile.
Where Peregrine causes some eyebrows to be raised, even in Hong Kong, is its
practice of taking equity in companies it brings to market. But Mr Leung
denies there is a conflict of interest.
'We use our corporate finance network and expertise to spot investment
opportunities,' he says. 'Corporate finance is separate from stock broking.
We invest in most when they are unlisted; the management of the exit is
handled by the trading department and corporate finance does not know about
it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 29

940412

