FT944-5904

FT  01 DEC 94 / Budget help for jobless 'must include training'


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Employment Editor


Many employers will not use the chancellor's key Budget measures to
encourage the recruitment of the long-term jobless unless the government
abandons cuts in its training programmes and concentrates on providing the
unemployed with skills.
This was the main judgment yesterday on the centrepiece of Mr Kenneth
Clarke's Budget from the UK's most influential employer organisations, the
Confederation of British Industry and the Institute of Directors.
'The worry is employers are being asked to hire workers who have been
without a job for over two years, but at present few of them have been
trained. For companies it comes down to a question of their employability,'
said Mr Robbie Gilbert, the CBI's social affairs director.
The main measures to encourage employers to recruit the long-term unemployed
were: a 0.6 per cent cut in their National Insurance contributions for low
earners; a 12-month NI rebate for each worker hired after two years of
unemployment; an extension of the two existing recruitment incentives. A
recent CBI survey of the long-term unemployed found the biggest barrier to
hiring among employers was their lack of 'suitable experience or
qualifications'.
The CBI has been urging the government to improve the skills of the
unemployed. 'A greater proportion of long-term unemployed people need to be
persuaded of the value of training and skills improvement,' said the CBI.
The Institute of Directors added its voice to the call for improved
government training for the long-term unemployed.
'Many of our council members have already told us today unprompted that the
Budget's employment measures will have no effect on their recruitment
decisions,' said Mrs Ann Robinson, head of the IOD's policy unit.
She added: 'They are looking for the best person for the job in a highly
competitive labour market. It would have been more sensible for the
chancellor to remove some of the many regulations and cost burdens that
discourage employers from hiring more labour.'
Several leading companies were sceptical about the likely effects of the
Budget's employment measures.
Vauxhall Motors said it was 'unlikely' the company would recruit people who
had not worked for two years or more. 'Our task is to make ourselves
relentlessly competitive.'
Rover car group said it was 'possible' the company would hire some long-term
jobless but added 'those concerned would have to fulfil other criteria
before getting a job with us, like being capable of reaching the skill
levels required'.
Imperial Chemical Industries said the company tended to recruit school
leavers and graduates. 'We would not lower our skill demands for employees.
That would not do anybody any favours,' it said.
The Trades Union Congress warned that 'any strategy for full employment must
address the skills and qualifications of unemployed workers with a
significant expansion of training facilities'.
Public sector fears job toll, Page 13
Editorial Comment, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 24

941201

