FT944-6090

FT  30 NOV 94 / Gatt reforms win strong House backing


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


The US House of Representatives yesterday approved legislation implementing
the Uruguay Round of trade reforms by 288 votes to 146, bringing the
proposed World Trade Organisation with its stronger rules and lower tariffs
one step closer to enactment.
The strength of the vote in favour was expected to provide momentum in the
Senate where the outcome is likely to be closer. The Senate vote on the
124-nation pact, concluded last year under the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, is scheduled for tomorrow with debate beginning today. Vote
counters among both the Republicans and Democrats said they were confident
of passage. The outcome in the House had not been in doubt although the
margin of victory was at the top end of expectations.
A few hours before the vote, Ms Lori Wallach of Public Citizen, one of the
Round's most bitter opponents, described the vote 'one more example of
business as usual in Washington'. She said the 'rubber stamping' House had
held only one hearing since submission of the implementing legislation in
October and that was 'not even on the substance of the agreement but on its
pork barrel deals'.
She said: 'It is a disgrace that the House only scheduled four hours of
debate on one of the most important votes this decade.'
Both opponents and supporters suffered hits yesterday. Senator Max Baucus,
chairman of the Senate trade sub-committee and a free trader, came out
against the deal.
Mr Laurence Tribe - an eminent constitutional scholar, whose conclusion that
the WTO 'would entail a significant shift of sovereignty from state and
local governments' was widely publicised by opponents - changed his view
after listening to arguments from the Clinton administration which has
worked hard for approval of the legislation.
The broad outlines of the Gatt deal have been known for months, as was
reflected by the debate. Most of the opponents cited worries about lost jobs
and US sovereignty. The supporters said it would provide the largest tax cut
in history.
In a speech typical of the opponents, Congresswoman Nydia Velaquez, a New
York Democrat, said she could not 'in good conscience vote for an agreement
that encourages companies to continue their exploitation of low paid workers
the world over'.
Congressman Bill Zeliff, a New Hampshire Republican, said: 'Free trade is a
proven job creator. Gatt will be good for New Hampshire and good for
America.'
The political factors behind the vote were complex.
Since the mid-term congressional elections earlier this month, in which the
Republicans trounced the Democrats, Republicans no longer worry about the
effects of denying President Bill Clinton a victory.
The 85 'retired and fired' members were free to vote according to their
consciences. But they had future jobs to consider, some as lobbyists,
lawyers or consultants in Washington.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941130

