FT943-12760

FT  22 JUL 94 / UK Company News: ED&F Man plans September float


   By DAVID WIGHTON


ED&F Man, one of the world's largest agricultural commodity traders, is
planning a stock market flotation in September which is expected to value
the company at about Pounds 450m.
Currently owned by 100 of its top managers, the company plans to raise
between Pounds 75m and Pounds 100m in new money with existing shareholders
selling no more than 15 per cent of their holdings.
For most of its 200-year history Man was primarily a sugar trader, but since
the 1980s it has broadened its food interests and built a large financial
services business. It is a leading trader in commodity, energy and financial
futures in London, Chicago and New York and one of the world's largest
managers and distributors of futures funds, with more than Dollars 1bn
(Pounds 600m) under management.
Mr Harvey McGrath, managing director, said the two sides of the business
fitted naturally together. 'Both are about managing market risk.'
Although it trades commodities as a principal, the company does not take
long-term positions and Mr McGrath said it had largely eliminated the
sensitivity of its earnings to prices.
Pre-tax profits jumped from Pounds 46.5m to Pounds 66.7m in the year to
March, with the contribution from agricultural products more than doubling
to Pounds 36.7m. This reflected recent investment in primary processing and
distribution of products from cocoa to nuts.
Although the company has a strong balance sheet the flotation should enable
it to obtain a higher credit rating which will improve its ability to offer
clearing services in financial futures.
It will also be able to redeem Dollars 60m (Pounds 39m) of preference
capital which was issued to Philip Morris in 1991 in part payment for a 45
per cent stake in the company which had been sold to its Jacobs Suchard
subsidiary in 1987.
The flotation, by way of a placing and public offer sponsored by Schroders
with James Capel as brokers, will value the stake of Mr Michael Stone,
chairman, at between Pounds 20m and Pounds 25m, while Mr Danny Rosenblum,
who heads the US operation, will have shares worth more than Pounds 30m.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940722

