FT942-15734

FT  14 APR 94 / World Trade News: China pressed over WTO entry - EU and US
say Beijing must accept world trade body's rules


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


   MARRAKESH


The European Union and the US hinted yesterday that they might withhold full
free trade privileges from China if it were admitted to the new World Trade
Organisation without accepting all the obligations and disciplines required
by other members of the body. Their statements, at a ministerial meeting of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Marrakesh, appear designed to
increase the pressure on China as its negotiations on joining the WTO enter
a crucial stage.
China is pressing to join as a full member when it is set up as successor to
the Gatt at the start of next year. However, the US and EU insist Beijing
has failed so far to demonstrate conclusively that it is prepared to abide
by the body's rules.
Sir Leon Brittan, European trade commissioner, said yesterday: 'If a country
can't comply with absolutely everything, one could say that one way of
dealing with it might be to say, okay, we might defend ourselves with action
that isn't normally to available to us.'
Sir Leon, talking after a meeting of the 'quad' powers - the US, the EU,
Japan and Canada - stressed that he was speaking only for the EU. However,
senior US trade officials later said they 'did not disagree' with his
statement. The US administration has already said that if China did not meet
demands that it improve its human rights record, the US might unilaterally
deny Most Favoured Nation treatment to China's exports after it joined the
WTO.
However, US officials said yesterday they were also concerned with China's
apparent reluctance to conform with existing Gatt requirements. They were
particularly concerned by its insistence on keeping secret certain import
quotas, on national security grounds.
Mr Rufus Yerxa, deputy US special trade representative, is understood to
have emphasised at a meeting with senior Chinese diplomats yesterday that
the US wanted to improve bilateral economic relations, but that China must
take steps to curb widespread piracy of compact discs and computer
programmes.
On Tuesday, Mr Gerard Longuet, French industry minister, said his government
favoured China's membership of the WTO but expected it to fulfil all its
obligations - including any new standards the body set on workers' rights.
Singapore has offered to host the first WTO ministerial meeting, due to be
held in 1996. The offer was made yesterday in Marrakesh by the trade and
industry minister, Mr Yeo Cheow Tong.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940414

