FT942-15523

FT  14 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: India heads for oilseeds record


   By KUNAL BOSE


   CALCUTTA


Aided once again by a good monsoon season - the fifth in a row - India hopes
to achieve a record production of over 21m tonnes of oilseeds in 1993-94
(November to October), up from 20.6m tonnes in the previous year.
The significant improvement in the total oilseeds production is coming about
in spite of a setback in the groundnut crop, the most important of all the
oilseeds grown in the country, caused by drought in Gujarat and Maharashtra.
According to trade officials, the country's groundnut production in 1993-94
will be about 7.5m tonnes (in shell), down from 8.5m tonnes last year. The
crop would have been even shorter had not production in Andhra Pradesh, a
south Indian state, risen by nearly 350,000 tonnes to 2.4m tonnes. However,
there is a shortfall in production in Tamil Nadu in the south.
As a result of the reduction in groundnut output and the unwillingness of
farmers to dispose of their stocks at this stage, prices of groundnut oil
have risen sharply. In sympathy, the prices of other edible oils have also
gone up, much to the discomfiture of the federal government.
The government has formulated a two-pronged strategy to stem the price rise.
Firstly, it will import at least 58,000 tonnes of edible oils, mainly
palmolein. And secondly, it will release the stocks of oils held for
distribution through fair price shops. The Central Organisation for Oil
Industry which expects a total supply of 7m tonnes of indigenous oils this
season does not, however, think that imports are necessary. Last year, India
imported only 43,000 tonnes of oils, against the sanctioned limit of 100,000
tonnes.
Not very long ago, India was the world's largest importer of oils. In
1987-88, its imports amounted to 1.8m tonnes, causing a lot of pressure on
its balance of payments position. A sea change in the oilseeds scene has
since been brought about by the government-constituted technology mission on
oilseeds.
While production of oilseeds has risen from 12.7m tonnes in 1987-88 to over
21m tonnes, the national oilseeds development project has set a production
target of 26m tonnes and productivity target of 1,100kg a hectare by the
year 2000. The government officials are confident that the targets will be
achieved.
According to farming experts, the extra production has to be sought through
productivity improvement as it will not be easy to get much extra land under
oilseeds. The total land under the nine major oilseeds  - groundnut,
rapeseed and mustard, soyabean, sunflower, sesame, castor, safflower,
linseed and nigerseed - is about 25.5m ha. Except for soyabean and
sunflowerseed, no oilseed has found extra land in the last few years.
The TMO wants to ensure that besides the nine major seeds, secondary sources
like cottonseed, rice bran, minor oilseeds of tree and forest origin and oil
cakes should make a greater contribution to India's quest for
self-sufficiency in vegetable oils at a satisfactory level of consumption.
Indian annual consumption of about 7kg a head is less than half the world
average.
It is also expected that by the turn of the century, India will achieve some
success in promoting the cultivation of oil palm. An expert committee has
identified 575,000 hectares of land in nine Indian states for oil palm
cultivation. The crop has attracted the attention of a number of big Indian
corporations as it gives up to six tonnes of oil a hectare, compared with
500kg to 600kg for other oilseeds.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940414

