FT943-12875

FT  22 JUL 94 / Arts: Clash of the piano greats - The start of a concert
tour that brings together two of rock's giants, Elton John and Billy Joel


   By FRANK LIPSIUS


Billed as the battle of the great piano rockers, the 24-date Billy Joel  -
Elton John US stadium tour brings together two confident superstars ambling
through 20 years of their repertoire.
The four-storey high set depicting the American War of Independence with
Redcoats and tricorned Americans conveys less of the regal atmosphere than
the shield atop the proscenium with the legend 'Heart and Soul' flanked by
the British lion and American eagle.
The paired grand pianos on-stage at Philadelphia's Veterans Stadium, where
the tour started with three shows, were closer together than the two
performers, despite a warm embrace at the start.
Elton John acted the shy guest, putting lusty lungs behind the songs with
little audience eye contact. He had been invited to join the show by Joel,
ostensibly after a decade-long courtship, but the dual billing was timed to
coincide with a crowded summer of superstar stadium tours by Pink Floyd,
Barbra Streisand and the Eagles, as well as the packaged events Woodstock
'94 and Lollapalooza (in its fourth year as a Woodstock for alternative rock
acts).
John started with his first hit, 'Your Song', followed by Joel singing
'Honesty'. John did Joel's 'New York State of Mind' saying that they had
agreed to sing one of each other's songs. This made Joel sound insincere in
his effusive intro to John's 'Goodbye Yellow Brick Road'.
When they took their turns separately, they sang truncated but generous sets
of their greatest hits. Returning together for the finale, they moved beyond
the predictable with an oldies medley and a duet of the Beatles' 'Hard Day's
Night'.
John used to make his body reverberate with the intensity of his fingers
pounding the keyboard. In this concert the piano still pounded out jangling
harmonies, but his expression was placid. His range of emotion was embodied
in a modest costume change from a loose grey suit to a white linen jacket
and finally a blue satin jacket. Even his spectacles were modest
yellow-tinted half-frames. It was positively demure by Elton's standards.
John got the audience to their feet with 'Philadelphia Freedom', but the
20-to-50-year-old crowd sat for the rest of the hour-long set, which
included his current number-one hit from The Lion King, 'Can You Feel the
Love Tonight', performed like a music video to the film's animated sequence.
The camera caught him at his most animated during 'Baby, You're the One'
gesticulating to his crew to turn his monitor down.
Joel was far more the showman. He soon removed his loose-fitting grey suit
jacket and rolled up the sleeves of his black T-shirt, swinging the
microphone stand as he strutted across the stage.
His good spirits seemed only spurred on by a sudden crisis when his drummer,
who had been food poisoned, left the stage. Joel quickly filled in with
John's drummer, whom he instructed before each song - back to the audience,
arms flailing.
Joel reached deep into his repertoire for songs such as 'Billy the Kid', but
he kept the audience on their feet singing the words.
These were obviously Billy Joel fans, happy to get a look at Elton John and
have a 3 1/2 -hour performance from the two piano rocking greats, but they
were there for the one whose finale 'Piano Man' sent them out singing into
the sweltering summer night.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940722

