FT941-5715

FT  04 MAR 94 / International Bonds: Volatility worries keep down new
issuance in Eurobonds


   By ANTONIA SHARPE and REUTER


   NEW YORK


New issuance in the Eurobond market remained thin yesterday despite the
slight improvement in sentiment in leading government bond markets.
Syndicate managers said borrowers and investors were reluctant to leave the
sidelines until they were sure that the recent price volatility had come to
an end. The widening in yield spreads of around five basis points on recent
Eurobond offerings from supranational issuers was a further deterrent, they
said.
The turbulence of the past weeks prompted Industrial Development Bank of
India to postpone its debut Eurobond offering, a Dollars 200m issue of
five-year bonds, until market conditions improved, lead manager Citibank
International said.
Among yesterday's meagre selection, GECC raised Fl 250m through an offering
of three-year Eurobonds. The proceeds of the deal were thought to have been
swapped into fixed-rate dollars.
Some syndicate managers were surprised at the three-year maturity because
they believed that GECC was seeking to reduce its dependence on commercial
paper and extend its maturity profile to between four and six years.
Lead manager ABN-Amro said the deal, which was priced to yield 15 basis
points over the interpolated curve, was targeted mainly at retail investors
in the Benelux region and in Switzerland. It noted that there was a shortage
of guilder-denominated paper with this maturity.
ABN-Amro added that a 'comfortable' amount of bonds had been placed and that
hardly any had been sold back to the lead manager.
Elsewhere, Credito Fondiario e Industriale, an Italian mortgage institution,
raised L120bn through an offering of 10-year floating-rate notes. Joint lead
manager Chase said the deal had gone well considering the underlying
volatility in the markets.
As with other recent offerings of lira-denominated FRNs, there was a strong
bias towards Italian investors. In the afternoon, the notes were quoted bid
only at the issue price of par.
The Bank of China's proposed Dollars 500m yankee bond offering is being held
up until the US Treasury bond market stabilises, according to a source close
to the Bank of China debt offering, Reuter reports from New York.
The deal was expected to be priced yesterday, but the Treasury market fell
this week on fears the Federal Reserve may again tighten credit. The bank
source said the deal was likely to be priced today or early next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940304

