FT941-4007

FT  14 MAR 94 / Brittan's book stirs debate on expansion


   By LIONEL BARBER and PHILIP STEPHENS


   BRUSSELS, LONDON


The UK government faces renewed controversy over Europe today after the
premature release of a book by Sir Leon Brittan, in which the senior British
commissioner calls for a wide-ranging overhaul of decision-making in an
expanded European Union.
Sir Leon's views run counter to the UK's insistence on special protection
for the large member states which has led to deadlock in enlargement talks
with Sweden, Finland, Austria and Norway.
His proposals for institutional reform are also likely to stir up Tory
Euro-sceptics worried that UK Prime Minister John Major's government may be
about drop its hard-line stand and adopt a more pro-European manifesto ahead
of European Parliament elections in June.
Mr Major was warned yesterday that any retreat from his insistence on
maintaining the present voting system after enlargement would provoke new
convulsions within the Conservative party. But with other EU states
threatening to block enlargement unless the threshold for a blocking
minority within the council was raised from the present 23 votes, British
ministers acknowledged the dilemma.
Both Mr Major and Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, have been adamant
that the minority veto should not be diluted. The same point has been made
to Conservative party managers by Euro-sceptic MPs.
EU foreign ministers will attempt to rescue the enlargement talks at a
meeting tomorrow in Brussels. Spanish demands for access to 7,000 tonnes of
Norwegian cod appear likely to be accommodated after reports of a new offer
from Oslo; but hopes of settling the row over power-sharing rest on a
face-saving compromise which takes greater account of population.
Britain, supported by Spain, is pressing to maintain the present voting
arrangements which allow two large nations and a smaller country to block
their partners. Germany and other EU members want to raise the 'blocking
minority' threshold to 27 votes. One compromise under review is to increase
the blocking minority to 27 votes, on condition it would not apply if
countries representing more than 40 per cent of the population wanted to
hold up decisions.
Mr Javier Solana, Spanish foreign minister, said in an interview with the El
Pais newspaper yesterday: 'I hope in the coming days we can find a formula
that will satisfy our legitimate aspirations.'
Friends of Sir Leon said last week that he was dismayed at the UK
government's apparent willingness to jeopardise enlargement, a goal
previously judged to be central to Britain's European policy.
The chief EU trade negotiator, who is a candidate to succeed Mr Jacques
Delors as president of the European Commission, argues in his book that
institutional reform is inevitable. He urges the UK to prepare actively for
the entry of the former communist countries of central and eastern Europe in
the Union.
In his book, Sir Leon proposes the introduction of a three-tier voting
system which would balance the need for accelerated decision-making without
upsetting the balance between the big and smaller member states.
The first tier would cover internal market measures, health and safety at
work, farm and fisheries policies, as well as the purchase and sale of goods
and services anywhere in the EU. These measures would be subject to 'low
majority' voting, making it harder for countries to muster a blocking
minority.
A second tier would cover social rules and the environment, as well as
'exceptional trade measures' such as action against low-cost imports. This
would make a majority in favour of action harder to achieve, though still
not impossible for a single country to block.
A third tier would cover the levying of taxes, all moves to European
economic and monetary union, increasing the EU's budget, and all laws on
visas and immigration. On these matters of 'core sovereignty', governments
would retain their right to veto.
Sir Leon's book is part of his undeclared campaign to succeed Mr Delors. It
is already on sale at the European Parliament in Strasbourg, although it was
not due to appear until the end of the month.
Power balance, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940314

