FT944-5858

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Company News: Telmex seeks 49% stake in
cable-TV business


   By DAMIAN FRASER


   MEXICO CITY


Telefonos de Mexico (Telmex), the country's monopoly telephone company, has
agreed to take a 49 per cent stake in the cable television subsidiary of
Televisa, the country's dominant media company, for Dollars 211m.
The proposed agreement would enable Cablevision, the cable arm of Televisa,
to use Telmex's fibre-optic cables to expand its subscription television
service. In turn, it would help Telmex move into video and data telephony.
The venture would not be an exclusive arrangement, with other television
companies able to use Telmex cables.
In practice, however, the alliance would remove a potential competitor to
Telmex in the local and long-distance telephone service, and give
Cable-vision a significant edge over its competitors in subscription
television.
Legal questions have been raised about the alliance, given that Telmex's
concession explicitly prohibits it from exploiting 'directly or indirectly,
any concession for public television services'.
Nevertheless, Telmex argues that this provision does not prevent it from
carrying Cablevision's signal on its network. It is confident that
regulatory approval will be given, arguing the link-up would help it and
Televisa compete against planned broadcasting and telecommunications joint
ventures between local and foreigner groups.
Telmex, with sales last year of Dollars 7.9bn, is by far Mexico's largest
private company. Grupo Televisa, with sales of Dollars 1.9bn, owns the
country's principal television networks, as well as Cablevision, which has
220,000 subscribers.
The two companies are respectively controlled by Mr Carlos Slim and Mr
Emilio Azcarraga, Mexico's two richest businessmen according to Forbes
magazine.
The competition commission has formal power to block mergers or alliances
that it believes could lead to monopolistic behaviour. However, even if it
wanted to prevent the venture, it may find it difficult to rule against Mr
Slim and Mr Azcarraga, two generous contributors to Mexico's long-ruling
party whose combined net worth is reported by Forbes at more than Dollars
10bn.
Telmex's move into Cable-vision was welcomed by analysts, who are concerned
about the company's prospects when the long-distance telephone market opens
up to competition in 1997. Earlier this month, Telmex's stock price fell
sharply after AT&T, the big US telecommunications concern, announced it had
agreed a joint venture with Alfa, an industrial conglomerate, to provide
long-distance telephone services in Mexico.
Over the long term, the Telmex-Televisa venture is expected to increase
usage of Telmex's new 13,500km fibre-optic network, as Cablevision uses it
to send television signals throughout the country. Cablevision's current
concession is limited to Mexico City, but analysts are optimistic this will
be extended to cover the whole country. The use of Telmex's network will
reduce installation time and costs for Cablevision, enabling it to reduce
prices and broaden its subscriber base.
The transaction would help reduce Televisa's heavy net debt load of Dollars
1.15bn. It is not expected to affect Telmex's earnings over the short term,
with the purchase value just 8.4 per cent of Telmex's expected cash flow for
this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

941201

