FT942-15472

FT  15 APR 94 / US tobacco companies go on defensive


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


US tobacco companies yesterday denied that cigarettes were addictive or that
they manipulated the nicotine levels in their products, as they tried to
defend themselves against a ferocious assault by members of Congress.
'Cigarette smoking is not addictive,' said Mr William Campbell, president of
Philip Morris USA, one of the leading tobacco industry executives who
appeared before a House of Representatives health committee.
The industry faces a three-pronged assault with potentially devastating
consequences for its future.
The US Food and Drug Administration is considering whether to regulate
nicotine as an addictive drug - a move that could lead to a ban on
cigarettes containing nicotine - and the Labour Department has proposed a
ban on smoking in all US workplaces, including restaurants and bars, because
of the deaths caused by second-hand smoke.
Also, the tax on cigarettes is likely to leap from 24 to 99 cents (16p to
67p) a pack, to help pay for the reform of the US healthcare system.
The committee chairman, Congressman Henry Waxman, opened the ill-tempered
and confrontational hearing yesterday by requiring the tobacco executives to
testify under oath.
'This hearing marks the beginning of a new relationship between Congress and
the tobacco companies,' Mr Waxman said, before beginning a hostile
cross-examination of the industry representatives.
The executives denied manipulating the level of nicotine to keep smokers
hooked even when they switch to lower-tar cigarettes.
Under close questioning from Mr Waxman, all panies admitted they could
adjust the concentration of nicotine in their cigarettes through blending
different tobaccos.
All, however, said that they did not aim for any particular nicotine level
through the blending.
'We do not design our cigarettes with any specification for nicotine. We
design them for tar levels,' said Mr James Johnston, chief executive of R J
Reynolds.
But Mr Waxman said a study by Mr Alexander Spears, now vice-chairman of
Lorillard, another cigarette company, showed in 1981 that the tobacco
industry had deliberately aimed to raise nicotine levels in low-tar
cigarettes.
Mr Spears yesterday told Mr Waxman that he had totally misunderstood the
evidence.
RJR share move, Second Section

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940415

