FT942-14299

FT  21 APR 94 / House hangs tough on crime bill


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The House of Representatives is expected to complete its version of a crime
bill today after a week of debate on the right blend of punishment and
prevention.
In an election year in which crime has soared to the top of many voters'
list of concerns, most members of Congress have preferred to err on the side
of toughness. They even voted to ban weightlifting equipment from federal
prisons.
Already, the House has voted to reject measures to streamline the appeals
process for prisoners facing a death sentence - which opponents said would
actually allow prisoners to drag out their appeals for longer - as well as
an attempt to substitute life in prison for all the death sentences in the
bill.
The appeals overhaul would generally have allowed prisoners to make one
appeal to the federal courts within a year of exhausting their state
appeals. It would thus overturn the effect of some recent Supreme Court
decisions which have limited the right to appeal to the federal courts on
the basis of new evidence or a new legal ruling.
The House voted, however, to allow defendants to use statistics to prove
racial discrimination in the imposition of the death penalty against them.
Statistically, black Americans are three to four times as likely as whites
to be sentenced to death for a given crime.
Statistically, a black American is more than twice as likely to be sentenced
to execution for killing a white victim than for killing a black victim.
It has also voted to expand the 'three strikes and you're out' proposal,
which would impose a mandatory life sentence for someone convicted of a
third violent felony, to include certain non-violent drug offences.
Critics feared this expansion of the 'three strikes' measure, which has been
endorsed by President Bill Clinton, could dilute its effect and possibly
even put the whole crime bill at risk.
However, Congressman Gerald Solomon of New York, who sponsored the measure,
argued that there was no such thing as a non-violent drug trafficking
offence.
It is hard for members of Congress to restrain themselves when it comes to
voting for anti-crime measures, even when they know very well that they will
probably not provide the money necessary to carry many of them out.
The version passed by the Senate last year already carried a price tag of
Dollars 22.3bn, including Dollars 8.9bn over five years to help local
governments hire 100,000 new police officers, and Dollars 3bn to build at
least 10 new federal prisons for violent offenders.
The cost of the House version has already risen above Dollars 28bn. Although
it provides for fewer new police officers, it adds an extra Dollars 10.5bn
to help states build more prisons of their own.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940421

