FT941-4240

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (1): Investors are tempted back
 -Buyers are seeking opportunities as the market sinks towards the bottom of
the property cycle / Introduction


   By VANESSA HOULDER


As Europe struggles to emerge from recession, most of its property markets
remain deeply depressed. However, some investors are beginning to trawl the
markets for bargains, in the belief that prices are close to reaching the
bottom of their cycle.
So far, contra-cyclical investment activity has been limited. The exception
has been the UK investment market which attracted Pounds 2.2bn of overseas
money last year, as it staged a strong recovery.
However falling interest rates across Europe, coupled with relatively high
yields from property compared with other investments, are beginning to tempt
contra-cyclical investors back into the market. Paris, Madrid, Milan and
Lisbon are some of the continental European cities being scrutinised most
carefully.
Investors believe that if they get their timing right, they may buy near the
bottom of one of the deepest troughs of any post-war property cycle. 'As
markets move to the bottom of their cycle, there will be clear opportunities
during the year, ahead of an economic upswing, to do business at extremely
attractive prices,' says Jones Lang Wootton, chartered surveyors.
Average capital values of prime offices in Europe's 14 largest property
markets have fallen by a third from their peak in March 1991, according to
Jones Lang Wootton. They are now at their lowest levels in real terms since
1986.
Some common themes run through many of Europe's property markets. The strong
economic upturn in the latter part of the 1980s resulted in increased
construction of new buildings, which came on stream at a time when the
recession had eroded tenant demand. As a result, vacancy rates have risen,
rents have fallen and investment yields have come under pressure.
The difficult economic conditions which have undermined occupational demand
in the past couple of years are generally expected to ease somewhat in 1994
 -although economic growth is expected, at best, to be limited. Moreover,
most established office markets now have a limited supply of new buildings
in the pipeline, which should help supply and demand come closer to
equilibrium.
But despite the similarities of the influences affecting Europe's markets,
there are marked differences in the structure and state of different
markets. They are influenced by their legal systems, planning laws, tax
regimes, bank lending policies, and accessibility to foreign investment, as
well as their stage of the economic cycle.
The greatest contrasts are those between the established markets of western
Europe and the fledgling markets of central and eastern Europe, which
continue to be hampered by legal and financial difficulties.
In Poland, there are problems with land title and financing continues to
restrict the number of new developments - except in the hotel sector, where
there is a surfeit of rooms at the top end of the market.
In the Czech Republic, all the large projects planned for central Prague
have collapsed, thanks to ownership problems, planning obstacles, financing
difficulties and the cautious approach adopted by potential occupiers.
In Hungary, many of Budapest's proposed office schemes have been postponed
or cancelled as a result of difficulties in raising finance. Investment
activity is largely limited to development projects or acquisitions by
owner-occupiers.
In Russia, last December's new constitution has strengthened private
property rights. But investment has been inhibited by red tape and political
instability.
Europe's more established property markets also present obstacles for
investors seeking bargains. In many of continental Europe's largest markets,
property values have not fallen as freely as in the UK.
In Belgium, the presence of the EU helps to stabilise the Brussels office
market, although the recession has pushed up vacancy rates. In the second
half of 1993, the fall in long-term interest rates stimulated investment
and, in particular, the market for securitised property.
In the Netherlands, the decentralised structure of the property market,
coupled with the dominant role played by institutions, has ensured that the
market remains more resilient than most.
In Paris, the investment market is still sluggish, as big banks and insurers
refuse to adjust the book valuations of their property in line with the
decline in the market.
In Germany, the investment market has remained remarkably robust, in spite
of economic difficulties. Strong demand from investors, led by the
open-ended property funds which have benefited from a large inflow of money,
ensured that yields stabilised in 1993 and in some cases improved.
In Spain, the recession which emerged midway through 1992 drove rents down
by as much as 40 per cent in some buildings. The sharp falls in values have
encouraged some interest from international investors anticipating recovery.
In one of the largest investment deals in recent years, Fomenta de
Construcciones y Contratas - one of Spain's large private corporations  -
bought a portfolio of office buildings and retail centres for Dollars 350m,
about a third of its peak value two years ago.
In Portugal, the investment market remains underdeveloped, largely because
existing laws give tenants perpetual security of tenure without any
open-market reviews.
The UK property market has performed more strongly than any other European
market, despite the patchy nature of the UK recovery. As bond yields fell
last year, the returns available on well-let UK properties with secure
incomes became increasingly attractive. Investors returned to the market in
force, creating one of the strongest bull markets for good quality property
since the 1970s.
The strength of the revival in the UK office market will not necessarily be
replicated in other European cities. London benefits unusually from the
liquidity and size of the market and the security of income derived from its
long lease structure.
Indeed, predictions of a general recovery in European property markets would
be premature. Nonetheless, if interest rates were to edge downwards, there
should be selective opportunities for investors to buy property at
historically low prices.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940311

