FT941-3572

FT  16 MAR 94 / EU expansion talks face collapse


   By DAVID GARDNER and ROLAND RUDD


   BRUSSELS, LONDON


Talks among European Union foreign ministers to settle the row over
power-sharing if the 12 take in four new members next year were on the verge
of collapse last night, with the UK holding out for yet another meeting to
settle the issue.
Any further delay on the voting rights dispute might sink chances of
Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden joining the EU next January as planned,
and brake the momentum behind the Union's expansion.
The UK, which with Spain is resisting any dilution of its right to block
decisions in the EU Council of Ministers, predicted last night that further
negotiation would be needed - possibly at a summit of European leaders.
A senior British government official said: 'There will be another meeting,
but we don't know the level, the time or the place.' But he made clear that
the government could not yet work its way around the voting rights dispute,
which it acknowledges may sabotage prospects for the 'wider Europe' London
says it espouses.
'You have to realise how (any weakening of UK veto rights) could play in
Westminster' among rightwing, Europhobic members of the British parliament,
the official said.
Mr John Townend, chairman of the powerful Tory backbench Finance Committee,
said opposition to watering down Britain's rights was spread right across
the party. 'This is a case of blackmail, to put it bluntly. The Commission
is proposing watering down voting rights to have enlargement of the
Community.'
Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, asked in parliament to clarify the
government's negotiating position at the foreign ministers' meeting, said:
'What we need to ensure is that democratic legitimacy and the rights of
minorities are sustained within the European Union.'
One rightwing backbencher said privately: 'The prime minister has been told
that he risks his majority in the Commons if he allows the Foreign Office to
agree to any compromise over our blocking veto.'
However, Sir Norman Fowler, Conservative party chairman, predicted that
there would be no revolt by Conservative Euro-sceptics over UK voting rights
in Europe.
In Brussels, enormous pressure was being placed on the British, including
calls for a vote that would expose them - and the Spanish if they do not
climb down - as the obstacles to the move from a Europe of 12 to 16.
Germany, France, the Netherlands and Denmark all suggested that those who
opposed the will of the EU majority on how to manage this first stage of the
Union expansion should 'go away and reflect', as Mr Niels Helveg Petersen,
Danish foreign minister, put it.
Mr Alain Lamassoure, France's European affairs minister, asked the British
to stop wasting time. 'The final result is not in doubt. The sooner they
realise that, the better.'
The UK wants to change the proportion of weighted votes in the Council of
Ministers needed to block EU laws and regulations. Currently, 30 per cent of
the votes - distributed roughly according to size among member states - can
form a 'blocking minority'.
Arithmetically, the UK and Spain's partners argue that that means the
present arrangement of 23 votes out of 76 should move to 27 out of 90 once
the Nordic and Alpine countries come in.
Spain is happy to see the blocking threshold raised to 27 votes, but under
conditions.
Ian Davidson, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940316

