FT941-4039

FT  12 MAR 94 / Travel: Care to share? Life on Siberia's frontier - At her
room in the 'bureaucratic hotel' in Kemerovo Lori Cidylo is taken aback by
an uninvited companion . . .


   By LORI CIDYLO


In the frozen vastness of Siberia, the air singes your cheek and your breath
freezes into a cluster of shimmering ice crystals that Siberians call the
whisper of stars. As the first flush of daylight bursts through, life in the
forest begins to stir. The pine trees stretch their limbs as the snow starts
to melt under the first rays of the sun. A white hare pops out of a
snow-covered hollow and twitches its pink nose, sniffing the air.
Ruddy-cheeked women, heavily bundled against the cold, emerge from log
cabins to traverse country roads in search of firewood while burly men in
fur caps cut holes in the ice of a frozen lake and thrust their fishing
poles into its depths.
In this land of legend and adventure, where the temperature can fall to  -
50`C, amazing things can happen. Steel cranes can snap in mid-air and
camera-film shatter like crystal.
Life in Siberia is evocative of life in the US in the days of the open
frontier. Many people have no telephones or running water. Water is trucked
in once a week and must be hauled from wells which often freeze in winter.
Galina Pushkaryova, a typically buxom Siberian with an iron constitution,
could hardly suppress her laughter when she opened her front door and saw me
standing there wrapped in so many layers, including two pairs of gloves,
that only my eyes were visible - and still I could not stop shivering.
Quickly she pulled me inside, and soon I was sitting in front of a fire
sampling some of the many exotic dishes Siberian cuisine has to offer.
Galina spread a lavish table which included home-made goose soup, pyelmyeni
(similar to Italian ravioli, but without the tomato sauce), and black bread,
before bringing out some elk meat and a bottle of throat-searing vodka.
'One shot of this and soon you'll be walking around without gloves,' Galina
said with a wink as she downed a glass with gusto.
'Siberians have a saying: if a person doesn't drink, he must be either very
ill or a complete scoundrel,' said Valentina Rumantseva, a local doctor.
Many Siberians start the day by dousing themselves with a pitcher of
ice-cold water. Local wisdom has it that this ritual strengthens the body's
immunity. Indeed, even the youngest natives seem to thrive. Siberian
children can toboggan before they can walk. When the barometer dips very
low, they spill water to form a slick sheet of ice in front of their houses,
and spend hours playing ice hockey.
Siberia is not a republic, and has no definite borders. It begins roughly at
the Ural mountains and runs eastwards for thousands of miles of forest
steppe, tiger and tundra. Yet there must be scarcely a person alive who does
not know what Siberia is and where it is - certainly no Russian.
Siberia occupies a unique place in the Russian soul. It is a well-spring of
romance, adventure, suffering and dread. Many of its people are the
descendants of those who were forced to travel there by train or on foot,
sometimes in chains, to live in the dark reaches of exile.
The city of Kemerovo had several prison camps. But there are other reminders
of the past. The huge chemical factories that made the city an industrial
giant during the Soviet era are still among the main sources of employment.
Siberia has no tourist attractions. Indeed, one can easily be lured into
treacherous wilds from which there may be no escape. 'The forest looks very
beautiful, but it is also very dangerous,' said Galina. 'If you were to go
inside, it would be almost impossible to find your way out because, to an
inexperienced eye, each path looks exactly the same. Your chances of
survival would be very slim. You would either die from cold and hunger or
you would be devoured by wild animals.'
There are many novel ways to quench your thirst for adventure which are
quite harmless. One is the banya po chornomu or 'black bath', the Siberian
sauna, a unique experience which Siberians believe can relieve almost
anything that ails you, from bronchitis to a bad heart.
'It's a feeling you won't forget,' said Tatiana Novikova, a local
entrepreneur, of the sauna's effects both on psyche and body. 'Afterwards,
you can run in the snow barefoot and you won't even feel the cold.'
Unable to resist the promise of such a treat, our group, which consisted of
four Germans, three Russians and one American, piled into a Jeep and drove
in search of a famed local sauna once reserved for the communist elite and
now frequented by the post-Soviet jet set.
At last we discovered a cosy, lace-curtained log cabin hidden among a covey
of trees. Inside, we were greeted by the scent of fresh pine. Obeying
Tatiana's instructions, we wrapped ourselves in sheets and donned hats to
keep our hair from getting scorched. Soon, we were sitting on wooden planks
in a steaming hot cocoon, inhaling the dry, pine-scented air.
The prescription is precise: one shot of vodka followed by a massage, a cold
shower and two hours in the sauna. But the curative effect is ensured only
after the final step. After emerging from the sauna, dripping wet, Siberians
often take a roll in the snow, in the buff. Being a modest lot, we omitted
that bit.
After the sauna, I decided to return to my hotel and relax before dinner,
but there was a complication: I could not recall the name of my hotel. So I
called Galina, who had made the reservation for me. 'This is rather
embarrassing,' I said, but can you tell me the name of my hotel?'
'It doesn't have a name,' she said.
Finally, I found it. It took half-an-hour. I was beginning to suspect it had
no address, either. I asked the clerk if it really had no name.
Surprised at my question, the clerk, an old woman, replied: 'Yes, it's
true.' The hotel was what is known as a vedomstvennaya gostinitsa, literally
a 'bureaucratic hotel,' and turned out to be as nightmarish as it sounded.
Such hotels, I learned, are affiliated to a particular enterprise, in this
case a factory, and are frequented by people who come to work there
temporarily. Reservations are made by the employee's nachalnik (boss). A
call from such a highly-placed personage and a room is assured; the
management has no right to refuse.
On my second day at the hotel, the clerk informed me that a woman had just
arrived and was staying in my room. Since I was expecting a friend from
Moscow, I was sure it must be her. I bounded up the stairs and rapped on the
door.
'Tanya, it's me.'
'Just a minute.'
When the door opened, I found myself face to face with a stout matron in her
mid-50s who regarded me severely. We stood motionless. 'Excuse me,' I
ventured, 'I think I have the wrong room.' I checked the number on the door.
No 8: my room. So who was this woman?
She told me that her name was Yelena and that she had come to work at the
factory affiliated to the hotel. I asked the clerk if there was anything to
be done about this distressing situation. The answer was negative. 'All I do
is take orders,' she explained.
I returned to my room. 'Don't worry. I won't bother you a bit,' said my new
friend, who was already in bed and puffing a cigarette, creating noxious
rings of smoke. Her clothes were strewn across the floor. 'You won't even
notice that I'm here.' Shortly after that she was snoring like a chainsaw.
To get to Siberia from London you can travel to Moscow with British Airways.
From Moscow, only Aeroflot, the former Soviet airline, goes to Siberia. In
Kemerovo there are three real hotels, not affiliated to any enterprise: the
Tom Hotel, the Tsentralniy Hotel and the Kuzbass Hotel, which is the best of
the three. Aeroflot is at 70 Piccadilly, London W1 V9HH. Tel: 071-491-1764.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

940312

