FT942-12607

FT  28 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee retreats after Brazilian
sales agreed


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


When trading re-opens in New York today after the day of mourning for
ex-President Nixon, coffee prices are expected to slip back. There has been
a sharp fall in the London market.
Trading was light at the London Commodity Exchange, where July robusta
coffee futures fell Dollars 13 to Dollars 1,476 a tonne. Traders suggested
the market was taking a breather after the recent run-up in price.
But the New York market could show a reaction to Tuesday's agreement in
Brazil on plans for the sale of 2.4m bags (60kg each) from the government's
stockpile this year in spite of strong opposition to it.
The Brazilian government has agreed to auction 150,000 bags to the soluble
industry in May and June along with 300,000 bags to the roasters. The rest
will be staggered over the following months although the government says the
sale will be dictated by necessity.
Traders believe that, although the Brazilian coffee auction is directed at
the domestic market, it is bound to have a knock-on effect on international
trade by freeing more supplies for export. 'It does slightly change the
fundamentals of the market and in my view, reduces its potential,' one
trader said.
Mr Lawrence Eagles, commodity analyst at GNI, said that the Association of
Coffee Producers, which is sticking to the export retention scheme, was
worried that Brazil's stock sales would delay the return of resonable market
prices to the industry. 'Indeed, the repercussions could even trigger a
price collapse if the aftermath forces the ACPC to disband,' he warned in
GNI's latest futures and options briefing.
Coffee producers are expected to halt retention of arabica coffee for export
after the daily indicator price reached 80 cents a pound yesterday. On
Monday the indicator for robusta coffee broke through 70 cents a pound,
which is the level that should trigger stock releases. Retention plan
officials will meet in London next month to discuss any sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940428

