FT942-12216

FT  30 APR 94 / Economic Diary: Forward Events


TODAY: Social Democrat (SPD) state conference (final day) in Mecklenburg,
Germany. South Korean Defence Minister Rhee Byoung-tae visits Moscow.
Taiwan's main opposition Democratic Progressive Party to hold congress and
elect new chairman.
TOMORROW: Cable News Network opens its annual World Report Contributors
Conference in Atlanta, US. President Clinton will address the forum and
answer journalists' questions via satellite on Tuesday. Belarus to lift
customs tariffs and trade barriers with Russia.
MONDAY: Start of European Parliament's last plenary session in Strasbourg
before June 9 and 12 EP elections. Israeli foreign minister Shimon Peres and
PLO chief Yasser Arafat meet in Cairo regarding Palestinian self-rule.
TUESDAY: Dutch general election. Trial resumes in Kuwait of five people in
connection with alleged multi-million-dollar fraud at Kuwait Oil Tanker
Company. General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade holds first monthly meeting
in Geneva of ruling council since signing of Uruguay Round treaty in
Marrakesh. British banking groups' mortgage lending figures (March). Bank of
England MO figures (April).
WEDNESDAY: Armed forces from 11 countries begin Nato air, sea and land
exercises in the central and western Mediterranean. UK official reserves
(April). UK advance energy statistics (March). Overseas travel and tourism
figures for UK (January).
THURSDAY: Nato secretary general Manfred Woerner briefs the Foreign Press
Association in London. Final day of Cable News Network's World Report
Contributors Conference in Atlanta.
FRIDAY: South Africa's National Assembly elects the country's new president.
Official opening of Channel Tunnel by the Queen and French president
Francois Mitterrand. Cyclical indicators for UK economy (April). British
banking groups' analysis of lending (first quarter). Full monetary
statistics from Bank of England (March). UK insolvency, bankruptcy
statistics (first quarter).

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940430

