FT943-13066

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: Many MPs expected more losers


   By JAMES BLITZ


There was little surprise at Westminster yesterday over the four names
struck off the prime minister's cabinet list. If anything, many Tory MPs had
been expecting a few more.
Mr John Patten has long been tipped to return to the back benches after an
unhappy - and sometimes disastrous - spell as education secretary.
In the last two years the 49-year-old minister with coiffured hair and a
natty line in shoes has presided over sweeping U-turns in many aspects of
the government's education policy. He has also had worse relations with
union leaders than any cabinet minister.
Compulsory national curriculum tests for schools have been abandoned. The
government's proposals to reform student unions disintegrated at the hands
of Tory rebels in the Lords. And the flow of schools opting out of local
education authority control - a keystone of the government's 1988 Education
Reform Act - slowed to a trickle.
His anger at dismissal came through in a terse resignation letter. He wrote:
'My dear Prime Minister, when we met last night, you explained that you no
longer wished me to remain as Secretary of State for Education, and I am
writing to say how glad I have been to serve in Her Majesty's Government.
With my best wishes for the future, yours ever, John.'
Mr John MacGregor's performance as transport secretary has been mixed. There
were indications yesterday that he was leaving the post at his own request
and that he is expected to take up a job in the City.
Mr MacGregor has pushed the railway privatisation bill through parliament in
the face of intense opposition, and the government is well set to proceed
with the sell-off of British Rail in spite of some public hostility.
But he has been forced to cut his road-building programme in the face of the
green lobby and the Department of Environment. He has no strong following on
the back benches, and has been criticised by some Tory MPs for an
un-inspiring performance.
Mr Peter Brooke always looked vulnerable as national heritage secretary
because he had acquired the job after the extrovert Mr David Mellor was
forced to resign.
Mr Brooke has, by contrast, been criticised for lacklustre leadership. He
introduced the National Lottery, but was dogged by speculation that the
government would press ahead with a privacy bill. He has been heavily blamed
for the recent fiasco over the D-Day celebrations.
Lord Wakeham, the departing leader of the Lords, came to his job with a
reputation as a powerful behind-the-scenes political operator. He is
understood to have told Mr Major in recent days that he was 'entirely at his
disposal', although there was little doubt that he wanted to stay in his
post.
However, he has been blamed for a succession of embarrassing defeats for the
government in the upper house on the criminal justice bill and the police
and magistrates bill. Like Mr MacGregor, there has been strong speculation
that he will take up a City job.
Brooke bows out, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940721

