FT942-14730

FT  19 APR 94 / When people prove to be a costly liability: Tracy Corrigan
and Patrick Harverson explain the dangers highlighted by the Kidder affair


   By TRACY CORRIGAN and PATRICK HARVERSON


Investment banks, particularly those with a strong bias towards trading, are
often fond of saying that their greatest assets are their people. The
Dollars 350m (Pounds 237m) pre-tax charge taken by Kidder Peabody in the
first quarter, as a result of a phantom trading scheme devised by its head
government bond trader, demonstrates that people can also be a liability.
Risk management has become a buzz word among financial institutions, many of
which now have global heads of risk management or risk control.
Sometimes, the human factor may be all but forgotten, as highly
sophisticated systems are set up to deal with the complex financial
instruments which increasingly dominate trading activities. 'Fundamentally,
banks are most exposed to their people,' said one treasury consultant. 'You
can invest a lot of money in computers and software but you also have to
find some degree of deterence: that is achieved if people know they will be
regularly audited.'
Traders at other Wall Street firms were puzzled as to how Mr Joseph Jett,
managing director in charge of Kidder's government bond trading desk, was
able to fake profits without being caught by the firm's internal accounting
procedures. 'We get our P&L (profit and loss statement) from a separate
department, so there are checks and balances,' said one trader at a
prominent investment bank.
Yet, senior Wall Street executives point out that if an experienced
professional running a complex and fast-moving securities trading desk wants
to mislead the firm about his activities, it is not easy to stop him. As Mr
Michael Carpenter, Kidder's chief executive, told reporters: 'When somebody
is trying to obfuscate the systems for a deliberate purpose, it's hard to
always be protected against these things.'
Kidder is not alone on Wall Street in having suffered at the hands of a
'rogue' trader. Three years ago, Salomon Brothers had to pay hundreds of
millions of dollars in fines and compensation after the head of its bond
trading desk was found to have faked customer bids in auctions of Treasury
securities.
The main dangers for a bank are that a trader may try to book false
transactions or use inflated valuations for genuine trades - either to
inflate profits or to try to cover up losses.
To guard against phantom trades, banks should have 'an independent
confirmation function, where the back office (which settles trades) has a
system of obtaining direct confirmation with the purported counterparty',
says Mr John Hitchins, a partner in the capital markets group at Price
Waterhouse. This is standard practice in the foreign exchange market, as
most big banks automatically confirm through Swift.
To stop dealers from fiddling valuations, the back office also needs to have
independent ability to value positions. This involves taking prices from
external feeds and having their own models for calculating positions.
In an attempt to bridge the growing gap between back office and increasingly
complex trading activities, some banks have created a new function which
they call the 'middle office'.
'They have an appreciation of the markets but also come from an accounting
culture,' explains Mr John Tiner, head of financial markets at Arthur
Andersen in London. 'Their job is often to recalculate the daily
marking-to-market in order to compare traders' records and accounting
records.' Kidder admitted that it did not have such a function.
According to consultants and senior bankers, the separation of front and
back office is virtually universal. The result is that 'it is almost
impossible for fraud to be conducted by one individual', said one
consultant. 'If you have a fake trade you need to have a fake settlement.
Otherwise, the scam should show up pretty quickly. The problem occurs where
you have collusion, particularly between front and back office.'
Another consultant described it as folly to underestimate the ingenuity of
people who want to defraud, once they have been working on a particular
system. He pointed out that traders, who are trained to look out for and
exploit the inefficiencies of markets, may take the same approach towards
the systems designed to check them.
It does seem that in the case of Mr Jett, who earned Dollars 9m last year,
the risk/reward ratio so dear to traders was just not there.
But perhaps banks should brace themselves for further attempts. After
earning record bonuses last year, many traders will face massive falls in
earnings in this year's bear market conditions.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940419

