FT942-14401

FT  20 APR 94 / International Bonds: L-Bank in DM2bn global issue


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN and JOHN BARHAM


   BUENOS AIRES


L-Bank defied volatile bund market conditions to issue its long-awaited
five-year global bond yesterday.
The recently renamed development agency of the German state of
Baden-Wurttemberg launched DM2bn of bonds due May 1999, to be priced today
at a spread of 34 to 37 basis points above the Treuhand notes due January
1999. Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan and Salomon Brothers were joint leads.
'I was a bit surprised they decided to come to the market while it was still
so choppy,' said one Frankfurt syndicate manager. However, he added that,
after the issue had been widely flagged in roadshows earlier this year, 'the
whole thing would have lost momentum if it hadn't come soon'.
Another dealer welcomed L-Bank's decision to issue DM2bn, rather than the
widely expected DM3bn. Most syndicate sources deemed the pricing of the deal
to be very fair, although they warned that the ongoing buyers' strike could
make it slow to place.
Despite widespread investor abstinence, the lead managers reported a steady
flow of orders, especially from east Asian and US accounts.
In the Canadian dollar sector, the Kingdom of Sweden issued CDollars 200m of
8 1/4 per cent bonds due December 1999. The bonds closed at 99.59, just
below their 99.62 fixed re-offer price, but the spread widened to 31 - 33
basis points over the corresponding Canadian government note, from 28 basis
points at issue, traders said.
Lead manager Daiwa Europe reported good demand from European and east Asian
investors attracted by the high coupon. However, some dealers felt the deal
was badly timed, with many investors avoiding the dollar bloc amid
nervousness over US interest rates.
Dewan Salman Fibre, Pakistan's biggest producer of polyester fibre and its
second-largest listed company, issued Dollars 45m of seven-year convertible
bonds via Citicorp and Crosby Securities. The bonds carry an indicated
semi-annual coupon of 4 3/4 to 5 per cent with a conversion premium of 8 to
12 per cent. According to one of the lead managers, this compares favourably
with recent Indian convertibles carrying 2 1/2 to 3 per cent coupons and
premiums of around 15 per cent.
Argentina plans a Dollars 2bn global bond, Euronote and peso note borrowing
programme later this year, writes John Barham from Buenos Aires.
Mr Joaquin Cottani, finance under-secretary, said the government 'will
follow last December's successful Dollars 1bn global bond with a new Dollars
1bn global bond in the second half of the year, a mid-term Euronote or
Treasury bill programme and Dollars 500m in peso T-bills.'
Mr Cottani said the government will this year target Argentina's domestic
investor base more than international investors as in previous years.
Private pension funds, which will begin operating in July, are expected to
be big buyers of government paper.
He said the government will spend about Dollars 7bn this year servicing its
Dollars 70bn debt, most of which is in dollars.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940420

