FT942-14788

FT  19 APR 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Inventing a hybrid -
Richard Gourlay reports on plans to make the UK Companies Act more relevant
to smaller concerns


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Last week the UK government asked the Law Commission to carry out a
feasibility study on whether company law could be made more relevant for
small and medium-sized companies.
In granting the Commission wide terms of reference, Neil Hamilton, the
corporate affairs minister, said he wanted to ensure company law achieved
its aims in the simplest way while imposing the 'minimum burdens on
business'.
To some this review is long overdue. As it stands, the Companies Act covers
every incorporated company from the multinational with thousands of
employees to the family-owned company employing a handful of people.
Large parts of the law define the responsibilities of directors in PLCs
where management is divorced from the shareholders who control the company.
Yet for many smaller companies, the separation of ownership and control is a
fiction only recognised by the Companies Act.
Many requirements, like holding annual shareholders meetings, circulating
agenda and even board meetings are not relevant and either do not happen or
are time-wasting formalities. Owner-managers are more likely to discuss
important business matters over breakfast than in a board meeting.
One option the Department of Trade and Industry wants the Law Commission to
examine is the feasibility of a hybrid limited liability partnership that
would fall somewhere between an incorporated company and the sole trader or
partnership.
Yet despite the apparent need for a review, the announcement of the Law
Commission's study has provoked a less than overwhelmingly positive
response. Some small business groups say it is 'an example of government
tendency to focus on the wrong issues'.
If the DTI had really wanted to cut what the corporate affairs minister
called the 'burdens on business', they add, it would have focused on cutting
the cost businesses incur complying with government regulations.
Graham Bannock and Partners, the private-sector research group specialising
in the smaller business sector, estimates 2 per cent of gross domestic
product is spent by UK companies on compliance - that is understanding and
compiling PAYE, VAT and National Insurance returns and dealing with their
respective inspectors.
Business spends an amount equal to a further 2 per cent complying with other
business regulations such as health and safety requirements, and sick pay.
And smaller companies bear disproportionately more of this compliance cost
relative to their turnover because of diseconomies of scale - it takes a
bookkeeper almost as much time understanding and compiling a payroll for
five people as it does for 25 people.
While changes to company law might bring modest benefits compared with a
move to allow companies to file all their tax returns on one form and
subsequently deal with one government inspector, the Law Commission's
feasibility study is nevertheless a valuable exercise.
'I could probably take you through a large part of the Companies Act and
pick holes in it in terms of its relevance to smaller companies,' says Diana
Faber, the Law Commissioner in charge of the study. 'However, the interests
of creditors in businesses are as important to the economy as the interests
of small businesses.'
In examining the feasibility of the hybrid limited liability partnership,
the Law Commission will be able to draw on the Gower Report laid before
Parliament in a green paper in 1981. Professor Jim Gower's recommendations
were not taken up because of lack of support from business at the time but
his proposals are nevertheless instructive.
Gower proposed a limited liability partnership designed for small family
concerns where there were fewer than 10 partners or 'members'. Unlike the
widely used ordinary partnership, the limited partnership would have a legal
personality. This would mean it could contract to take on debts by giving
banks a floating charge over its assets.
As one of the main reasons for incorporating is to raise finance via
floating charges, the limited partnership could help many family-owned
businesses avoid incorporating. Gower suggested this partnership would have
to file accounts - presumably to provide some protection to unsecured
creditors who could not take legal action against the assets of the
'members' whose liability would be limited.
And in an attempt to avoid reinventing the wheel, the Law Commission is also
likely to look at the experience in countries such as Canada, the US and
South Africa where new corporate structures have been established.
Lastly, the Commission could recommend no changes to company law, on the
grounds that no reform would help. One problem the Law Commission faces is
identifying exactly why owner-managed businesses incorporate. The status of
limited liability is one factor. Tax is another and probably the single
issue that will make or break any recommendations for change.
The Law Commission will have to steer a path that makes any new hybrid legal
entity acceptable both to the Treasury and to the owner-manager's pocket.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940419

