FT942-12692

FT  28 APR 94 / Analysts fear the errors of over-ambition: David Lascelles
and Peggy Hollinger report on moves in the independent oil sector


   By DAVID LASCELLES and PEGGY HOLLINGER


Although they started out as the Tweedledum and Tweedledee of the UK oil
industry, the fortunes of Enterprise Oil and Lasmo could hardly have turned
out more differently.
Both are medium sized independent oil companies with a strong North Sea base
and smaller operations elsewhere, mainly south-east Asia. Both are closely
geared to exploration and production, and both have avoided diversifying too
far downstream.
But whereas Enterprise, under its chairman and chief executive Mr Graham
Hearne, has built a reputation for strong management and far-sightedness,
Lasmo has been battered by disasters and disgruntled investors.
Much of its tarnished reputation stems from the Pounds 1bn acquisition of
Ultramar in 1991. Although Lasmo subsequently sold off many of Ultramar's
assets, the view remains that it greatly overpaid.
The strain of the acquisition came on top of a high cost structure, and an
investment cycle which left Lasmo having to make its heaviest outlays at a
time when the oil price was close to a 20-year low. One of its biggest
projects is Liverpool Bay, a large natural gas development off north-east
England which does not start up until 1996.
These strains culminated in the departure of Mr Chris Greentree, its chief
executive, last year and the subsequent decision to pass its dividend. This
month Lasmo also appointed a new chairman, Mr Rudolph Agnew, and went to
shareholders with a Pounds 219m rights issue.
Enterprise has managed to cultivate a much higher reputation in the market.
It has traditionally been seen as the better managed and financially
stronger of the two companies. But even Enterprise has not been immune to
the weak oil price.
Recently its financial performance has deteriorated: its 1993 profits were
only up because of exceptional tax items, and the dividend was left
unchanged. It has been slower than Lasmo in replacing production with new
reserves. However, with big new fields coming on stream, such as Nelson in
the North Sea, cashflow is strong, and Enterprise needs to find a home for
its financial resources.
The logic in bidding for Lasmo is twofold. First, Enterprise could acquire a
substantial amount of new production, probably more cheaply than drilling
for it itself. Second, it would virtually double its size, and emerge as a
much more formidable force in the oil business.
Although the two companies overlap geographically, Lasmo's strength in gas
complements Enterprise's bias towards oil. If the oil price continues the
recent run which has taken it from Dollars 12 a barrel to over Dollars 15,
Enterprise could therefore get itself on to a profitable escalator.
But having said that, there was very little enthusiasm for a bid in the
market yesterday. 'We think it would be the wrong thing to do,' said Mr
Mehdi Varzi, oil industry analyst at Kleinwort Benson. He points out that
Enterprise would have to find 170m barrels of oil a year to top up the
combined companies' reserves. 'That's a tall order,' he says. He believes
Enterprise would do better to expand by buying up oil and gas assets
selectively rather than 'the whole baggage'.
Most analysts also consider Lasmo to be 'fully valued' as an investment. Now
that the worst seems to have passed at Lasmo, the share price has recovered
strongly from its low last December, partly on the strength of US buying.
But Mr Lars Reierson, at Morgan Stanley, the US investment bank, said
yesterday he doubted that any US companies would make a bid much above the
present price level. If Enterprise was going to make a bid, it should have
done so six months ago.
The fear is that Enterprise could end up making precisely the same mistake
that got Lasmo into its present predicament. By taking on an over-ambitious
acquisition which could double his company's size on paper, Mr Hearne might
end up finding, as Mr Greentree did, that one plus one equals no more than
one.
And if Enterprise did go ahead, it could face quite a battle. As Lasmo made
clear yesterday, it would not welcome a bid. Its new chairman, Mr Agnew, is
a hardened take-over warrior. As chairman of Consolidated Gold Fields, he
led one of the great takeover defences of the 1980s when he fought off a
sustained attack by Minorco in 1988.
With so little going for a bid, there was some speculation in the market
yesterday that Enterprise was more interested in flushing out another bidder
than in making a strike of its own. Lasmo's fate is of vital interest to
Enterprise because the two companies compete so directly. If so, the next
few days could be quite eventful.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940428

