FT942-12343

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (5): Higher interest
or immediate access? - A regular income 2: Deposits / Investors chosing a
bank or building society account are being obliged to compromise


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Four years ago, a typical building society account would pay more than 13
per cent interest on a balance of about Pounds 5,000 in an instant access
account.
Now, the equivalent rate would be just over 4 per cent; if you searched
carefully, you might be able to find a postal account paying in the region
of 6 per cent. Some building society accounts, particularly the instant
access ones, offer what seem like derisory amounts of interest - as little
as 0.25 per cent on Pounds 1,000 in some cases.
Declining interest rates may have been the salvation of the over-mortgaged
segment of the population, but they have not been so welcome to those
depending on savings for a living, who have seen their income cut by a half
or two thirds.
All over the country, pensioners and others are conducting a desperate
search for high-interest accounts. Unfortunately, there is no such thing as
a safe account with a respectable high street institution paying 10 per cent
at the moment.
If 10 per cent is what you are looking for, you must either enter the
higher-risk, higher-reward world of stocks and shares (where 10 per cent
returns are still difficult to come by), or come to terms with reality and
resign yourself to tightening your belt.
If you depend on savings for a noticeable proportion of your income, you
will probably have at least a five-figure sum to invest. Rates available
from building societies range from roughly 4 per cent to about 7.5 per cent
on that sort of amount. However, if you are looking for a regular income,
with interest paid monthly or quarterly, you will not get rates quite as
high as on accounts paying interest annually, or at the end of a fixed term.
The choice of account depends not only on which has the highest rate, but
also your priorities: are you prepared to sacrifice flexibility and ease of
access for marginally higher rates? Is your future financial position
unclear, so that you need to have instant access to your savings? Or are you
happy to lock your money away with the same institution for five years, as
long as you receive a reasonable rate of interest on it?
Naturally, there are stages in between those two extremes. Postal accounts
are becoming increasingly popular, with both savers and societies. They
offer access as instant as first-class post can make it, but reduce branch
administration costs, so usually offer better rates than accounts operated
over the counter or with a plastic card.
Then come one-month or 30-day notice accounts: if you give a months' notice
of any withdrawal, you do not suffer any penalty, but otherwise you lose 30
days' interest. Other accounts with notice periods of 60 days, 90 days etc
generally work in the same way. Check the conditions carefully before
signing up: some accounts do not allow any access before the notice period
is up, even in an emergency, while others offer a bonus if you make less
than a certain number of withdrawals each year.
Finally, fixed-term accounts require you to tie up your money for a period
of one to five years, usually with very limited ability to make withdrawals,
except of interest, or heavy penalties if you do.
Which institution is offering the best rates will tend to vary considerably
over time: high rates are often offered during a marketing campaign to
attract new savers, and are then scaled down over a few months.
Obviously, if you are locked into a 90-day notice account, you cannot make
frequent switches between accounts without losing a lot of money, but it is
worth checking a couple of times a year that your account has not fallen too
seriously behind the typical rates. One way to do this is to look in the
Weekend FT for the weekly table of the highest rates for your money,
provided by Moneyfacts.
Banks are not usually the first place to look for a regular income from
money on deposit; rates at the high street names tend to look unappealing by
comparison with most building societies. When a bank is for once offering
extraordinarily attractive rates, do not rush to deposit all your money
there immediately.
Higher returns are a sign of higher risk. This is an eternal principle, but
one which the public regularly ignores. The pitiful situation of savers left
stranded by a series of collapsed banks, from BCCI to the Wimbledon South
West Finance, which offered suspiciously high rates on supposedly secure
deposit accounts, is all too graphic evidence of this.
There are compensation schemes covering bank deposits, but the maximum
amount covered is Pounds 20,000 a person, and the maximum amount refunded is
75 per cent of that, ie Pounds 15,000. It can also be a long wait before the
compensation comes through, and of course you will not be earning any
interest on the money during that time.
Judging by recent history, small, struggling building societies are likely
to be rescued by a larger society before they collapse entirely, but the
possibility remains. Smaller building societies often offer attractive
rates, but cautious savers may want to consider the wisdom of putting too
much money in any single small society. The compensation for building
society deposits is slightly more generous, at 90 per cent of the first
Pounds 20,000 - so if you have more than that to invest, it is safer to
spread it around a little.
No matter what your opinion of the present government, it is less likely to
go bust than any bank or building society. This means that National Savings
products (see also page 20 of this Review) are the safest possible option
for savers.
At the moment, NS has two products offering a monthly income. One is
available to everybody: income bonds. These pay interest gross at a variable
rate (currently 6.5-6.75 per cent) on a minimum deposit of Pounds 2,000,
maximum Pounds 250,000. They have no fixed term, but impose a three-month
notice period; and if you cash in within the first year, you forfeit half
the income paid.
Over-65s also have access to the pensioners guaranteed income bond -
inevitably nicknamed the 'granny bond' - which currently pays 7 per cent
(fixed) on a minimum of Pounds 500, maximum of Pounds 20,000, with a
five-year term. Earlier withdrawals can be made with 60 days notice, and you
lose 60 days' interest on the sum withdrawn. This has proved popular, having
pulled in Pounds 906m by the end of March.
Building societies, seeing record outflows of funds, have responded with
lookalike products, in the form of five-year fixed-rate bonds, but rates and
conditions differ from the National Savings version. For example, there have
been some complaints that the National Savings 'granny bonds' are only
available to the over-65s. Building society equivalents do not necessarily
have the same age limits, and so could be a better bet for anyone retiring
early.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940429

