FT944-14577

FT  22 OCT 94 / Flamboyant Catalan faces survival test: A look at the
charges against Javier de la Rosa that have landed the Spanish financier in
deep water


   By TOM BURNS


Mr Javier de la Rosa, the flamboyant Catalan financier who since Wednesday
has been sharing a small cell in Barcelona's Modelo prison, foundered in
deep waters before and came out swimming. But now he faces charges levelled
by mostly retired people of modest means who claim he has swindled their
savings.
These minority shareholders of Grand Tibidabo, the now bankrupt holding
company that Mr de la Rosa acquired in 1991, accuse him of rerouting at
least Pta3bn (Pounds 15m) towards his own private businesses.
Mr de la Rosa, 47, has swum away from the wreckage before. In 1985 he
resigned as head of Banca Garriga Nogues, a small Barcelona subsidiary of
the Banesto banking group, to start a private investment career. The
following year Garriga Nogues collapsed with bad debts of Dollars 800m.
In May 1992 Mr de la Rosa left Grupo Torras, the Spanish investment arm of
the Kuwait Investment Office (KIO) that he had run for six years, and in
December the company, citing losses of Dollars 4bn, went into receivership.
The year before casting loose from the KIO, which is suing him separately
along with other former Grupo Torras executives, Mr de la Rosa began putting
together his own financial empire by paying Pta8.5bn in a public share offer
for 30 per cent of Consorcio Nacional de Leasing (CNL), a Barcelona leasing
company with a widely distributed small shareholders equity base.
Later in 1991 he had CNL buy 30 per cent of S A Tibidabo, a company he
already controlled, sold CNL's headquarters and its leasing business, and
transformed it into a holding company with the new name of Grand Tibidabo.
Last May Mr de la Rosa's chequered business career repeated itself. A month
ahead of Grand Tibidabo's general meeting he resigned as chairman of the
holding, saying he was willing to sell his stake in it for Pta1.
At the AGM Grand Tibidabo's directors announced that a revised audit had
established losses for the company of nearly Pta11bn, in place of profits of
Pta16m, and, during a six-hour meeting, they endured sustained abuse from
angry minority shareholders.
The chief cause of the shareholder hostility was their belief that Mr de la
Rosa had used their money in Grand Tibidabo to buy and sell, at a profit to
himself, properties that either belonged to him or to his associates and
that he had decapitalised the holding in the process.
What Banesto failed to do after the collapse of its Garriga Nogues
subsidiary - and what KIO has so far failed to achieve after the fall of
Grupo Torras - has been accomplished by lawyers representing some 500 of
Grand Tibidabo's 7,000-odd remaining shareholders. Mr de la Rosa is being
held in custody pending charges of falsifying public documents and
misappropriation of funds, which carry jail terms of up to 12 years. He was
ordered yesterday to post bail of Pta7bn to cover his alleged liability for
the losses of Grand Tibidabo.
Mr Joaquin Aguirre, the civil court judge who ordered Mr de la Rosa's arrest
earlier this week, said the financier must pay the money by Monday or face a
possible embargo of his personal assets.
The courts will decide whether the charges against him stick and the
investigating judge may still add new ones. But what has for the time being
put Mr de la Rosa behind bars in his home town is an odd combination of
high-level political infighting and of small-time investor hostility.
'People kept telling Javier that what would land him in jail would not be
the big KIO guns but the old widows who had their savings in CNL,' says a
Barcelona lawyer who monitored Mr de la Rosa's dealings. 'Javier has tripped
up because he refused to recognise that Grand Tibidabo had shareholders,
that it had to be properly audited and that it was subject to the scrutiny
of the stock exchange commission,' says a former senior employee of the
holding company.
Civil actions, like the ones brought by lawyers representing the group of
Grand Tibidabo shareholders, do not in themselves propel the chairman of a
failed company into custody. Mr de la Rosa was not, however, an ordinary
chairman and there has been a backlash against those who made speculative
fortunes during the late 1980s.
Politics lie close to the surface of the Grand Tibidabo affair as Mr de la
Rosa was close to the Catalan nationalist party that runs the Generalitat,
the Catalan government. The Barcelona prosecutors seized on allegations that
Mr de la Rosa had temporarily used Pta1bn of a Pta10bn loan to Grand
Tibidabo, that had been guaranteed by the Generalitat to develop a theme
park south of Barcelona, for his own private business purposes.
The prosecutors - Mr Carlos Jimenez Villarejo and Mr Jose Maria Mena - are
seen as being 'political' prosecutors who are staunch opponents of the
Catalan nationalist party. The two were involved in a long-running feud with
the Generalitat during the 1980s when they attempted to pin the blame for
the failure of a local banking group on Mr Jordi Pujol, its former chairman
and the Generalitat's chief executive.
Catalan nationalists say the prosecution of Mr de la Rosa is linked to
attempts to undermine Mr Pujol, who has frequently held the financier up to
be an exemplary Catalan entrepreneur.
Mr de la Rosa defiantly told a radio interviewer, shortly before his arrest,
that 'everyone had better be prepared to take their share of
responsibility'.
The whole affair takes the form of an Italian-style corruption scandal as Mr
de la Rosa is widely believed to have extensive dossiers on leading
political figures in Spain and has allegedly taped all his conversations.
The discovery of a Panamanian passport, bearing Mr de la Rosa's photograph
but with a false name, during a police search of one of his six offices in
Barcelona underlined the dark side of the financier's approach to business.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941022

