FT941-12820

FT  28 JAN 94 / Major attacks opponents on spending


   By DAVID OWEN


Mr John Major yesterday attacked Labour's credibility over public spending.
He said the party's claim to have no spending commitments showed that nobody
should believe a word it said outside the Commons.
The prime minister said the claim - made earlier this week by Mr Gordon
Brown, the shadow chancellor - meant that it was now known that Labour would
earmark no extra money for the National Health Service. 'All their promises
are obvious rubbish - as the opposition front bench have told us,' Mr Major
said.
His comments came in stormy Commons exchanges after cabinet ministers had
discussed tax, spending and public-sector pay at their weekly meeting. Mr
John Smith, Labour leader, sought to brand the government as one 'of high
taxation'. He said this was because it was also the government of 'waste and
incompetence'.
Mr Smith, however, has been attacked from the left of his own party over the
tough line on spending pledges.
Thirty four Labour leftwingers have signed a parliamentary early-day motion
calling for a 'clear socialist commitment to be made now' on a range of
policy objectives.
These include the recovery of full employment, planned defence
diversification, rebuilding of Britain's infrastructure, extension of public
services and the regeneration of industry.
Meanwhile Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, sought to back up Mr
Major's attacks, using a letter to Mr David Blunkett, her opposite number,
to ask for 'clarification' of Labour's health policies. Referring to
newspaper reports that Mr Blunkett had been 'severely reprimanded' by his
colleagues for producing a policy document full of uncosted spending
pledges, Mrs Bottomley said the 'dressing-down' he had received exposed the
'deceit' at the heart of Labour's health policy.
In a separate development last night Labour accused the government of trying
to 'gag' discussion on the controversial Child Support Agency by removing a
planned Labour-led debate from next week's parliamentary programme.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940128

