FT941-13105

FT  27 JAN 94 / Auditors fight BCCI decision


   By ANDREW JACK


The accountancy profession plans to argue in the House of Lords that any
delay to the launch of a disciplinary inquiry into the collapsed Bank of
Credit and Commerce International could jeopardise the future of
self-regulation.
The Joint Disciplinary Scheme, the accountancy profession's highest such
body, is to petition against a Court of Appeal ruling last month which found
in favour of Price Waterhouse, the accountancy firm.
Price Waterhouse has been fighting attempts by the scheme to start
investigating its role as auditor to BCCI, which was closed by banking
regulators in July 1991. The firm argues that such an investigation would be
disruptive and prejudicial to civil actions pending against it.
It also says that its auditing procedures have been examined by accountancy
regulators and no problems have been identified with its ability to continue
acting as an auditor.
The scheme, which represents the chartered and certified accountancy bodies
covering England, Wales and Scotland, is awaiting a decision from the Lords
on whether it may make its appeal.
It says that to wait until the outcome of litigation against Price
Waterhouse will delay any examination to the next century, by which time it
will be rendered impossible. Witnesses will be dead, retired or relying on
their memory long after the events, it says.
Mr Brian Harris, secretary to the scheme, said yesterday: 'The court should
have balanced the private rights of PW's partners with the public interest
in examination of the audit.
'By deferring it is effectively saying there will not be an investigation
into the biggest banking scandal in history.'
Lawyers for the scheme preparing the BCCI case for the Lords say that the
Appeal Court judges were inconsistent in their reasons.
In particular, they believe the judges neglected the need for the scheme to
pursue its investigation if it is to meet its requirements as a regulator
under the 1989 Companies Act.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940127

