FT943-824

FT  27 SEP 94 / Markets Report: D-Mark loses ground


   By MOTOKO RICH


The D-Mark was weaker against the dollar, the pound and the Swiss franc
yesterday as markets took cover following electoral results in the state of
Bavaria, writes Motoko Rich.
The failure of the Free Democrats, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's junior partner,
to achieve the 5 per cent vote necessary for a place in the state parliament
unsettled market expectations for the October 16 German federal poll.
Such nervousness allowed the dollar to rise against the D-Mark, while
growing market acceptance of a likely compromise in the US-Japan trade talks
also gave the US currency a boost against the yen.
In London the dollar finished at DM1.5551, up from a Friday close of
DM1.5443. Against the yen it closed at Y98.70 from Y97.705. It ended in New
York at DM1.5535 and Y98.75.
Sterling was also firmer against the D-Mark, though slightly weaker against
the dollar. Against the D-Mark, the pound closed at DM2.4482 from DM2.4380.
Against the dollar, it finished in London at Dollars 1.5743 from Dollars
1.5788.
The Italian lira rose against the D-Mark in late trading as Prime Minister
Silvio Berlusconi and leaders of his coalition parties reached an accord on
the shape of Italy's 1995 deficit-cutting budget.
The Free Democratic party, the junior partner in Mr Kohl's government, only
achieved 2.8 per cent of the Bavarian vote, far short of the 5 per cent
needed to guarantee it a place in the state parliament.
Markets were spooked by this result because it foreshadowed the federal poll
next month, when a similar setback for the FDP could force Mr Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union to forge a coalition with the Social Democratic
party, a prospect the markets do not favour.
The D-Mark was generally softer against other European currencies. Against
the Swiss franc, it closed in London at SFr0.828 from SFr0.831. Against the
French franc, it finished at FFr3.417 from FFr3.419.
Mr Steve Hannah, economist at IBJ, noted that most national polls are
showing the FDP with 8.5 per cent support for its bid to join the national
parliament. 'So no-one is panicking yet,' he said.
The weakness of the D-Mark helped the dollar to turn in a fairly strong
performance. Against the yen, it breached the Y98.50 level for the first
time in a week.
Although analysts were reluctant to pinpoint any one factor as the
motivation for the dollar's improvement, Mr Hannah said the markets were
beginning to realise that trade negotiations between the US and Japan do not
hinge on this Friday's deadline.
'The markets are beginning to realise that even if the Japanese are named
for engaging in unfair practices in some areas, it would not necessarily
mean a wholesale trade war or that the US will start talking the dollar
down,' he added.
Today's meeting of the FOMC, the policy-making arm of the US Federal
Reserve, should provide most of the focus for the foreign exchange markets,
as expectations are divided on a possible interest rate rise.
Sterling continued its firming trend against the D-Mark, piercing the
resistance level of DM2.45 early in the day. Although it has not yet
consolidated its gains, analysts believe it will move upwards.
The markets are bullish on the pound due to confidence in the monetary
policy of UK chancellor Mr Kenneth Clarke. 'He has never denied the idea of
another base rate rise in the future,' said Mr David Cocker, economist at
Chemical Bank. 'That is seen as very positive by the markets, especially as
he gives the impression of being mildly pre-emptive.'
He said the pound's slight fall against the dollar was primarily a result of
profit-taking.
The lira was boosted by a coalition agreement in Italy over the 1995 budget.
Although no details were revealed, the tone of the announcement suggested
that the government intended to shape the budget to cut the deficit.
Against the D-Mark, the lira finished at L1006 from L1009, and was trading
as high as L1004.5 after the close of the London markets.
Canadian short-term forward interest rates fell against US rates for the
first time since 1984, demonstrating the market confidence in the Canadian
dollar.
Since the Quebec election, when Bloc Quebecois, the party which promotes the
separatist cause, won by an unexpectedly narrow margin, the markets have
been shrugging off the risk of Quebec's secession from Canada, giving a
boost to the Canadian dollar and allowing the markets to discount lower rate
rises.
The UK December short sterling contract finished unchanged at 93.19,
discounting a short-term interest rate of 6.81 per cent.
In the UK money markets, the Bank of England provided liquidity of Pounds
561m after revising its shortage forecast to Pounds 550m. Overnight rates
traded between 2 and 5 per cent.
German call money was quoted between 4.25 and 4.50 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940927

