FT942-14510

FT  20 APR 94 / Management: Sugar daddy - In a second article on ownership,
Christopher Lorenz examines Nestle's acquisition of Rowntree


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


An unprecedented event occurred at Easter in the cathedral city of York, in
northern England. The managing director's seat in what for 90 years was the
proud headquarters of Rowntree, Britain's biggest maker of chocolate and
other confectionery, was taken for the first time by a manager from
Swiss-based Nestle.
The man in question, David Harris, is a Briton. But he is very much a
'Nestle man': he has 30 years of experience with the group as a marketing
expert in its coffee, milk and drinks businesses.
The multinational acquired Rowntree six years ago this spring after a battle
over the latter's loss of British nationality. Given the continued
sensitivities among the 4,500 employees at York - most of whom were loyal
Rowntree people - and the watchfulness of many outsiders over the
commitments made by Nestle during the 1988 bid battle, one might have
expected a fuss over the appointment.
Not a bit of it. Even Neil Moore, the chief representative for unionised
office staff at York, who regrets the gradual removal of various aspects of
managerial decision-making to Nestle's Swiss and UK headquarters, says he
has 'no strong feelings'. One former Rowntree director fears that York is
'being moved towards branch factory status', but he declines to be named.
Behind this general equanimity lie three factors. First, Nestle, an old hand
at acquisitions, has handled the integration of Rowntree with even more than
its customary care. Whereas some predators assimilate acquisitions within
months, Nestle usually takes two or three years to start the process in
earnest. With Rowntree, it waited for four.
Second, York has emerged, in several respects, as a significant force within
the giant multinational. This is in spite of the fact that not all of
Nestle's commitments have been kept: some have proved impracticable with
time.
The biggest casualty was the plan to run Nestle's global confectionery
strategy from York, not Switzerland. This had to be dropped two years ago,
partly because of the amount of travel involved, and also because the
strategy unit became subsumed within a far-reaching reorganisation of
Nestle's entire corporate HQ, which was designed to make the group
faster-moving. This involved co-locating at head office all but one of its
product divisions: its mineral water interests, including Perrier, are based
in Paris.
The most visible aspect of Nestle's commitment to York - its largest factory
complex - has been its capital investment of Pounds 120m made there since
the takeover. This is far more than Rowntree could have afforded on its own
in so short a time. Part of this investment, such as a newly-opened Pounds
28m KitKat plant, has expanded capacity and helped double Nestle Rowntree's
total exports from its seven UK plants to Pounds 150m. This has pushed its
export ratio from 15 per cent in 1988 to 25 per cent last year.
Other parts of the investment have boosted labour productivity. For
instance, a heavily automated Pounds 7m plant, opened in 1993, has helped
cut the labour required for Aero bar production by almost a quarter, to 165
people.
Though some office jobs have also gone, higher factory productivity is the
main factor behind a fall in the total Nestle Rowntree labour force at York
 -from almost 6,000 at the takeover to its current 4,500. Of these, 3,300
are production workers.
Former Rowntree managers argue that this fall cannot be attributed to
foreign ownership: it is the continuation of a productivity drive which the
UK company began in the late 1970s. Without Nestle's extra sales outlets
around the world, the fall could have been steeper still.
Arguably even more important than York's production role is that Nestle has
retained the site as what Graham Millar, Harris's Rowntree-schooled
predecessor, calls 'an intellectual resources centre'.
At a cost of more than Pounds 6.5m above the Pounds 3.5m which Rowntree had
already committed, the original UK R&D operation has doubled in size to 80
highly skilled people, and become Nestle's leading worldwide research centre
for confectionery. This involved closing Rowntree's former research and
development centre in France, and slimming Nestle's in Switzerland. A
quarter of the York centre's staff now come from outside the UK, and this
proportion is expected to rise to a third.
York has also become a specialist support services centre for the whole of
Nestle UK, providing consumer relations, information technology, and quality
and scientific services. This has involved moving jobs north from Nestle
UK's head office in south London almost as quickly - but not quite - as
Rowntree's former corporate functions (finance, pensions, legal and
communications) have gone south.
The third reason why the appointment of Harris has drawn so little internal
comment goes to the heart of why the takeover has been successful. In the
words of trade unionist Moore, 'it's two-way traffic. We can't complain
about Nestle people coming in, because we've had Rowntree people going the
other way. Six years on, that's inevitable.'
From the start, Nestle took care not merely to leave Rowntree people in
charge of the UK management - Harris is the first very senior exception -
but also to move them into senior jobs elsewhere within Nestle. So far more
than 30 have won jobs outside the UK, half at corporate HQ, in both its
divisional and geographic organisation. They include the head of the
confectionery strategic business unit, which replaced the York-led strategy
group.
In the UK, the two most senior ex-Rowntree managers are Peter Schroeder,
head of the York research centre, and Peter Blackburn, who since 1992 has
been executive chairman of Nestle UK. Schroeder says: 'Rowntree integrated
into Nestle with enthusiasm partly because the Rowntree managers were left
in charge. In one sense it was easy: Nestle had neglected its chocolate
business and wanted Rowntree to bring it into the modern world.'
He remembers meeting one Nestle chocolate manager who said: 'Ah, you're from
Rowntree - it's you who took us over.'
'Some Nestle people would say that we've had a very good deal indeed,' says
Blackburn - and not because he has been an obvious beneficiary. The two-way
traffic that is now affecting York flows from this; Blackburn says he
intends to foster it in order to develop a 'one-company' culture. After any
merger or acquisition, he says, this does not emerge 'unless you really do
mix people up'.
The series concludes next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940420

