FT942-14316

FT  21 APR 94 / World Trade News: Dunkel sees end to skirmishes on trade
front


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


Mr Arthur Dunkel, former director-general of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, yesterday suggested that its successor World Trade
Organisation would virtually outlaw the use of unilateral trade retaliation.
'Now, if things work well, the multilateral system will be so strong that no
government will need to make recourse to unilateralism,' he said. 'The World
Trade Organisation will cover practically everything that is the subject of
disputes: goods, services, ideas.'
Mr Dunkel, speaking in Washington, said that the US would be able to bring
its complaints about the EU's audio-visual protection to the WTO, where a
3-5 member arbitration panel would hear the case.
He does not expect Washington to withdraw the laws allowing it to act
unilaterally. However, if the US imposed sanctions, they could be appealed
against at the WTO where the US may be forced to 'correct the situation'.
He refused comment on the contention by Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade
representative, that the US can continue to act unilaterally in disputes not
covered by the WTO.
Mr Dunkel wrote most of the new text of the rules agreed in Marrakesh last
week. He refuses to say how much of his 'draft final act' was later amended
until the new WTO is approved by all the governments. Mr Dunkel said the WTO
would offer faster recourse in disputes than any current mechanism.
Mr Ron Brown, the US commerce secretary, yesterday said his department was
monitoring 50 large environmental projects around the world so that US
companies can compete swiftly for the business.
He spoke during a week of Commerce Department activities highlighting the
mobilisation of government resources behind exports of environmental
technology. US officials say the effort has already helped to generate more
than Dollars 595m (Pounds 407.5m) in environmental exports.
Mr Brown is establishing an environmental trade advisory committee with 30
members of Congress and the private sector to advise the government.
A working group within his department is identifying markets where
government assistance to US companies can secure 'high immediate returns'.
These include Mexico, the China Economic Area, Germany, South Korea, Brazil,
Canada, Singapore, Malaysia, Chile and Argentina.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940421

