FT941-17178

FT  06 JAN 94 / Mexican rebellion starts to fade: Strife-torn Chiapas state


   By DAMIAN FRASER


The Mexican army tightened its control over former rebel strongholds in the
southern state of Chiapas yesterday as questions were raised over its
excessive use of force.
Government aircraft fired rockets and cannon early yesterday over the
village of Ranche Grande, outside the city of San Cristobal, even though
peasants said the Zapatista Army of National Liberation had long since
withdrawn.
The rockets, which nearly hit a television crew covering the uprising,
followed similar attacks late on Tuesday.
The government said rebel troops were still in the area and an army
helicopter had been damaged by rebel fire. The ministry of defence said 61
rebels had died, bringing the official death toll to 95.
In Ococingo, a town rebels had captured on New Year's Day and which was
seized back by the army by Tuesday, at least15 insurgents lay dead in the
market and in the main roads. At least seven appeared to have been shot at
close range in the back of the head. Some had string tied to their wrists,
suggesting they may have been tied up first.
Mr Eloy Cantu, the government spokesman in San Cristobal, said the federal
government was willing to open a dialogue with the rebels, if they
immediately ceased hostilities, handed in their weapons, and identified
their leaders. There was no sign that rebels, who seem to have withdrawn to
the jungle or towns where they live, would meet the demands.
Msgr Samuel Ruiz, the bishop of San Cristobal, has called for international
human rights observers to monitor the situation in Chiapas. With the formal
insurrection almost at an end, observers are concerned the army might abuse
human rights while searching for rebels in towns and jungle. President
Carlos Salinas asked the head of the government's human rights commission to
monitor developments.
In Ococingo residents were leaving their homes for the first time since New
Year's Day and tension had died down. Government officials said life was
returning to normal in other towns briefly under rebel control. However
there were still places where fighting was continuing, they said.
The rebels had destroyed several buildings in Ococingo, including the
municipal palace. They had kidnapped a farmer and his family, and at least
one member was still reported missing, according to a builder outside the
house. The residents interviewed showed little sympathy for the rebels, and
were concerned about the economic cost of the uprising.
While most of the rebels seem to have fled populated areas, several were
seen walking between San Cristobal and Ococingo, having lost contact with
their group.
Mostly in their teens, and all apparently indigenous people, they had little
sense of why they were fighting, or what it would achieve. They seemed more
motivated by the despair and poverty in which they live.
One rebel peasant, aged 17, said he fought 'because we have nothing -
nothing to eat.' Another said 'it is because of our poverty, for many
things, I don't know, for the necessity.' The first professed never to have
heard of the North American Free Trade Agreement, one of the ostensible
grievances.
Mr Cantu said a group of extremists were manipulating the population, and
that among them were Guatemalans and El Salvadoreans.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940106

