FT942-16045

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (10): Legislation follows the EU line -
Foreign investment is needed - and controversial


   By PATRICK BLUM


Foreign investment has proved almost as controversial as privatisation,
although both have a prominent role in the government's strategy to
modernise the economy. Selling Slovene companies to foreigners is not
popular, but officials are convinced it is only a question of time before
more people recognise the benefits.
'People are not very keen on foreign investment, but (their attitude) is
changing. Many people want to buy their own company, but when they see the
company cannot survive (without new capital and technology) they'll accept
foreign investment,' says Ms Mira Puc, managing director for the
privatisation agency.
Foreign investment in Slovenia has been relatively small during the past 25
years, representing less than 8 per cent of aggregate gross domestic
product, or 0.3 per cent of average annual GDP, according to the Vienna
Institute for Comparative Economic Studies.
One of the reasons was the restrictive investment regime which limited
foreign investment to contractual joint ventures in which the foreign
partner could participate in the management of the company and share in the
profits, but had no ownership rights. These contractual joint ventures were
essentially quasi-credit arrangements making possible duty-free imports of
machinery and equipment.
Regulations were substantially liberalised in 1988, leading to more foreign
investment. Slovenia, with less than 9 per cent of the population, received
more than 25 per cent of total foreign investment in the former Yugoslavia
between 1988 and 1991. Since 1988, more than 3,000 investment projects were
realised with foreign investment of about DM1.8bn.
Over the years, the largest share of foreign investment has gone into
manufacturing, followed by construction, trade, tourism and business
services. Manufacturing investment has been concentrated in transport
equipment, chemicals, electric appliances, and food and beverages.
The biggest investor has been Germany with DM721m invested at the end of
September 1993, followed by Austria with DM 332m (but with the largest
number of investments), Italy with DM257m, and France with DM115m.
The new law allows for 100 per cent foreign ownership, although there are
still restrictions limiting investment in sensitive sectors such as defence,
aviation, telecommunications and the media. Foreigners cannot own land,
although a joint venture with a foreign partner can.
The law acted as an incentive, but the break up of Yugoslavia and the onset
of war frightened off many investors. Now the prospect of peace in Bosnia
and, at some stage, of an end to UN sanctions against Serbia, is also
encouraging investors to look again at Slovenia.
According to a recent Slovene government survey, most investors are
attracted to Slovenia by the prospects of higher profits; building or
expanding their markets in the region - including those in the much larger
former Yugoslavia; the availability of a skilled labour force and low
production costs compared with western Europe.
A stable legal framework for investors is gradually being put into place and
this should also help. A new company law based on German company law was
passed last June, bringing legislation into line with that in the European
Union. Corporate taxation at 30 per cent is low, and new companies are
exempt from tax in their first year.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940412

