FT941-12914

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (26): Three in front but it's Bonas by a nose -
Why one of the world's top pharmaceuticals companies was pipped at the post
by a small textile machinery maker in northeast England / Natwest/FT
Exporter competition results


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


It was almost a three-way dead heat. The mighty Zeneca Pharmaceuticals - the
former ICI drugs business - looked as though it was going to win the first
NatWest/FT Exporter award for export excellence when it was pipped at the
post in a last round of point scoring.
The winner was Bonas Machine Company, a textile machinery manufacturer in
north-east England, but by only half a percentage point over Richardson
Sheffield, the well-known kitchen knife maker.
'I'm sorry anyone had to lose at all,' Ian Campbell, chairman of the judges
and director-general of the Institute of Export, said afterwards, 'but there
could only be one outright winner.'
The competition was organised by National Westminster Bank, FT Exporter and
the Institute of Export. The seven finalists were all winners of regional
heats, announced at the series of forums held in London, Belfast,
Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Manchester and Newcastle during October and
November.
These export awards were different. Unlike most prizes in the exports field,
neither the size of a company's export order book nor rapid growth in
foreign markets were necessarily qualifications to win.
Independent assessors from the Institute of Export, NatWest and KPMG Peat
Marwick, the accountancy firm, rated the finalists on efficiency,
innovation, training, quality control, and whether exporting was part of
each company's main thrust, rather than a bolt-on function.
This enabled very small companies such as Magstim - which makes medical
instruments in Dyfed, South Wales, and has only a Pounds 1m turnover - to
compete equally with Zeneca, the north-west winner, or Richardson Sheffield,
which has annual sales of more than Pounds 25m.
Another small-sized finalist was Valpar Industrial of Bangor, County Down,
the Northern Ireland winner. It turns over only Pounds 3m, selling a cooling
system which ensures beverages like lager, beer or cola stay cold between
store-room and tap. The other two finalists were Apollo Fire Detectors, the
Hampshire-based London regional winner, and Staffordshire Tableware, which
claims to be the world's largest mug manufacturer, winner of the Midlands
prize.
Bonas received its award at a dinner in London from Baroness Chalker, the
overseas development minister, Lord Alexander, NatWest chairman, and David
Bell, chief executive of the FT.
Mr Campbell said: 'The excellence awards were designed to test exporting
philosophy and ethos in depth, rather than just acknowledge turnover and
profit. Bonas demonstrated extensive customer contact, new product
introduction, staff training and an attempt to raise standards year on
year.'
Bonas, which was founded in 1957, is based in Team Valley, Gateshead, and
has offices in Charlotte - in the US - Hong Kong, Bombay, Frankfurt and
Milan. It makes electronic jacquards - devices attached to looms that enable
figures to be woven into fabrics.
With 383 employees worldwide, it exports to more than 75 countries, but
particularly to the US, Germany, Switzerland, Japan, Italy and India. About
90 per cent of the present Pounds 35m of annual turnover is exported.
Mr Gordon Bridge, chief executive of Richardson Sheffield, was disappointed
at losing by 65 per cent to 64.4 per cent but said coming so close would
only inspire the company to try harder next time.
Richardson came top in three of the five categories - innovation, education
and thrust. Bonas was top in efficiency and quality, but was equal second
with Zeneca for education and third on thrust. Richardson's chances were
spoiled by a third place on efficiency and an equal fourth in the quality
category, where only 3.5 points out of 18 separated the seven contestants.
Zeneca won no category outright, but was second or third in four of them and
fourth in the remaining one. The final scores were decided by marks out of
10 for overall impression - a subjective measure, but one where the judges
were rightly called on to display some judgment. Valpar and Apollo scored
equally with Zeneca here, while Magstim and Staffordshire tied just one
point behind. This meant, in effect, that none of the finalists did badly,
as might be expected from companies which had already beaten off strong
regional challenges to reach the last - and necessarily merciless - stage of
judging.
All said just entering was worthwhile in itself, since it forced critical
self-examination. In Zeneca's case, senior managers used it as a means of
pulling their team together at a time when the business was establishing
itself, after ICI split its 'bio' and 'non-bio' businesses last year.
The most interesting individual exporting story came from Magstim, last but
no means least of the finalists. As a Welshman, Robin Davies, the
international sales director, naturally has Welsh as one of his languages.
Had he ever sold in Welsh? Well, yes. He was making a presentation to senior
doctors in a Canadian hospital when one of them, in exile from Wales for 25
years, asked him a question in Welsh. Davies replied in kind and the
discussion continued in the language. The order was clinched on the strength
of it.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

940127

