FT942-14399

FT  20 APR 94 / Government Bonds: European sector falls as traders digest US
rate rise


   By SARA WEBB and FRANK MCGURTY


   LONDON, NEW YORK


Europe's government bond markets fell sharply yesterday morning, as traders
and investors continued to digest Monday's unexpected rise in US interest
rates.
Although the European markets edged up slightly at the opening, government
bond futures quickly reversed direction and tumbled again, breaking through
key support levels which then triggered further selling.
The German government bond futures contract on Liffe, which opened at 95.51,
tumbled more than a point in the morning as it dropped from its early high
of 95.62 to a mid-morning low of 94.40.
However, the bund market gradually clawed back some of the losses, ending
the day at around 94.93.
Given that the bund market is choosing to take its direction from the US at
present, bond analysts pointed out that the Bundesbank's repo today may not
make much difference to market sentiment.
Mr Kit Juckes, international economist at S. G. Warburg Securities, said
that he expected a cut of between 5 and 8 basis points at the repo.
Other analysts pointed out that a small cut, for example in the region of
only 3 basis points, could simply provide more bad news for the European
markets.
Ms Alison Cottrell, international economist at Midland Global Markets in
London, said: 'There's a lot of nervousness. Investors are not even looking
for the troughs for buying opportunities at the moment (and) there's not
even any bargain-hunting on fundamentals.'
French government bonds ended half a point down on the day, with the Matif's
notional futures contract falling from its opening level of 121.50 to a low
of 120.36 before settling at 121.04.
The weakness of the French franc against the D-Mark is proving an additional
worry for the French government bond market.
Traders point out that the Bank of France is far less likely to cut interest
rates this week if the French franc remains weak, especially since at 3.4315
francs to the D-Mark, it is now outside its former ERM band.
'The European bond markets are geared up for a rise in US interest rates,
and the fact that Europe is behind (the US) in the business cycle means they
are expecting to see a follow-through eventually, with rises in European
interest rates,' said Mr Michael Burke, economist at Citibank.
UK government bonds performed better than the other European markets, helped
primarily by a favourable auction announcement. In spite of a volatile
trading session, which at one point saw gilt futures down by more than a
point, the market ended little changed on the day.
The Bank of England announced that it would auction Pounds 2bn of the 6 per
cent Treasury stock due 1999 next Wednesday, April 27.
Gilt analysts said the market was relieved at the smaller than expected size
of the auction. They added that there should be good demand for this
particular stock, both from UK and foreign investors.
The 6 per cent gilt due 1999 is currently trading at around 93, giving a
yield of 7.46 per cent.
The US Treasury market was firmer in light trading yesterday as traders
sifted through the implications of Monday's interest rate increase and the
subsequent sell-off in bonds.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  1/2 better
at 86 9/16 . The yield slipped to 7.366 per cent, still 8 basis points
higher than at the opening of trading the previous session. The two-year
note was unchanged at 98 31/32 , with the yield holding at 5.673 per cent.
With US bonds slumping in London before trading opened in New York, prices
showed further erosion as the session got under way. Traders were reluctant
to step in and buy on the heels of the central bank's third increase in its
target Federal Funds rate in the last 10 weeks.
But the market began to pick up support at mid-morning after a shred of
favourable economic news was released.
The Commerce Department said the US trade deficit had widened in February to
Dollars 12.36bn, from Dollars 10.17bn in the previous month. A big drop in
US exports was partly to blame. Traders interpreted the decline as a good
signal for bonds because it suggested a slowing of economic growth during
the month and an easing of inflationary pressure.
Many traders are now expecting an additional increase in short-term rates
sometime before the next meeting of the Fed's policy-making arm on May 17.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940420

