FT944-10876

FT  09 NOV 94 / World Trade News: Malaysians question Apec goal


   By PETER MONTAGNON and KIERAN COOKE


   KUALA LUMPUR


Malaysia yesterday put in doubt the outcome of next week's Asia Pacific
Economic Co-operation forum summit in Indonesia by saying that it could turn
into an elaborate public relations exercise and would not lead to any
binding agreements on regional trade liberalisation.
President Suharto, who is to host the meeting, has been pressing for a
declaration promising trade liberalisation by the year 2020 in an area which
produces roughly half the world's economic output. He is supported most
strongly by the US and Australia, both of which want a binding agreement. Mr
Suharto sees the Apec meeting as an opportunity to establish Indonesia as an
important player in world economic matters.
However, Mrs Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's trade minister, said yesterday that
Apec had no mandate to enforce any agreement. 'Why have all this exercise of
doing something which you know cannot bind people?' she said. 'It's a very
elaborate PR exercise.
'Anything that happens in Apec is non-binding. That's the principle of the
organisation,' said Mrs Rafidah. As long as Malaysia sticks to its position
it will be impossible to establish a meaningful consensus among the 18 Apec
members at next week's meeting.
Mrs Rafidah said Apec's eminent persons group which proposed the 2020 target
date should be disbanded and that the group's private sector forum which
suggested an earlier date for trade liberalisation only represented the
personal views of individuals.
She reaffirmed Malaysia's view that the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade was the appropriate forum for binding commitments on trade, and was
vehement in her criticism of the US and Japan for their slow progress in
ratifying the Uruguay Round.
Mrs Rafidah said that Malaysia was 'just a bit disgusted' that Japan and,
especially, the US have not ratified the Uruguay Round. 'The profound
statements made by the US over the past seven years when the negotiations in
Gatt were taking place indicated that they would be the first to ratify.
'If the US and Japan need pressure to ratify,' she continued, 'why don't
they give up the economic leadership of the world? Let the small countries
rule the world.'
Malaysia is concerned that the US and Australia are seeking to build up Apec
in a way that would eclipse the smaller Asean regional grouping, which has
its own more modest agenda for trade liberalisation. Apec was conceived as a
loose, consultative forum, Mrs Rafidah said.
Malaysia's stand is, however, likely to cause problems within Asean. It
risks upsetting not only Indonesia, but also Singapore which is a strong
Apec supporter and a firm advocate of trade liberalisation on a broad front.
Outside Asean China is more in sympathy with Malaysia and has expressed
opposition to a firm timetable.
Underlying Malaysia's tough approach is its desire to develop a new grouping
 -the East Asian Economic Caucus (EAEC) which would include Japan but not
the US. Malaysia has recently criticised Japan for its non-committal
attitude to this proposal. 'There is a difference between the official
stance of Japan and the stance of Japan as we know it,' Ms Rafidah said.
Japan must decide whether it is part of East Asia, she added.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941109

