FT942-12770

FT  28 APR 94 / Invisible Britons win accolades in Brussels: The image
problem of British MEPs is not reflected in Europe


   By KEVIN BROWN


Britain's 32 Conservative and 45 Labour members of the European parliament
have an image problem. Few electors can name their MEP, and few bother to
vote: the turnout at the last election in 1989 was the lowest in the
European Union.
On current indications, that dubious honour will fall to Britain again on
June 9, when voters will elect 84 MEPs to an expanded parliament. Barring an
unexpected turnround, MEPs will continue to be the invisible men (and women)
of British politics.
Cross the channel to Brussels and Strasbourg, the twin seats of the
parliament, and the picture changes. There, Britain's MEPs are widely
respected for their skills in exploiting the parliament's great and growing
power. MEPs from both parties have been appointed to chair committees, or to
help run the parliament as vice-presidents. No national delegation has a
higher profile.
The contrast irritates MEPs. Most say they work at least as hard as MPs,
commuting to parliamentary and committee sittings for 46 weeks a year and
handling around 50 constituents' inquiries a week. 'I work far harder than I
did as a businessman and for far less reward,' says a disgruntled
Conservative. 'The so-called European gravy train is a myth. '
The contrast also surprises continental MEPs such as Mr Klaus Hansche,
leader of the German socialists, who credits the British with a unique
combination of aggression, wit and procedural dexterity. Mr Claude Cheysson,
a French MEP who is a former cabinet minister and European Commissioner,
says the British delegation is 'by far the most effective' in the
parliament.
Behind the contrast lies a paradox: Britain's MEPs may be ignored at home,
but they take the parliament more seriously than almost any other
delegation.
Drawn from the mainstream of their parties - Labour academics and trade
unionists, Conservative professionals and businessmen - they have built on
the traditions of Westminster to exploit the parliament's rules.
Their influence can be seen clearly during the parliament's monthly plenary
sessions in Strasbourg. Superficially, the parliament makes a sharp contrast
to the overcrowded, claustrophobic chamber at Westminster. MEPs sit in a
spacious semi-circular chamber, equipped with a desk and a microphone. They
speak in their own languages, translated simultaneously through headsets.
There is no drama and very little passion. Voting, electronic and
instantaneous, rarely follows debates, underlining the point that the two
are only loosely connected.
Yet the British have shown that there are opportunities for spontaneity.
Many continental MEPs were surprised by their use of time set aside for
questions to the commission to make detailed points rather than broad
statements. Many now follow suit.
The British are also assiduous attenders. Britain's unique single-member
constituency system means prolonged absences would be quickly exploited by
political opponents. Continental MEPs elected under the list system can
afford to spend more time on domestic politics.
But there is more to it than just turning up. Most MEPs say the influence of
both Tory and Labour MEPs has increased as the number of Euro-sceptics has
fallen. Labour now fields less than half a dozen sceptics, isolated within
an overwhelmingly pro-European party. 'These are yesterday's battles,' says
Mrs Pauline Green, the British Labour leader.
The issue is more controversial for the Conservatives, who have formed a
parliamentary alliance with the European People's party of continental
Christian democrats. Publicly, Conservative leaders distance themselves from
the EPP's determined federalism. Privately, Conservative MEPs admit that the
delegation is overwhelmingly integrationist.
Sir Jack Stewart-Clark, Conservative MEP for East Sussex since 1979 and a
vice-president of the parliament, says the party is being 'held to ransom'
by a handful of Westminster Euro-sceptics.
Asked whether he is a federalist, he says: 'If anybody came to me and said I
had gone native I would say they need their heads examined.' He pauses for
thought before adding: 'If we want to be a coherent unit, we have got to be
more unified.'
Once, many of Britain's MEPs saw the job as a training ground for
Westminster. Few now do so. Many, like Mr David Martin, member for Lothian,
say the parliament offers them the chance to play a crucial role in
scrutinising Europe's institutions. 'This is not a rubber stamp parliament,'
he says. 'We change and influence the progress of legislation in way that
the average Westminster backbencher could not hope to do.'

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940428

