FT942-15893

FT  13 APR 94 / Arts: Final act for the man of drama - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


Once upon a time David Mercer could have been a contender for the title of
'Best Television Dramatist' but he died before we could ever be sure of what
his best might be. Today the only person who could compete with Dennis
Potter for the title is Edgar Reitz, creator of Heimat, yet his strength
lies in narrative and historical span. Reitz's work is literal and
ultra-realistic. Potter stands alone and supreme as the man who has mastered
television and shown it to be a medium which can challenge print, theatre
and cinema in the exploration not only of the human condition but of the
mind. I consider The Singing Detective to be the greatest piece of original
fiction ever created for television: Proustian in its detail, astonishing in
its originality, superbly entertaining.
Last week Potter came before us in the most extraordinary television
programme - an 85 minute edition of Without Walls on Channel 4 - to say that
he is dying of cancer, expects to be dead within weeks, but is surviving on
a diet of liquid vitamins, morphine and cigarettes. He is racing the clock
and the angel of death to complete two television dramas, one for the BBC,
the other for Channel 4, one about cryogenics, the other about virtual
reality, which he sees as closely connected and which he hopes will each be
shown on the originating channel and then repeated on the other. The awful,
and in a way wonderful, thing about this unique interview (Melvyn Bragg at
his best) was that, despite moments of strain, Potter looked better and even
sounded happier than he has seemed for years. Is there really no hope that
he might survive? He has been embattled so many times and overcome so much
that we look to him for the sort of miracles that have been at the centre of
much of his work.
Friday nights now bring two modern American animated cartoon series to
British television: Beavis And Butt-Head is screened at 11.35 on Channel 4
and The Ren And Stimpy Show at 12.40 on BBC2. Midnight is not usually
considered cartoon time, but both these series have been criticised for
their violence and their potentially bad influence on children. Of course
cartoons have always attracted such strictures: Betty Boop (b. 1915) was too
sexy, Tom and Jerry (b. 1937) too violent. What really sets these new
American offerings aside from their predecessors is that they are utterly
charmless. Last Friday's Ren And Stimpy was a pointless story about selling
rubber nipples. The funniest line in 30 minutes was 'The Lord loves a
hanging, that's why he gave us necks'. Beavis And Butt-Head are American
teenage boys who ogle the female talent on the pop video network MTV (much
of which fills up the time in the cartoon) going 'Whooorrr] Loogadat]' every
time there is a glimpse of breast or thigh. The funniest thing about it is
the pretence that this might, somehow, be seen as social satire. Neither
series has a trace of talent. You would need to be a very backward teenager
to be amused by either.
The demand for 'good news' programmes is wrong headed. We could certainly do
with more positive items within the existing news programmes, but the idea
of bulletins announcing how many houses did not burn down yesterday is a
dead loss. If your real aim is the feel-good factor then what you need is
more programmes like The Young Musician Of The Year. The final on Sunday
provided three hours of inspiration and sheer pleasure. The young talent on
display was astounding - not only among the soloists but from the members of
the National Youth Orchestra who played for nearly three hours without ever
sounding like a 'youth' orchestra. The right competitor won, Natalie Clein's
performance of the Elgar Cello Concerto owing nothing to the so often
overwhelming presence of the shade of Jacqueline du Pre. Somehow you knew
that as they left the concert hall these teenagers would not be tearing
aerials off cars and throwing cans of lager at one another. Three cheers for
the BBC.
Getting comedians Hale and Pace to star in a police detective series is a
bit like getting Esther Rantzen to give the commentary on the Grand
National: no doubt she could take a stab at it, but why bother when Peter
O'Sullevan is so good, and Rantzen is so much better at what she already
does? Having said which, Hale and Pace are not the worst things about A
Pinch Of Snuff. This silly and unconvincing story about blue movie makers in
Harrogate has been produced by people who seem to believe in one of the most
famous of the modern urban myths: 'snuff movies'. The assertion is that in
some violent films the victims really are killed for the sake of the
cameras, though nobody has ever actually identified one, of course. Here the
idea is not a genuine death but - wait for it - a genuine broken jaw (hence
a pinch of snuff, presumably). It sounds so ludicrous that those who did not
watch it may suspect this is really just another comedy vehicle for Hale and
Pace. Would that it were.
Those who used to doubt whether women could ever succeed as comedians must
surely have had their minds changed in the last 10 years. The roll call has
grown and grown: Maureen Lipman, Victoria Wood, Dawn French, Jennifer
Saunders, Josie Lawrence, Ruby Wax. However, while all these women are
outspoken and several are on the large side, it is not enough just to be fat
and loud-mouthed - you also have to be funny. This is a subtlety that seems
not to have filtered through to Jo Brand or those who keep on putting her on
television. Someone should have taken her gently aside after the opening
episode of Through The Cake Hole and explained that while she, in her
condition, may be reduced to near hysteria by the presence of the word
'cake' in Pontefract cakes, cow cake and Kendal Mint Cake, the rest of us
find the bare recital of such a catalogue remarkably unfunny.
The current BARB figures show the BBC with just a 40 per cent share of the
week's viewing. You have to go back to January 1985 to find a figure lower
than that (39.5) and in those days the BBC had neither EastEnders nor
Neighbours which, today, give them their top seven programmes for the week.
ITV and Channel 4 take a 52.7 share and 'Other Viewing', meaning cable and
satellite, achieves 7.3 for the second week running, a figure bettered only
once: 7.4 in August last year. The BBC is still worth the licence fee three
times over, but it is as well to keep an eye on such matters.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940413

