FT944-2699

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (3): Far-reaching global
expansion plan - Profile, Volvo


   By KEVIN DONE


Volvo, the Swedish car and truck maker, has faced testing times in the past
12 months since the collapse of its planned merger with Renault of France.
The group, the world's second largest heavy truck maker (above 15 tonnes
gross vehicle weight) behind Mercedes-Benz, has been developing a much more
aggressive strategy to expand its automotive operations and to divest
non-core operations as it prepares for an independent future.
The 45 per cent cross shareholdings with Renault Vehicules Industriels have
been dissolved, and Volvo has been working on plans to increase its share of
the world truck market alone, rather than in an alliance with the French
truck maker. Renault's 45 per cent holding in Volvo Truck was acquired for
FFr4.5bn late last month.
Volvo is now poised to embark on a far-reaching expansion of its truck
operations in Europe and Asia. The ambitious moves include the development
of a new range of trucks to allow it to enter the European light truck
market for the first time.
As a crucial part of this strategy it is planning:
To expand the capacity of its heavy truck operations in Europe by up to 20
per cent by mid-1996, with the investment of more than SKr1bn (Dollars
140m).
To develop a range of light trucks (7.5 tonnes gross vehicle weight) to
allow it to challenge for the first time established rivals such as
Mercedes-Benz, Iveco, MAN, Renault and Daf in this segment of the European
market,
To establish a joint venture in China with the aim of adding a production
centre in Asia to its three existing regional truck manufacturing operations
in Europe and North and South America. It has also launched a feasibility
study into establishing production in India.
Volvo is leading the European truck industry's emergence from recession
helped by several factors including the weakness of the Swedish krona, the
successful launch of a new range of heavy trucks and its large share of
those European truck markets with the strongest growth such as the UK and
Scandinavia.
Production of its Volvo brand trucks, chiefly in Europe and in Brazil - it
currently sells under the WhiteGMC brand in North America - is running at an
annualised rate of 45,000 a year, an increase of more than 60 per cent from
fewer than 28,000 a year in the depth of the recession in mid-1993.
Volvo's share of the west European heavy truck market has jumped to 15.5 per
cent this year from 12.1 per cent in the whole of 1993, and the company's
truck operations are operating at the limit of their capacity in Europe.
It increased its deliveries of trucks by 38 per cent in the first nine
months this year to 49,400, and its order book for heavy and medium-heavy
duty trucks at the end of September was nearly double the level of a year
earlier.
The losses of 1992 and early 1993 have been overcome thanks to a combination
of tough restructuring and cost-cutting and a strong recovery in demand. The
truck division has closed one truck plant and one bus plant, has cut the
workforce by 19 per cent with the reduction of 4,700 jobs and has
concentrated its spare parts operations.
Volvo claims that new product development processes that are being put in
place will cut lead times from the 60 months for previous truck programmes
to an estimated 36 months in future.
In the first 9 months this year operating profits for Volvo Truck surged to
SKr2.697bn from only SKr183m in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Volvo is already investing SKr390m to raise truck capacity from 45,000 a
year to 50,000 (excluding North America) by July next year. The Volvo board
is expected to approve soon the investment of more than SKr1bn to raise
capacity further to between 55,000 and 60,000 a year by mid-1996.
Volvo's plan for entry into the European light truck market will also be
completed in coming months. It is expected to adopt a strategy of purchasing
the main components such as engines, gearboxes and axles from outside
suppliers, and negotiations on supply contracts are likely to begin in early
1995. Annual production capacity is expected to total well in excess of
10,000 a year.
According to Karl-Erling Trogen, president of Volvo Truck, Asia is Volvo's
'number one priority' in the geographic expansion of its truck operations.
It has launched a feasibility study with China National Heavy Truck and
Shandong Automotive for the establishment of joint ventures for the
production of trucks and components in Shandong province south-east of
Beijing.
Mr Trogen says that Volvo is waiting for approval from Beijing. Production
could rise to around 20,000 a year over six to seven years and Volvo is
'looking at the investment of billions of kronor'.
The group is also establishing a greater presence in east Europe with the
establishment of a small volume truck assembly plant in Poland. The
facility, which will be located in Wroclaw, will have a capacity to assemble
up to 1,000 heavy and medium-duty trucks a year.
The decision to establish a wholly-owned plant follows the failure of its
collaboration plans with Jelcz, the Polish truck maker, which had begun to
assemble Volvo trucks this year.
The Swedish group is moving equipment, tools and personnel from the Jelcz
facilities to its new plant in Wroclaw, where it is planning to produce more
than 700 trucks in 1995. It is the leading importer of heavy-duty trucks to
Poland and expects to deliver around 550 this year. It has established a new
marketing and finance company during 1994, and has a network of 10 dealers
selling exclusively Volvo vehicles.
Volvo is also seeking to expand its truck activities in North America and is
investing Dollars 200m in the next five years to modernise its US heavy
truck operations. It is building a new cab assembly plant and a high-volume
paint shop close to its existing truck assembly plant at Dublin, Virginia,
with operations due to begin in 1997.
Volvo's US heavy truck operation, Volvo GM Heavy Truck, is owned 87 per cent
by the Swedish group and 13 per cent by General Motors of the US. It has
sold its trucks hitherto under the WhiteGMC brand name, but this is to be
replaced by the Volvo brand name, as new products are introduced.
Production capacity at the Dublin truck assembly plant is to be increased by
20 per cent by the end of 1995 to 72 trucks a day from the present capacity
of 60 a day. The facility is being developed as Volvo GM Heavy Truck's
high-volume production operation in the US.
The cab assembly plant will have an initial capacity to produce 70 cabs a
day, but this will be increased later to 110 a day, and the Dublin facility
will also supply cabs to Volvo GM's other truck assembly plant at Orrville,
Ohio.
The investment in the US production facilities is part of the ambitious
modernisation of Volvo's heavy truck range, which began last year with the
launch of its new FH series of heavy trucks in Europe after a seven-year,
SKr6.5bn development programme.
The group is planning for the first time to integrate its US-built trucks
with its European-built products, and is aiming eventually to achieve as
much as 30-40 per cent commonality of components, excluding the driveline of
engine, gearbox and axles. Mr Trogen says that Volvo also plans to supply
around 25 per cent of its US trucks with its own engines in the next two to
three years compared with a current level of around 15 per cent.
Volvo GM Heavy Truck is in fourth place in the US market with a share of
around 12.3 per cent behind Mercedes-Benz (Freightliner) with 24.2 per cent,
and the US producers Paccar (22.3 per cent) and Navistar (18.9 per cent).

The Financial Times


London Page II

941216

