FT944-2548

FT  16 DEC 94 / Let's keep Ashton's flame burning: Clement Crisp argues that
more of the great choreographer's work should be in the repertoire


   By CLEMENT CRISP


Remembering Frederick Ashton's ballets - and Covent Garden's second
programme in tribute to him is called Ashton Remembered - is too nostalgic
for my taste. What we must see is Ashton, the man we know from his
choreographies, alive on stage through scrupulous performance. When his
works are well performed, audiences understand the essential Ashton, what he
gave the Royal Ballet, what he wanted classical dancing to look like. Not
memories, but deeds.
The matter of preserving his work and his style (which was the man), seems
to me urgent. The Royal Ballet does not maintain a corpus of Ashton pieces
in repertory - a fault owed to an inadequate allocation of performances -
and I sense that schooling in Ashtonian nuance, vital matters of posture,
precision and clarity of execution, is not always careful. The Royal Ballet
no longer speaks Ashton's poetry as well as it does Forsythe's rap.
There sometimes seems a prettiness, an almost fatal charm, in Ashton
ballets, as with the fairies in The Dream or Cinderella, or the skaters in
Les Patineurs. But the prettiness is not over-sweet, and sustaining every
charming moment is a master's craft. (The scherzo in The Dream is a miracle
of composition matching Mendelssohn's airy genius). Ashton should be second
nature to our dancers, though recent disastrous casting in Symphonic
Variations, with performers so physically unsympathetic to its style that
they dismantled the piece, show how easy it is to destroy his work.
The good things about the Ashton Remembered bill, as I saw it at the week's
end, is that The Dream has been well revived, and Facade has, at last, a
Dago worth watching. The Dream was at its gossamer best. Bruce Sansom is a
commanding Oberon, classically sure. Peter Abbeglen is a delightful, because
innocent, Bottom. The fairy legions are quick-footed, deliciously melting in
pose. The lovers are freshly funny, and touching. Viviana Durante can spin
through Titania's steps with the best, but the role lacks radiance and that
wilful sensuality to illuminate the last duet. Tetsuya Kumakawa is a
technically astonishing Puck - the role has never been more ebulliently
danced - but his interpretation is a Kumakawa flag day. His bravura is
destructive because too emphatic.
Ashtonian fragments make up the centre of the programme. Two pieces have
been rescued from oblivion: the 'Air' pas de deux from Homage to the Queen,
which was the ballet's tribute in Coronation year; and the Raymonda duet
made in 1962 for Beriosova and Donald MacLeary. 'Air' is a lovely thing,
despite its clattering Malcolm Arnold score. After all the years, memories
came back of Fonteyn and Somes effortless and serene in it. It looked less
than serene with the first appearance of Deborah Bull and William Trevitt,
but it will handsomely repay their further study.
Raymonda brought Darcey Bussell to the stage after a long period of injury.
She has the expansive grace and grandeur that the dance needs - if not yet
all the stamina - and it was a delight to see her again, though if the piece
is to persist in repertory the ballerina's pink costume had better be sent
to the nearest Oxfam shop, and something less cute be confected. Zoltan
Solymosi was Bussell's cavalier - and rather cavalier in manner.
The luscious Thais duet - Massenet's swooning violin; an extremely high
sugar-content; the veiled vision of an Alexandrian courtesan; one lingering
kiss: can life offer more? - was done to a turn by Viviana Durante and
Stuart Cassidy. Divinest patchouli-scented hokum. And, unnecessarily, a tiny
Ashtonian sneeze - La chatte metamorphosee en femme - was also remembered.
It does nothing for Ashton's reputation, and not enough for its interpreter,
Maria Galeazzi.
The closing Facade was memorably led by Stephen Jefferies as the Dago. It
was a role made wildly funny by Robert Helpmann, compounded of sinuous wit,
brilliantine, diamond rings and devastated glances. No one, until Jefferies,
has come anywhere near Helpmann's satiric skill. Jefferies plays it deadpan,
and wonderfully so, and misses not one comic trick. He is so good that the
Noche Espanol, in which Helpmann used to saunter about in a maddened
pin-stripe suit, should be restored to the ballet for him. The revival was,
otherwise, decent - though the Popular Song could be more bored and
oh-so-slightly more relaxed. Ashton was properly remembered. Long may the
company remember its duty to him.
Ashton Remembered: Covent Garden on December 17 (mat & eve).

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941216

