FT941-12919

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (20): New Year shakeup in Europe - The
deregulation of Europe's haulage rates is a boon to exporters. But truckers
claim it will put the skids under them / Distribution in Europe / Truckers'
dilemma


   By TONY BUSH


Any German entrepreneurs considering New Year resolutions will know that one
is not to become a haulier. Deregulation of the country's trucking business
was to come into force this month and could cause mayhem, especially among
smaller operators, as rates are predicted to fall by up to 30 per cent.
Until now, the industry has been protected by the government, which set
fines for shippers seeking discounts or transportation companies giving
them.
Whilst this staggered dismantling of protection will be good news for
shippers, who will be able to buy their transportation more cheaply, it is
likely to wreak havoc among truckers already contending with an economy in
recession.
As if that were not enough, they will still have to continue to fight off
competition from hauliers in the Netherlands, who are recognised as being
the most innovative and entrepreneurial truckers in Europe.
The Dutch internal market is small but a big proportion of GDP is accounted
for by transportation. The industry gets strong government support,
including what are said to be the most lenient internal regulations
concerning size and weight limits.
The government also actively promotes the Netherlands as a European
distribution centre, making much of the fact that if a 500-kilometre radius
circle were drawn around Amsterdam it would contain 70 per cent of Europe's
GNP.
Like Belgium, the Netherlands transport industry also benefits from the
presence of the European head offices of many multi-nationals. Forty-six per
cent of them are in one of these countries.
Some companies have Benelux distribution centres, but the practice is fairly
uncommon. They generally use either Belgium or The Netherlands and, once
again, the Dutch benefit in that the majority of those head offices are in
Holland.
An increasing number of companies are clearly adopting a pan-European
outlook, using regional distribution centres. Brian Bolam, managing director
of TNT Contract Logistics (Europe), based in England and the Netherlands,
said, 'Despite European governments' lack of progress in developing the
market as a single entity, businessmen are making it happen. Competition has
made companies seek economies of scale.'
Scandinavia has been particularly resourceful in this respect with the
creation of Nordic Distribution Centres. Now it is planned to have a similar
centre in the EU to service Scandinavian trade within the Single Market. The
location is still undecided, although it is likely to be in Denmark.
Industry experts first have to consider the 'physical flows', ie, a study of
inbound and outbound deliveries, looking at where they would be coming from
and where they would be going.
But, as the system of regional distribution centres spreads, another
development is also occurring: specialisation. David Howes, managing
director of Christian Salvesen Distribution, which has a pan- European
network, said that, increasingly, the bigger companies in his field were
setting up centres to cater for particular products.
They already exist for food, textiles, industrial products and hi-tech
goods, and Christian Salvesen itself has five centres in Belgium and Holland
set up just to handle frozen and chilled foods. Howes believes that
exporters approaching four or five multi-national operators for a quote
should also be asking about their particular strengths.
Among countries with the biggest distribution problems are Ireland and
France. Ireland is a major centre for selling into mainland Europe largely
because of the number of big US companies that set up there attracted by
subsidies. But, because of the country's geographical location, distribution
is a problem.
Some companies based there have now established central European depots with
a number of satellite warehouses. Final shipments are then made in dedicated
vehicles or by express carriers.
However, among smaller companies, it is often still the practice to book a
'backload' to the continent.
France's problem is that it has an unwieldy and fragmented trucking industry
consisting of 35,000 operators, most of them with fewer than five trucks.
No other European nation has so many operators and if the industry is to be
truly competitive it may have to be less nationalistic in outlook. Its
future lies in joint ventures with operators in other countries or, at
least, looking for more cross-border business.
Exporters in Spain, Portugal, Greece and even Italy are hampered by the
distances their goods have to travel to central Europe and operators know
that return loads are not always easy to find.
Shippers take advantage of the fact that, at the time of the Spanish orange
harvest, when the fruit has been brought north, some operators will sell
southbound carriage for next to nothing.
Trade to and from Italy is also affected by hardening attitudes towards
hauliers in Austria and Switzerland. Both countries have become increasingly
fed up at being used as arterial highways and have imposed a number of
restrictions on night time and weekend driving and the size and weight of
trucks.
One of the most effective and advanced countries where distribution is
concerned is Britain. Knowledge of regional distribution was gained in the
UK more than 20 years ago thanks to the policy of the big supermarket
chains, which hit on the whole concept of centralised inventory holding and
frequent deliveries to their retail outlets.
But more than a highly-sharpened expertise in regional distribution will be
required in Europe as it heads towards the next millennium. Freight traffic
within the EC alone is forecast to grow by 40 per cent by the end of the
decade and the present infrastructure is already groaning.
But, as Brian Bolam of TNT points out, 'it takes 15 years to take a mile of
railway from thought to actuality'. So time is not on the side of the
European transport industry.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940127

