FT942-16381

FT  11 APR 94 / Management: Breaks in the supply chain - People are the
biggest barrier to good logistics


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Somewhere in France there is a very unhappy chief executive. Until recently
he had complete responsibility for the profitability of his company, part of
a multinational, in the French market.
In future, however, he is losing control of most of his marketing, and will
be completely dependent on warehouses in Belgium and Italy for his stock.
'The centre will control this company. I will be left to run a shell,' he
laments.
The anonymous manager is quoted in a big new report* on logistics in Europe
by Ernst & Young, the accounting and consultancy group. His fears underline
the central finding of the survey - that the biggest barriers to modifying a
logistics system are people-related.
Logistics is a big issue for European manufacturers operating in the single
market. Many have integrated their logistics nationally but more recently
have had to decide to what extent their distribution and warehousing should
be pan-European.
For many, a completely new approach is necessary: others, probably a
minority, are right in seeing no need to make changes. Either way, it is
something companies have to think about, says Paul Bysouth, head of E&Y's
supply chain practice in the UK.
Also, as barriers to business have fallen in Europe during the last decade,
companies are having to adopt concepts of 'integrated logistics' which focus
on the entire value chain - the design and co-ordination of a company's
physical network, use of suppliers and other third parties, information
technology systems and the way staff are organised and trained to think in
'integrated' terms.
The aim, says Bysouth, is to see the supply chain as a profitability issue,
where the aim is to increase service and value to the customer.
The good news from the report is that European industry understands that the
issues are important. Unfortunately, however, it seems to be tackling the
problem the wrong way.
A survey conducted for the report found that only 29 per cent of companies
had developed an integrated logistics network, with a further 11 in the
process of developing one. That leaves 60 per cent of companies which have
not integrated their logistics.
The changes which industry believes it needs to make to integrate its
logistics reveal where things may be going wrong. Sixty-seven per cent of
companies believed the best route was through IT-led integration, compared
with 18 per cent which thought their infrastructure needed changing and only
6 per cent which thought they needed to change their organisation and their
employees' attitudes.
Conversely, while excessive emphasis is being placed on IT, not enough is
being done about the real problems. Internal barriers to integration were
identified by 65 per cent of companies questioned, and 62 per cent of all
such barriers were linked to some form of resistance from staff.
The survey found a number of methods being used to overcome change, such as
training, meetings, or simply allowing 'time to heal'. But in contrast to
IT, the process is generally left unmanaged or poorly managed. What is
needed, says Bysouth, is a strong internal 'sponsor' for change, and good
communications, both internally and with customers.
That, he says, might help win over people like the disgruntled French
manager. Or the Spanish transport manager whose company is moving to
third-party hauliers, leaving him with merely a monitoring role. 'How will I
know what to do each day? How will I be able to get on with my boss when he
sits in a different country? I am just scared of what is going to happen.'
*The survey was carried out for E&Y by IMR International. The report,
Integrated European Logistics: the Barriers to Overcome, is available free
from E&Y's European Consulting Group, in Paris. Tel 1 4693 7152.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940411

