FT943-13150

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (6): Rush for 'western' homes - Laura
Silber meets a UK participant in the Tirana building boom


   By LAURA SILBER


Albania's dilapidated buildings and run-down blocks of flats epitomise a
housing shortage which is expected to get much worse as people flock from
the countryside to the towns over the next few years. But the housing
shortage spells a big business opportunity for builders and architects such
as Mr Martin Stent, who left London to build western-style houses in Tirana.
When he arrived at his new 'office' there were no windows, doors, or phone.
'But we took it and agreed to redo it, after all I am an architect,' he adds
in what is now a modern office overlooking the site.
Fifteen months later, he is a happy man after a state commission awarded his
company a licence to build 1,200 'traditional' western-style houses in the
southwest of Tirana, the capital city in which little has been built since
the Italians left 50 years ago but which is now expected to double its
240,000 population within a decade.
Mr Stent admits a few misconceptions have been set right since he set up
shop. Above all, he underestimated the purchasing power and potential demand
for western style housing.
'When I first came here, I thought we would be building flats at Dollars
10,000 a piece. It turned out to be 10 times that,' he says, pointing to the
picturesque building site nestling on the shores of a reservoir and framed
by the slopes of Mount Dajti which rise above the city. Cows and sheep
meander through the pastures, unaware that Albania's first joint venture in
private housing is about to leave them homeless.
He also learnt that building houses in Albania means thatMacRae
International, his London-based development company, will also have to put
in the entire infrastructure, from sewerage to power lines, even though,
under the current agreement, Mr Stent's company does not own the land.
Instead it has received power of attorney to sell or lease it on behalf of
the state at an agreed price.
Mr Stent's team christened the housing complex Green Valleys. 'But Albania
is not like England where everyone likes to live somewhere named after a
village.' Albanians don't want anything sounding too rural, he says, mainly
because most urban dwellers are recent immigrants from the countryside and
the two-thirds of Albania's population who remain in the countryside have no
romantic ideas about doing so.
Social habits in Albania, with its history of clans and extended families,
are also different from what he is used to. 'Several families want to live
in adjoining houses or neighbouring flats - envisioning common rooms between
them, not just now but for generations to come.'
Meanwhile, changing times have created a booming market. 'In the old system
people were not free to choose where they lived. Now they will naturally
gravitate to Tirana, What is more 'Albanians want a huge house for the whole
family. Some shared houses will have up to nine bedrooms,' he says.
Another characteristic of the current Albanian market is that potential
buyers, after 50 years of economic privation under the Hoxha dictatorship,
are anxious to pay in advance, afraid that there will not be any houses left
to buy a year from now.
Mr Stent turns them away, until the building gets underway. 'Many Albanians
were burned by foreign bandits at the beginning. Everyone paid cash and they
lost all their money,' he says.
At present, the new rich speed, horns blaring, down Tirana's wide boulevards
in their shiny new Mercedes. But Mr Stent believes that their tastes will
change quickly. 'Once they have tasted privacy, they will want more of it,'
he says, adding that many future buyers are currently living in one-room
flats with their families.
Local construction officials now realise that Mr Stent can offer them a
badly needed product to cope with rising population and incomes. 'But it did
take a while to get them to understand that I was here to make money, not to
do good,' he says of Tirana officials whose mentality was shaped under the
old communist regime.
Now, relieved that the project at last is officially underway, Mr Stent
frets about what lies ahead. 'There are 101 things to do. They do not make
plywood here and they do not know about different colours of bricks - they
used to have no choice.' But that is about to change, and MacRae
International will be part of the reason.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940721

