FT942-16015

FT  12 APR 94 / Algerian PM resigns after IMF deal


   By DAVID BUCHAN, FRANCIS GHILES and Agencies


   PARIS, WASHINGTON, ALGIERS


Algeria's president, Mr Liamine Zeroual, yesterday replaced his prime
minister after less than eight months in a surprise move which came as the
government took measures to put the economy back on course.
The departure of Mr Redha Malek and his cabinet in favour of a team to be
led by Mr Mokdad Sifi, transport minister, came shortly after Algeria's
army-backed rulers undertook a steep devaluation of the dinar as part of an
agreement with the International Monetary Fund.
At the weekend the government sent a letter of intent to the IMF which will
pave the way for a Dollars 1bn standby credit and economic reforms. These
are aimed at liberalising the country's economy which is increasingly
crippled by a debt-service ratio of over 100 per cent and a confrontation
between the army and supporters of radical Islam.
Since Mr Malek took office last August, Moslem fundamentalists have stepped
up their violent campaign against the government, widening random attacks to
include foreigners.
Mr Sifi, aged 53, has served in high-ranking posts in the ministries of
commerce, public works and finance.
France yesterday pledged its support for Algeria's new economic measures,
while awaiting announcement of the full composition of the new government
before commenting on the political changes.
'France has always said it is ready to play its part in helping the Algerian
people and we will continue in this direction,' Mr Richard Duque, the
foreign ministry spokesman, said yesterday.
In practical terms, this means France is holding open a largely unused
FFr6.3bn (Dollars 1.08bn) credit line granted to Algeria last year. Some
FFr5bn of this is export-credit tied to the purchase of French goods, and
should help maintain Algeria's imports from France which would otherwise be
severely hit by the 40 per cent devaluation. France is also Algeria's
largest single creditor, accounting for about 20 per cent of its Dollars
26bn debt.
Paris has also been urging its European Union partners and other creditors
to give Algeria generous rescheduling terms.
In Washington, Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, said the reform
programme which the loan would support was 'courageous and far reaching . .
. worthy of the support of the international community.'
But some senior officials could not disguise their bafflement that Mr
Malek's resignation was not delayed until the IMF board approved the loan.

The Financial Times


International Page 18

940412

