FT942-14601

FT  20 APR 94 / Options for UN in Bosnia


Schematically, the options fall into the following broad categories,
starting with the most belligerent and reading across to the softest:
OPTION 1: 'Take on the Serbs' by escalating air strikes and putting in more
UN ground troops, with a clear mandate to change the balance of forces on
the ground in the Bosnian government's favour, and so oblige the Serbs to
accept a more equitable territorial and constitutional settlement.
Objections: This would involve a huge increase in expenditure and acceptance
of heavy casualties. It would almost certainly provoke fresh waves of Serb
atrocities against Moslem civilians, and might encourage Moslems or Croats
to commit atrocities against Serb civilians in areas they would recapture.
It would be hard to get UN blessing for such a course because Russia would
veto it. Its effectiveness would be hard to predict. Recent experience has
shown that air strikes can be difficult to carry out in foggy, mountainous
terrain and virtually impossible in built-up areas. Serb anti-aircraft fire
is also much more effective than the west thought. Troops from the leading
western countries would be subjected to continuous provocations, aimed at
forcing them to leave or goading them into confrontation.
The number of ground troops needed would be enormous: 7,000 battle-hardened
Moslem soldiers were unable to defend Gorazde, and one UN estimate suggests
that 34,000 troops would be needed to defend the safe areas alone.
OPTION 2: Withdraw all UN personnel, military and humanitarian, from the
ground in order to have a free hand to carry out strikes.
Objections: This would also alienate Russia, with uncertain military
results. The withdrawal could lead to a humanitarian disaster, and
communities that depend on UN convoys might obstruct with- drawal by making
dramatic protests. This would not look good on television.
Even worse, the Serbs would guess the purpose of withdrawal accurately
enough, and take their own steps to prevent it, escalating their tactic of
keeping UN personnel hostage.
OPTION 3: Disengage completely from the ground and the air, and 'let them
fight it out'. The arms embargo against the Bosnian government would be
lifted (which could also be a feature of options 1 and 2).
Objections: Without Nato air cover the Bosnian government would be hard
pressed to hold its ground against the Serbs, who would launch an all-out
offensive to take advantage of the period before significant new weapons
could arrive and be deployed. The credibility of Nato and the EU as
guardians of regional stability would be reduced even further by their open
abdication. Renewed fighting might well break out in Croatia and/or Kosovo
and Macedonia, with all the risks of a wider Balkan war.
OPTION 4: Play down military options and renew efforts to secure a
diplomatic settlement, using offers of reconstruction aid for Bosnia, and
gradual lifting of sanctions on Serbia to coax the parties along.
Objections: This is essentially the strategy pursued by the EU so far (while
the US has suggested linking the easing of sanctions to Serb behaviour in
Croatia and possibly Kosovo). If continued now, it will at best consolidate
recent Serb gains and reward the Serbs' bad faith. The Bosnian government
will be very reluctant to resume negotiations on this basis. Its army has
made substantial gains in central Bosnia in recent weeks, and the Moslems
may now feel they have more to gain from military options than from
diplomacy under the guidance of an uncertain west. Also, western acceptance
of the latest Serb conquests would encourage other regional bullies to think
that aggression and bad faith will go unpunished.
It could be very difficult to reimpose sanctions in the event of Serb
backsliding.
OPTION 5: Lift sanctions unconditionally, as suggested by Russia, in the
hope that this will make the Serbs feel more conciliatory and encourage them
to behave better.
Objection: This would enrage the Bosnian Moslems, other Moslem countries,
and western public opinion. It would certainly be vetoed by the US. The
Serbs' behaviour in Gorazde would argue against any proposal that expects
them to show good faith or moderation.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940420

