FT943-13065

FT  21 JUL 94 / Labour leaders face fight on renationalisation


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Labour's modernising leadership faces a battle at this year's party
conference with union and constituency delegates demanding renationalisation
of large parts of the economy.
The list of resolutions for the October conference in Blackpool, released
yesterday, shows substantial support for renationalisation of the gas, water
and electricity industries.
Many motions on the economy also call for renationalisation of the railways,
basic industries such as steelmaking, coal-mining and shipbuilding, and the
Post Office, which the government wants to privatise.
There is also significant support for a literal interpretation of Labour's
long-standing commitment to public control of the 'commanding heights' of
the economy.
Several motions urge the conference to instruct Labour's leadership to
propose the nationalisation of at least one top company in each financial
and manufacturing sector.
The depth of support for a return to old-style nationalisation will concern
Labour's dominant modernising tendency, which will be boosted today by the
almost certain election of Mr Tony Blair as party leader with between 50 per
cent and 60 per cent of the vote.
It will also concern Mr John Prescott, the traditionalist shadow employment
secretary, who is expected to win a narrow victory over Mrs Margaret
Beckett, the leftwing interim leader, for the deputy leader's job.
Mr Prescott has largely supported Mr Blair and Mr Gordon Brown, the
modernising shadow chancellor, in their efforts to prevent commitments to
renationalisation, with the exception of British Rail.
Instead, the modernisers have promised stronger regulation of monopolies,
which would be forced to place greater emphasis on consumers and
reinvestment, and less on dividends and executive salaries.
Renationalisation has remained a potent totem for the left, including Mrs
Beckett, who promised during the leadership campaign to consider taking
water back into public ownership.
However, Labour's continuing debate over nationalisation is regarded as a
public relations gift by Conservative officials, who believe the policy is
deeply unpopular with voters.
The modernisers face a further battle over their attempts to update the
party's social security policies through the mechanism of a commission on
social justice, set up by John Smith, the late Labour leader, and chaired by
Sir Gordon Borrie.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940721

