FT941-17054

FT  06 JAN 94 / LWT merger strategy collapses


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


London Weekend Television and Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television will today
announce that their merger talks are off. The move will boost Granada
Group's chances of succeeding in its hostile bid for the London ITV company.
It means that Sir Christopher Bland, the LWT chairman, has failed in his
attempt to put together a quartet of ITV companies - LWT, Yorkshire, Tyne
Tees and Anglia. The short-term aim was that LWT would take over Yorkshire
and Anglia would take over Tyne Tees to comply with broadcasting rules that
prevent one company holding more than two licences. The longer term hope was
that further deregulation would enable the four to come together to form a
'super' ITV company.
All the signs last night were that Anglia, which had a board meeting
yesterday, decided not to go ahead. Anglia's approval was necessary before
detailed negotiations began on price.
The collapse of the strategy - which senior LWT executives saw as a long
shot - is likely to have considerable impact on the future ownership of ITV
companies. Although LWT will now fight on its managerial and programme
making record - next week it will issue a pre-tax profit forecast that could
top Pounds 40m - the battle has now swung towards Granada.
The collapse of the merger talks means that Yorkshire-Tyne Tees could now be
vulnerable to a takeover bid from outside the ITV system. Anglia, too, loses
a potential defensive shield and could be vulnerable to Lord Hollick's MAI
which has made no secret of its ambition to expand in commercial
broadcasting. MAI controls Meridian, the south of England franchise holder.
Granada's share price yesterday gained 18p to close at 539p, making its
paper offer - of six new shares for every five LWT - worth around Pounds
670m, or 647p a share. There is a cash alternative of 528p a share. LWT rose
20p to 626p.
LWT hopes that this week's announcement that the government is reviewing
cross-media ownership rules will strengthen the argument in favour of 'pure'
television companies.
Granada paid Pounds 84m in the summer for a 17.5 per cent stake in LWT and
acceptances of its offer have taken its interest to nearly 20 per cent. The
collapse of one of LWT's defensive strategies eases the pressure on Granada
to 'sweeten' the offer.
Granada last night confirmed that it was in tough negotiations with Unilever
over the company's advertising budget for next year. Last year Unilever
spent around Pounds 11m with Granada.
Lex, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940106

