FT944-10933

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (15): Room for everybody - Steel makers are
now less terrified of imports


   By KUNAL BOSE


The fear that lower duties on imported steel would harm domestic steel
producers has proved unfounded.
The duties are being steadily reduced as part of the federal government's
trade reforms programme.
According to Mr J M Bhasin, director of the government-owned Rashtriya Ispat
which owns a 3m tonne shore-based steel plant at Vizag, steel imports in the
current year will exceed 1.5m tonnes, compared with 1.01m in the year to
March 1994.
Mr Bhasin explained, however, that imports are rising because of the growth
in Indian domestic demand for steel. Since this is also benefiting the home
producers, the latter are no longer worried by imports.
With almost three years of recession at an end, Indian steel production,
according to the steel ministry, is likely to go up to 17.84m tonnes in the
current year from 15.13m tonnes in 1993-94 when there was a marginal fall in
output.
Besides some high grades of steel which are not produced locally, India
imports billets to be converted into finished products.
The Indian steel producers know that import duties on steel will be further
reduced from the present average of 50 per cent. According to Mr J Mehra,
chairman of Rashtriya Ispat, 'the Indian manufacturers can meet the
challenge of a lower import duty regime'. In a reference to CIS countries,
he added: 'we must guard ourselves against the dumping of steel by countries
which have excess capacity and which need foreign exchange badly.'
Following forceful representations by local producers, the government has
simplified procedures for filing petitions against dumping. However, Mr B
Muthuraman, vice president of Tata Iron & Steel, is concerned about the
import of a substantial quantity of seconds at heavily discounted prices.
'This is particularly going to hurt the local producers of hot rolled coils
and electrical sheet,' he says.
The removal of all controls has seen Indian iron and steel export rising
sharply from 910,000 tonnes in 1992-93 to 2.22m tonnes in 1993-94 worth
Rs17.64bn (Pounds 353m).
Imports include not only low value items such as sponge iron and pig iron,
but its steel export basket now includes cold rolled and galvanised sheet
and coils. The recession had forced Indian manufacturers to the export
market.
'True, we went for export in a big way because of the recession at home. It
will not do the industry any good if it is to export only when there is a
demand shortfall within the country. The experience of the last two years
should lead the industry to adopt the strategy to export about 20 per cent
of its production,' said Mr Muthuraman.
The world trade in steel is about 125m tonnes and it should not be difficult
for India to have a share of about 3 per cent of it, according to Mr Bhasin.
While India is principally targeting China, a major importer of steel, and
south and south-east Asian countries, industry officials think that there is
scope for export of steel to the US, Europe and Japan. Mr Santosh Mohan Dev,
steel minister, is trying to convince the government that 'suitable
incentives should be given to steel export'.
Nearly 4.7m tonnes of finished steel capacity, involving an investment of
Rs84bn, is in various stages of implementation. Most of the new projects
will be exporting a good portion of their output.
The export capability of the Steel Authority of India which owns four
integrated steel plants will improve considerably as it completes the Rs70bn
modernisation programme. The same will happen with Tata Iron & Steel, which
is investing heavily in modernisation and capacity expansion.
India's biggest steel biggest exporter is the three-year old Rashtriya Ispat
plant, incorporating the latest technology. Industry officials point out
that as a result of the deregulation of steel in July 1991 and the removal
of controls on price and distribution of the metal in January 1992, the
steel sector is inviting new investment.
The induction of the state of the art steel making technology in the country
has become easier with the government allowing up to 51 per cent foreign
equity investment in steel projects.
According to the steel ministry, the government has so far given approval
for foreign equity investment of over Rs8.60bn in various projects. Although
India is rich in iron ore and coal, the two principal inputs for making
steel, the per capita consumption of steel here is less than 25 kilos a
year, compared with the world average of 136 kilos.
But industry officials expect that in the next five years, the demand for
long products, used mainly in construction work, will grow at 6 per cent a
year and that flat products, used by the automobile, white goods and
engineering industries will rise by 10 per cent.
The government predicts that by 2002 the demand for steel will be about 31m
tonnes a year. The country's nominal steel-making capacity is about 27m
tonnes. But of the 7.5m tonne capacity in the mini steel sector, half is
sick.
Mr Mehra said, 'if we have to satisfy a demand for 31m tonnes by 2002, then
we must start planning for the creation of an additional capacity of at
least 8m tonnes of steel now. Steel in India is considered a safe
investment. It should not be difficult to mobilise resources to fund the
creation of new steel-making capacity.'
The initiative for the new capacity creation has to come from the private
sector since the government has decided not to build any new steel plant.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941108

