FT941-3492

FT  16 MAR 94 / Police given new cautioning guides


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


New guidelines on the cautioning of suspects, which are likely to increase
the number of prosecutions and ultimately the size of the prison population,
were sent to police forces in England and Wales yesterday by Mr Michael
Howard, the home secretary.
The move follows widespread public concern that too many offenders were
escaping prosecution through inappropriate use of cautioning by police.
Mr Howard said that while 87 per cent of cautions were effective, there was
a need to reduce the number of repeat cautions, stop cautions for serious
offences and ensure a more consistent application by police forces.
The guidelines say:
Police should consider whether a caution is likely to be effective and
whether it is appropriate to the offence.
Juveniles should not necessarily be cautioned rather than prosecuted just
because they are young.
Cautions should only be used in exceptional circumstances for serious
offences.
Multiple cautions should only be considered where the subsequent offence is
trivial or where some time has elapsed since the original caution.
Mr Harry Fletcher, general secretary of the National Association of
Probation Officers, said abandoning repeat cautions would result in 60,000
extra prosecutions a year and an increase in the prison population.
In 1992, there were 321,000 cautions for all offences, compared with 279,000
in 1991, and 1,735 cautions for more serious, indictable offences.
The Home Office estimates there will be 50,000 fewer cautions each year but
not all will result in prosecutions.
Police forces piloting so-called Cautioning Plus schemes, in which
conditions such as supervision or community work are attached, are being
asked to monitor the results.
The Police Federation welcomed the guidelines and Mr Howard's recognition
that the decision to issue a caution should always be taken by the police.
Federation chairman Dick Coyles said research showed too many offenders had
received multiple cautions which brought the system into 'disrepute' with
youngsters equating a caution with being 'let off'.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940316

