FT944-2991

FT  15 DEC 94 / Technology: Cargo vessels take to the air - A group of
ship-builders in Japan is focusing on speed


   By ROBERT PATTON


Sea transport gave way decades ago to roads, rail and air as the fastest way
to move goods around the world. However, a consortium of Japanese ship
builders is developing a high-speed cargo ship that may bring sea transport
back into fashion.
The seven-company consortium, Technological Research Association of
Techno-Superliner, has been working on the ship since 1989. The goal is to
make the transport of time-sensitive goods by sea a serious alternative to
road,
rail and air.
The techno-superliner, with a cruising range of about 930km, will carry
1,000 tonnes of cargo over, rather than through, the waves at speeds of at
least 50 knots. This compares with 35.5 knots achieved in a trial run
earlier this month by a car ferry, and the previous 30.5 knots record held
by a Finnish vessel.
The developers are testing designs that lift the hull out of the water,
reducing water resistance. Propulsion and steering systems will use movable
water jets since there will be no conventional hull to support propeller and
rudder.
The consortium, which includes Mitsubishi, Kawasaki and Sumitomo, is testing
two designs that lift the hull: the hydrofoil and the air cushion. The
hydrofoil uses the same principle that keeps conventional aircraft aloft.
'Wings' beneath the water's surface produce lift which keeps most of the
craft out of the water and free of its resistance to motion.
The air cushion type uses large fans to create a 'cushion' of air under the
ship. The hull shape includes skirts that surround the air cushion and
contain it. The result is that the craft skims over the air cushion instead
of ploughing through the water like conventional cargo ships.
Neither of the designs is new, but they have not been used successfully to
build vessels as large and as stable as the techno-superliner will have to
be.
Experimental vessels of both types have been built and have been in sea
trials since July. The Hayate (Japanese for 'swift wind') is the hydrofoil
version. A one-sixth size scale version has reached speeds of 41kph in
tests. But the most advanced model is the air cushion ship Hisho (meaning
'flight').
The 70m Hisho, built to approximately half-scale, has recorded speeds up to
54 knots. The captain and crew reported good manoeuvrability and
seaworthiness in high waves. Hisho, they say, can safely weather 3m waves.
In sea trials between July and September, the air-cushion ship was put
through its paces off the coast of the Goto islands in Nagasaki prefecture
and since then has sailed the length of the Japanese archipelago. Although
the experimental vessel is not equipped for cargo handling, the weight of
cargo is simulated using a centrally located water tank.
In two test runs, with cargoes of 100 and 200 tonnes, the experimental ship
attained 50 knots. Next year, Hisho will be used to conduct safety trials.
The vessel will move goods in 12 hours or less from Tokyo to Hokkaido in the
north or Kyushu in the south or even to neighbouring Asian countries in just
a day or two, the developers say.
The companies have spent Y75bn (Pounds 475m) on the techno-superliner
project over the past six years, but about double that amount will be needed
to build a full-scale, 127m version of Hisho. That is twice the cost of a
conventional ferry of the same size.
Fuel consumption is 10 times that of conventional, slower craft and Hisho
requires special cargo handling equipment to minimise the time spent in
port. But once those problems have been solved, Hisho's 200,000 hp engines
will power a cargo ship capable of carrying 100, 10-tonne, 20m cargo
containers to and from any port in or near Japan.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941215

