FT944-2282

FT  16 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Old gold mines index to go


The Financial Times will cease calculating and publishing its old gold mines
index after February 28, 1995. The index, which is based on the performance
of South African companies only and was launched in September, 1955, was
replaced by one with a broader scope earlier this year.
Gold mining companies from all over the world are included in the new index
if they:
Have sustainable, attributable gold production of at least 300,000 ounces a
year;
Draw at least 75 per cent of revenue from mined gold sales;
Have at least 10 per cent of their issued capital available to the investing
public.
These conditions mean that there are no set number of constituents and the
eligibility of each company will be reviewed four times a year.
Copies of the list of constituent companies and of the ground rules of the
FT Gold Mines Index are available from The Manager, FT Statistics, One
Southwark Bridge, London SE1 9HL. A disc with the index's history will be
available from the same address when calculation of the predecessor index
series ceases.
The Mining Journal provides technical and financial information to assist
calculation of the FT Gold Mines Index.
At present in the new index Australasia is represented by Dominion Mining;
Gold Mines of Kalgoorlie; Homestake Gold Australia; Newcrest Mining; Placer
Pacific; Plutonic Resources and Poseidon Gold. Canadian constituents include
American Barrick Resources; Cambior; Echo Bay Mines; Hemlo Gold Mines;
Pegasus Gold; Placer Dome and TVX Gold.
From Ghana there is Ashanti Goldfields and South Africa is represented by
Beatrix; Buffelsfontein; Driefontein; Elandsrand; Freegold; Harmony;
Hartebeestfontein; Kinross; Kloof; Randfontein; Southvaal; Vaal Reefs;
Western Areas; Western Deep Levels and Winkelhaak.
US Mines in the new index include Battle Mountain Gold; Homestake Mining;
Newmont Gold and Santa Fe Pacific Gold.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941216

