FT942-15858

FT  13 APR 94 / Procter may sue over swaps losses


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


Procter & Gamble, the US consumer products group, yesterday raised the
possibility that it will take legal action against Bankers Trust over losses
it incurred on interest rate swaps contracts designed by the banking group.
P&G said it has been forced to take an after-tax charge of Dollars 102m
(Pounds 69m) in the first quarter to cover the losses.
The company said that although it has long been using derivatives
instruments to cut the cost of borrowing and manage exposure to interest
rate and foreign exchange, the losses were incurred on two highly leveraged
swaps contracts that were inconsistent with company policy on the use of
derivatives.
P&G said it lost money on the swaps because of the recent sharp rise in
interest rates. Mr Edwin Artzt, P&G chairman and chief executive, said:
'Unlike the other swaps the company has historically used, it turned out
that the two leveraged swaps in question were based on highly complex
formulas that multiplied the effect of interest rate increases. Derivatives
like these are dangerous and we were badly burned. We won't let this happen
again.'
Mr Artzt said that P&G was 'seriously considering our legal options relative
to Bankers Trust'. The company, however, would not discuss whether it was
considering filing a lawsuit.
Bankers Trust said that while it had entered into a number of derivatives
transactions with P&G, some of which were profitable, when market interest
rates began to affect the company's position adversely on some of the
contracts, the bank 'strongly and formally recommended that Procter & Gamble
limit its risks by unwinding all or part of the transactions'. However,
Bankers Trust said senior officials at P&G rejected its recommendations.
The two contracts that soured were designed to allow P&G to swap fixed rate
loans for floating rate loans, and assumed that US and German rates would
stay low. P&G would not comment on whether any of its executives had been
disciplined for buying swaps from Bankers Trust that breached company
policy, but admitted that some officers had become involved in transactions
they did not fully understand.
The group said its first quarter earnings, to be released later this month,
will show a gain of about 15 per cent, in spite of the swaps-related charge.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940413

