FT944-14584

FT  22 OCT 94 / CIS states inch towards integration: Summit adds to 'paper
trail' of agreements on co-operation


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


   MOSCOW


The 12 former Soviet republics in the Commonwealth of Independent States
took a tentative step towards closer integration at a summit in Moscow
yesterday, agreeing to form a supra-national economic committee.
But many of the states expressed reservations about this and other political
and economic agreements signed, and retained the right to opt out of CIS
accords.
These hesitations suggest that, despite the decidedly upbeat tone of Russian
President Boris Yeltsin at a concluding press conference, the CIS is
unlikely to be granted the authority to overrule national governments soon.
Mr Yeltsin also made a veiled attack on Russian advocates of tough fiscal
and monetary policy by strongly endorsing the bid by the embattled republic
of Tajikistan to rejoin the Russian rouble zone.
During yesterday's meetings the Russian and Moldovan prime ministers agreed
on the withdrawal of Russian forces from Moldova by 1997. Russia also pushed
through an agreement on protection of national minorities, which could
strengthen Moscow's efforts to speak for the 20m ethnic Russians living in
other former Soviet republics, but many states, including Ukraine, appended
reservations to their signatures of the agreement.
Mr Yeltsin, who expressed his satisfaction about the formation of the
Inter-State Economic Committee, in which Russia will control 50 per cent of
the votes and decisions are taken by an 80 per cent vote, admitted that real
economic integration had not been achieved.
Agreements on forming a payments union - which might require a curtailment
of national control over monetary policy if it is formed - and a customs
union were also signed, but no details were released.
Later the Ukrainian prime minister, Mr Vitaly Masol, told Interfax that
Ukraine would not join the payments union.
Mr Yeltsin acknowledged the difficulties, saying: 'Not all states are
equally ready to take part in the economic union, although all voted for
it.'
Since its formation in December 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union
the CIS has created an impressive paper trail of agreements but few have
actually been implemented. Mr Yeltsin, who held a private meeting with
Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma, praised the 'completely different
atmosphere' which now prevails in Ukrainian-Russian relations since the
defeat of former President Leonid Kravchuk in elections in July. However,
privately, Ukrainian officials said Kiev remained unwilling to give up any
national sovereignty to CIS structures.
Mr Steve LeVine, central Asian correspondent for the Financial Times and
News-week, said yesterday the Uzbekistan authorities had refused to renew
his press accreditation. Mr LeVine said he was told: 'We think you are
against our president.' He will continue to report on the region from
Alma-Ata, the capital of Kazakhstan.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941022

