FT944-2868

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (8): Everything depends on the peace
process - Israel's prospects as a regional financial centre


   By ERIC SILVER


A fund manager in Tel-Aviv can eat a civilised breakfast and still trade on
the Far Eastern stock exchanges. During the day he can buy and sell in all
the European markets. And before dinner he can tune into Wall Street.
If Middle East peace adds the necessary element of political tranquillity,
Israel is ready to exploit this geographical advantage to promote itself as
a regional financial centre.
Meir Het, a former chairman of the Tel-Aviv stock exchange and of Bank
Leumi, Israel's second biggest bank, told The Financial Times: 'We should
try to encourage quality financial services that can utilise the benefits of
a location where you can sleep soundly in the night and still be active in
all the major exchanges.'
If the tax incentives were right, Mr Het predicts that American and European
Jewish professionals would set up shop in Tel-Aviv and provide the essential
expertise. He suggests conditions similar to those operating in Dublin - low
taxation for companies that do the business, no taxation on funds.
Mr Het served on a government committee, which reported last February on the
dividends that Israeli banks and finance houses could hope to gain from
peace with their Arab neighbours. It came out emphatically against turning
Israel into a tax haven - 'it would attract the kind of money we're not
interested in attracting,' Mr Het insisted. 'We don't need laundered money
here. What we should get into are things like fund management and custodial
services.'
Israel could also become a regional centre for development banking. Ten
American and European investment bankers are already dipping their toes in
the water.
'Almost everyone who counts today has some kind of foothold in Israel,'
according to Dan Halperin, a financial consultant and former Israeli
Treasury official, who now represents Salomon Brothers of New York in Israel
 -'mostly, they are employing Israelis as their eyes and ears.'
Originally, these banks were attracted by Israel's privatisation programme.
They are also angling for a share in large infrastructure projects, such as
the expansion and modernisation of the national rail network, plans for a
rapid-transit system in Tel-Aviv, and expansion of Ben-Gurion international
airport.
'By and large,' Mr Halperin admits, 'the investment bankers are here for the
Israeli work. But some are also coming in order to be involved in regional
projects, in which Israel will be involved. Let's say, a natural gas
pipeline from the Gulf to Israel, or all kinds of projects for the Jordan
Valley and the Dead Sea that were mooted at the Casablanca Middle East
economic conference in November.
'Nothing is very 'concrete' yet, but the bankers are looking.'
Meir Het is equally cautious - 'everything depends on the peace process,' he
says. 'If it goes well, the prospects are good. Interest is being expressed,
but bankers are conservative people. They will need to see that conditions
are stable. It's a future hope, but not something you can build on.'
Pinhas Landau, a senior financial columnist on Telegraph, an Israeli
business daily paper, believes that Israeli banks could also turn into
primary players in regional project and trade finance - 'if only because the
Israeli economy will be dominant,' he argued, 'it is perfectly feasible that
Israeli banks will take a lead.'
They would, however, have to build up their expertise - and compete with the
international giants.
The Gulf Arabs seem already to have trampled down the political and
psychological barriers against doing business with the Jewish state - 'we've
got nothing against the people with the money,' Mr Landau explains, 'and
they've got nothing against us. More and more visibly, they're seeking
business here.'
What nobody takes seriously is the suggestion that Tel-Aviv might assume the
role of regional banking centre that Beirut played before the Lebanese civil
war broke out in 1975. The oil sheikhs no longer need it. They have made
alternative arrangements, and the banking world has changed.
The days when Beirut was the only Arab capital where the phones worked are
long over. With faxes and electronic mail, it is as easy and as quick to
send instructions to Europe as it is across town. Market information is 'on
line' in real time. If the princes and the playboys went to Beirut to escape
the puritanism of Saudi Arabia, they can now fly to London or Paris in five
or six hours. And even with peace, tranquillity will remain relative.
'If you're an Arab sheikh in Kuwait, waiting for the Iraqi tanks to roll
again,' says Pinhas Landau, 'you keep your money in classic safe havens -
Switzerland, or Luxembourg, or the Channel Islands, or in London or New
York. What they offer is a historic record of expertise and political
stability, safety, security, secrecy.
'Tel-Aviv is lacking most of the classic requirements of a banking centre.
Nothing on earth is going to make the Middle East in general and Israel in
particular a safe haven any time in the near future, even if we make peace
with everybody.'
Then there is the more specific issue of a body of expertise - 'it is
entirely lacking,' he says. 'It can begin and develop gradually. Tel-Aviv
has certain things to offer, Jewish financial know-how among them. But while
manufacturing centres like Hong Kong can be built overnight, financial
centres cannot.'

The Financial Times


London Page 44

941215

