FT944-2690

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (12): Ukrainian supply line


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


MORE than 90 per cent of the iron ore fed into the blast furnaces of the VSZ
steel works in Kosice is transported nearly 1,100km. along the broad,
Russian-gauge railway which connects the plant with Krivoi Rog in the
eastern Ukraine.
After decades of open-cast mining, the once enormous iron deposit at Krivoi
Rog has been turned into a gigantic pit more than 1km. deep.
Ancient electric locomotives laboriously pull laden wagons up the crumbling
sides of the mine while equally ancient pelletising plants churn out
enriched iron pellets in factories of Dickensian squalor.
The future, if there is one, lies in completion of a new pelletisation
complex at Dolinskaya, 15km. from Krivoi Rog. Planned as a joint
Comecon-wide co-operative venture, Dolinskaya has been on hold since the
east Germans departed two years ago. They left 95 per cent of their
contribution to the venture already completed.
But Bonn refused to throw more D-Marks at a venture whose economic viability
was probably shaky at the outset and became more so as the date for
completion receded into an uncertain distance.
Ukraine badly wants Dolinskaya to be completed. The new plant was planned to
process the millions of tonnes of relatively low grade ore piled up in waste
tips around the city of Krivoi Rog. It would also allow the obsolete and
heavily polluting existing pelletisation plants to be closed down.
But the Slovak and Romanian steel industries also have an interest in
securing future supplies of relatively cheap Ukrainian pellets to keep their
own steel industries fed into the next century.
The alternatives of Brazilian, South African or Swedish pellets are all more
expensive and less reliable than the long term supply contracts promised by
Ukraine if only the project can be completed. Having come to this conclusion
the Slovak government last year signed a new agreement with Ukraine under
which VSZ and other Slovak companies will help to complete Dolinskaya in
return for guaranteed supplies of 17m tonnes of pellets over the first 10
years of the new plant's life and the prospect of more supplies thereafter.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941216

