FT942-15385

FT  15 APR 94 / Lead not into temptation


   By JOE ROGALY


Now that spring has come I remain undisturbed by news that some chief
executive or other is taking home sterling or dollars in sacksful. Most
people do not receive seven- or even six-figure salaries, but that is no
reason to envy those who do. Some of them deserve it. Good luck to them. Yet
high pay is becoming a political issue. Last week The Sun ran a spread on
the '10 greediest bosses', with pictures. The captions contained the
tabloid's calculations of the villains' compensation packages, broken down
into comprehensible weekly amounts. The usual suspects were there - Mr Derek
Hunt, chairman of MFI (Pounds 31,423 a week); Sir Paul Girolami of Glaxo
(Pounds 27,744); Mr Mick Newmarch of the Prudential (Pounds 13,865) and so
on. Mr Rupert Murdoch, proprietor, was absent from this little gallery.
The chancellor of the exchequer, who earns about a tenth of a Newmarch,
disapproves of some of the large executive salaries paid by British
companies. He has expressed the wish that more business leaders would show
'a decent level of restraint'. The prime minister, questioned in the
Commons, concurred, but added that the subject is not a matter for the
government. This is 'a free capitalist country in which companies determine
their wages', he said. When Lady Thatcher had his job, she also supported
voluntary limits. That is clearly as far as the present Conservative
government will go.
It may not be far enough. Average incomes are increasing slowly, if at all.
Most employees worry about losing their jobs. This early post-recessionary
atmosphere is not one in which it is comfortable for highly rewarded CEOs to
take the salary and the bonus, cash in the options, and run. US President
Bill Clinton demonstrated during his 1991 campaign that politicians can win
votes by attacking what seem to be over-generous executive salaries. There
may even be an advantage in promising tax increases at the very top. The
difficulty comes when the election is over. Congress has voted to put a
Dollars 1m a year ceiling on corporate tax deductions for executive
remuneration. The reaction from the tax-avoidance industry has been
disappointment that the provision is so easy to circumvent. It spoils the
fun. You do not need to use stock options to get around the Dollars 1m cap.
Playing with definitions of an incentive bonus scheme will suffice.
It would be foolish to attempt a similar restriction in Britain. Some
employees are almost literally worth their weight in gold. Mr Peter Wood
(Pounds 355,253 a week in Sun money) created Direct Line, now the insurance
division of the Royal Bank of Scotland. No Peter Wood, no Direct Line.
Everyone in financial services knows of this or that dealer whose
contribution is as unique as that of a named pop star to the entertainment
business. Specialists, or those of exceptional ability who work
exceptionally hard, de-serve commensurate rewards. The undeserving cases
are, however, both obvious and sad. We can all think of certain well-known
former nationalised industry flacks who privatised their salaries when their
enterprises were sold off and they became chauffeur-driven executives. Have
they no sense of decorum?
There is a theoretical curb on such behaviour in quoted companies. The
Cadbury code on corporate governance provides for remuneration committees of
non-executive directors. These are supposed to keep the managers honest. In
fact they are probably doing more harm than good, according to Mr Stanley
Wright, a former civil servant who has spent much of his career in the City.
His case is made in a pamphlet published by the Social Market Foundation*
yesterday. Remuneration committees, he says, 'are confronted with confusing
surveys, largely prepared by 'human resources' or 'management selection'
firms, whose only emphatic messages are that the trend is strongly upwards
and that every class of benefit is becoming 'normal'.'
Mr Wright approaches management theory in much the same way as public choice
theorists analyse the behaviour of officials. Executives, hirelings of the
shareholders, think they own the companies they are paid to manage.
Self-interest motivates everyone. Headhunters prosper when they persuade
boards that there is an international market for overpaid generalists;
flattered managers do not take many lunches to be convinced. As Adam Smith,
quoted by Mr Wright, said: 'The directors of joint stock companies being the
managers rather of other people's money than of their own, it cannot well be
expected that they should watch over it with the same anxious vigilance with
which the partners in a private copartnery frequently watch over their own.'
So what else is new?
Quite a lot, if Mr Wright has his way. He would have each director's
remuneration and benefits published in greater detail than Cadbury suggests.
This would be enforced by law, not a voluntary code. Directors should be
re-elected by the shareholders every two years. The maximum legal
compensation for unexpired contracts should be cut from five years to two,
rather than the three in the Cadbury code. That would limit failed CEOs'
termination pay-offs. Non-executives should be able to report directly to
the shareholders, and to comment on directors' remuneration for the current
year. To encourage shareholders to use this additional power, dividends
should not be paid unless votes representing at least 75 per cent of the
shares have been cast on all resolutions at an annual general meeting.
There are many such recommendations. They all shift the balance of power
towards institutions as responsible shareholders. Mr Wright rejects both the
German bank/stakeholder system, and the Japanese consensual model as either
out-of-date or alien to the Anglo-Saxon culture. He regards the notion of
empowering more individual shareholders as a 'romantic muddle'. He would
tighten takeover rules. That would curb the temptation to grow by
acquisition, which, he argues, rarely benefits the buying companies'
shareholders. In sum, his proposition is that 'a powerful body of
institutional shareholders has become an essential for shareholder
sovereignty'. He may be on to something. If the government does not perceive
the need for thinking about his argument, the opposition might. One day,
perhaps, Labour will awaken from its long sleep.
*Two Cheers for the Institutions. SMF, 20 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H
9AA, Pounds 10

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940415

