FT942-14612

FT  20 APR 94 / Yeltsin calls for summit on Bosnia as US reviews options


   By JUREK MARTIN, LAURA SILBER and LIONEL BARBER


   WASHINGTON, BELGRADE, BRUSSELS


Russia's president Boris Yeltsin last night called for an urgent summit
between Russia, the US and the European Union to solve the worsening crisis
in Bosnia.
Marking a sharp reversal in Russia's previous sympathetic treatment of the
Bosnian Serbs, Mr Yeltsin urged them to stop their attack on the Moslem
enclave of Gorazde, while Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the foreign minister, warned
the Serb forces not to 'test the patience of the world community'.
Mr Yeltsin has previously suggested a summit, but this proposal comes amid
growing international calls for action, and was welcomed by President Bill
Clinton, who was meeting with his senior military and foreign policy
advisers to review the military and diplomatic options over Bosnia.
Although US officials were conceding that little could now be done to
prevent the fall of the eastern Moslem enclave of Gorazde to surrounding
Serb forces, the broader use of Nato air power to protect other Bosnian
'safe havens' was understood to be high on the list. It was also urged by Mr
Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general.
Serb forces nevertheless continued to fire on Gorazde and, in an ominous
measure of their new-found disdain for threats from both west and east,
raided a UN encampment near Sarajevo and took off with 18 anti-aircraft
guns. The weapons were handed to the UN six weeks ago after the Serbs had
been forced to ease their siege of the Bosnian capital.
About 150 Serbs were involved. 'They were simply overrun,' said a spokesman
for the UN forces in Bosnia. 'If they had fired, it would have been a
massacre.'
Mr Clinton was said to be determined to pursue diplomatic courses. Ms Dee
Dee Myers, his press secretary, said yesterday the president believed that a
negotiated settlement was 'the only way to end the cycle of violence'.
Officials at Nato headquarters in Brussels were being equally circumspect
despite an appeal from Mr Boutros Ghali for authority to call air strikes to
protect civilians in all six Moslem 'safe areas' in Bosnia.
That would significantly extend the UN mandate for military action, Nato
officials said. The mandate is currently restricted to calling for close air
support to protect UN peacekeepers on the ground.
Russia vents fury on Bosnia Serbs, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940420

