FT941-4030

FT  12 MAR 94 / What kind of ghoul am I?: Dominic Lawson casts a sceptical
eye on the press and Cromwell Street


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


Late last year I was driving at speed down the M4, when the traffic in front
of me began to slow rapidly. So rapidly, that I almost collided with the car
I was following. There were no roadworks. The traffic was not heavy. There
had been no collision or crash. We were near the Windsor junction, and to
the left a building was ablaze.
The drivers who had slowed to 25 miles an hour, and were winding down their
windows to get a better look, could not all have guessed that it was one of
the Queen's residences which was on fire. But someone's palatial home was
being cruelly destroyed and someone's priceless possessions were being
reduced to ashes.
I doubt that at that moment any of the fire-gazers, myself included, felt
much sympathy for the unknown householder. We were just overwhelmed by
curiosity. We were ghouls. Newspapers love the word 'ghoul', chiefly,
perhaps, because its monosyllabic terseness fits into a tabloid headline.
The word has been used repeatedly this week in the reports of the scenes
outside 25 Cromwell Street, Gloucester, as, over a period of days, the
remains of nine female bodies have been disinterred and brought out in
boxes.
You would think, from the comments of journalists, that the behaviour of
local sightseers was worse than that of whoever put the bodies there.
Frederick West, a former resident of 25 Cromwell Street, has been charged
with murder.
Paul Callan, the Daily Express's man outside 25 Cromwell Street, and that
newspaper's most talented 'colour' writer, was particularly outraged.
Under the headline 'Place where people just don't care', Callan stigmatised
'the ghoul watch' as a daily, sickening sight. He added to his list of
'sickos' the man who now owns the scaffolding-covered No 25 for 'charging
Pounds 450 for television crews to clamber up, and Pounds 60 for Fleet
Street photographers.'
Well, this is indeed all very shocking.
I imagine we should take it as read that the Daily Express's photographer
was far too noble and sensitive a spirit to pay his Pounds 60 and provide a
picture of what his own newspaper tastefully calls 'The House of Death'.
And I imagine that the editor of the Daily Express was most calm and
understanding when his star photographer explained why it would be unethical
and, let us use the word, ghoulish, to pay Pounds 60 to the owner of number
25.
I also wonder what the newspapers would call the owner if he had not charged
them for their pictures: 'helpful' perhaps. Certainly not 'sick'.
The point, naturally, is that the owners of local properties can make big
money from facilitating 'ghoulish' pictures only if Fleet Street wants to
publish them.
The main distinguishing characteristic of the members of the Cromwell Street
'ghoul watch', is that, unlike most of the tabloid readership, they live
close enough to the scene of the crimes to see it for themselves.
They do not need to cough up 32p for a copy of the Daily Express to see the
photograph which accompanied Callan's article: a shocked looking police
officer emerging from the house carrying a box with a black cloth covering
the unmentionable things which it must have contained.
And about 3in away from Callan's excoriating prose, his employer, under a
bold headline, begs: 'Do you or did you know Fred West, or have any pictures
of him? The Daily Express would like to hear from you - call us on
071-922-7210.' This, presumably is the Daily Express's very own 'ghoul
line'.
Among the Cromwell Street residents whose cynicism has shocked Paul Callan,
is a lady who charges onlookers Pounds 2 for a box of sandwiches. He quotes
her as saying: 'Just providing a service dear.' So are we all, Paul dear, so
are we all. We just have different ways of describing the same activity.
All, together, conjugate after me: I am a newspaper reporter; you are a
Daily Express reader; they are all ghouls.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVIII

940312

