FT941-13039

FT  27 JAN 94 / Berlusconi sets up group to fight March election


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate, abandoned his position as chairman
of Italy's third-largest private business empire yesterday in favour of an
uncertain career as head of a new political grouping, Forza Italia - 'Come
on, Italy' - to fight a general election in March.
It is the first time in recent years such a prominent business figure in any
European democracy has switched from business to politics. Mr Berlusconi
said he was entering politics 'because I don't want to live in an illiberal
country run by immature people linked to the political and economic failures
of the past'.
The announcement came in a video message sent to television stations
controlled by his Fininvest group and those of state-run television. State
television was last night resisting pressure from him to run either the full
eight-minute video or a four-minute version on the grounds that they were
unsolicited political propaganda.
Mr Berlusconi's likely entry into politics has been an on-off affair since
last December. He had held back until now because of fears that his entry
could split the centre-right vote even more.
There are believed to be some 4,000 Forza Italia clubs already in existence,
set up by Mr Berlusconi some months ago.
His principal enemy, the former communist party of the Democratic Left
(PDS), said Mr Berlusconi could not easily distance himself from his media
interests and there were clear conflicts. Indeed, Fininvest made clear that
Mr Berlusconi's ownership would remain unchanged. He was simply abandoning
any management role. Fininvest controls more than 80 per cent of Italy's
commercial television networks, as well as two newspapers and magazines.
His move also raises questions about the financial health of Fininvest,
whose profit figures analysts have recently begun to question. Its 1992
profit was L21bn (Pounds 8.2m) in the published accounts with debt at
L4,500bn, 43 per cent of turnover. Part of his empire, Silvio Berlusconi
Enterprises, has been due to be floated to raise money. Last autumn the
banks obliged him to bring in a more professional management structure.
Mr Berlusconi said yesterday: 'I want to form a wholly new group of voters.
It won't be the traditional faction-ridden grouping. On the contrary it will
have the opposite aim - of uniting people to give Italy the majority and
government the country needs.'
The unholy allies, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940127

