FT944-5809

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (4): Last minute
solution - A publisher's view / Portal was convinced that Windows was the
answer. But it was hard to find the right package


   By CLAIRE GOODING


Shopping can be a frustrating experience when you know what you want but
cannot find it. Neil Beardsley, operations director of Portal Publications
in the UK, was sure he wanted a Windows package when he started the search
for an accounting system.
It was unexpectedly hard to find one, and the package he now uses, Kewill's
Dynamics, came into the picture at the eleventh hour, thanks to an
eagle-eyed book keeper who had read a magazine review.
Portal is the UK arm of a US publisher with a Dollars 200m turnover, the
world's largest in the specialist area of shrink-wrapped posters and prints
of the kind that adorn student rooms all over the world. Portal had set up
in the UK under the wing of a sister organisation, which initially provided
accountancy services and software on a contract basis.
The arrangement had its drawbacks: Mr Beardsley found the contractor's
implementation of the Pegasus package too limiting.
'The Pegasus software didn't retain historical data, nor did we have
drill-down, such as being able to look at a trial balance and drill-down to
the source of a figure,' he says.
'We couldn't track back without using huge print-out reports.
'We looked at half dozen well-known packages, mostly good, but none had made
the leap into Windows.
Although it was clear at the demonstration that Dynamics was not yet
complete, Mr Beardsley was prepared to compromise, and wait for the
purchasing and sales order processing modules. 'We took the view that if
what was to come was as good as what we had already seen it would be what we
wanted.'
The flexibility of the package is its strength but also its danger, because
it demands skilled analysis in implementation. Portal used a Kewill
consultant to do the initial set-up. 'If you don't spend time setting it up
correctly, and give yourself time to understand its potential, you'll never
get the best out of it,' says Mr Beardsley.
As a UK subsidiary, Portal is self-sufficient in IT terms, and there is no
need as yet to link with the parent's AS/400. So far there have been few
problems in any downloading of data, and Portal makes its software work
hard, providing stock label data into Word and data for analysis into Excel
spreadsheets. 'We've had no problems, and are happy with our choice,' says
Mr Beardsley.
Supplier profile Product: Kewill-Omicron's Dynamics is a multinational
accounting system designed specifically for Windows and Macintosh. Includes
drill-down enquiry, background processing, unlimited budgets and on-line
history, data exchange facilities and an easy-to-use report writer. All
screens and menus can be tailored. A linking tool kit allows integration
with other applications.
Suppliers: Kewill-Omicron is owned by UK-based Kewill Group, whose business
software products include manufacturing, Cad/Cam, accounting, wholesale and
retail distribution, and EDI.
Turnover: Pounds 31.8m to March 1994, with Pounds 4.04m profit; Pounds 31m
in 1993, with loss of Pounds 5.19m (disposal of discontinued operations cost
Pounds 5.63m).
Employees: 200 in the UK.
Number of users: 20 in UK, 850 in US, 150 elsewhere.
Price: Pounds 2,290. Entry price Pounds 2,290, typical price for 40-user
network is Pounds 8,770 for five modules under Windows.
Hardware and operating systems: PC-DOS Windows, Macintosh, client server
RS/6000, NT, Alpha, HP9000, Intel.
Sales and support/maintenance: direct and through dealers. Maintenance 20
per cent of list price.
Other services available: consultancy, training.
User views: flexible, powerful, power-hungry (needs 486), adaptable and easy
to use. Minimum training, but needs careful implementation to reflect a
company's needs.
Contact: Neville Merritt, sales director.
Tel: 0932 248328.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941201

