FT941-12866

FT  28 JAN 94 / S African leaders postpone constitution deadline again


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   PRETORIA


South African politicians last night stepped back from the brink of
confrontation when they postponed for the third time this week a deadline
for final agreement on a new constitution, and agreed to meet again on
Monday for further negotiations.
Negotiators from the right-wing Freedom Alliance held out little hope for
agreement on Monday, saying they were battling with the government and the
African National Congress for the moral high ground, with no party willing
to take the blame for the failure of talks.
The extension of the deadline raised doubts over whether this weekend's
conference of the Inkatha Freedom party would take a final decision on
whether or not to participate in April's all-race elections.
On the eve of the talks, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi appeared to indicate he
personally favours boycotting the poll, though senior leaders in his party
argue strongly for participation. The party central committee held heated
debate at an all-day meeting on Wednesday, but said it was unable to decide
one way or the other.
It deferred the decision to this weekend's Inkatha conference at the KwaZulu
capital, Ulundi, to be attended by 8,000 delegates.
Chief Buthelezi told the central committee that he did not expect talks to
succeed in yielding the constitutional amendments Inkatha is demanding -
changes which would give greater powers to regional government - and that it
would be morally wrong to contest the elections under a flawed constitution.
To do so would mean 'betraying the sacred charge history has bestowed on me
as a democrat and traditional prime minister of the Zulu kingdom'.
However powerful Inkatha leaders argued in the meeting that Inkatha would be
destroyed if it boycotted the poll, and that it could more effectively fight
the constitution from within the new parliament than from outside it. They
also argued that Inkatha, which has no army (even the KwaZulu government
which it controls has only a police force), would not be able to put up
effective armed resistance to the central government, with its powerful
armed forces.
The central committee decided to make no recommendation to the weekend party
conference, which begins tomorrow.
However Inkatha sources said that this might favour the position of Chief
Buthelezi because the conference will be packed with rural delegates who
have a strong tradition of obeying their leader's recommendations, and among
whom Chief Buthelezi remains very popular.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940128

