FT942-14349

FT  20 APR 94 / Molyneaux sees end 'in year' to Ulster violence


   By MICHAEL CASSELL and JIMMY BURNS


   BELFAST, LONDON


Terrorist violence in Northern Ireland could end within a year, Mr James
Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionist party, predicted yesterday.
Mr Molyneaux, who was speaking in Washington, added to a series of recent
upbeat predictions about an end to terrorism made by politicians and
security forces in the province since the IRA's recent three-day ceasefire.
In a particularly optimistic forecast, which caused some surprise in Ulster
last night, Mr Molyneaux said he believed violence would soon begin to
decline.
He stressed he was not ruling out 'the occasional Mafia-type operation' but
said that, once terrorist violence was over, the 'one united community in
Northern Ireland - Protestant, Catholic, no religion at all - will sit very
firmly on anyone who seeks to disturb the settlements which are now
beginning'.
Meanwhile, British and Irish police yesterday carried out a series of raids
as part of an unprecedented co-ordinated security crackdown on funding for
the IRA.
Scotland Yard said that a substantial quantity of drugs, cash, stolen
property and financial instruments was recovered from 41 addresses in the
Irish Republic, Northern Ireland, north-west England, London and the county
of Surrey. There were eight arrests.
The raids involved 1,000 officers drawn from police on both sides of the
Irish border, including the Royal Ulster Constabulary's anti-racketeering
squad, the Metropolitan Police anti-terrorist squad and three UK regional
squads.
The raids were part of a joint operation codenamed Operation Madronna. This
has involved more than a year of covert investigation, also involving the
British security service MI5, into suspect sourcing of several millions of
pounds of funding for the operations of the IRA.
A joint police statement last night described the raids as the first time
the RUC's anti-racketeering squad had mounted an operation involving so many
forces.

The Financial Times


International Page 14

940420

