FT943-752

FT  28 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Eastern Europe varies widely on incentives
 -Foreign investors are offered fewer perks


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


Most of the countries of central and eastern Europe have ceased to grant
automatic tax or subsidy incentives to foreign investors and are
increasingly treating domestic and foreign investment on equal terms, a
United Nations study shows.
In a comparison of foreign investment legislation*, the UN Economic
Commission for Europe (ECE) says governments in the region continue to adopt
a largely liberal approach to foreign investment, though a 'surprising
variety' of treatment exists.
Foreign investors in Hungary, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic and, with a few
exceptions, Poland and Slovakia, do not have to seek special approval. In
other countries they do. Tax rates also vary widely.
Despite these differences, the ECE notes a general trend towards
even-handedness between foreign and domestic investment. Thus there are now
no discriminatory tax or subsidy benefits for foreign investments in the
Czech and Slovak republics, and 'for all practical purposes' Belarus,
Poland, Slovenia and Bulgaria (though selected investment projects may
receive help).
Hungary, which has attracted far and away the largest amount of overseas
investment in the region since 1989, ceased offering incentives to new
foreign investors from the beginning of this year. Not surprisingly, those
countries with the most difficulties in attracting foreign funds - Ukraine,
Romania and most central Asian republics - are most likely to have generous
incentives such as five-to-10-year tax holidays and reductions in profit
tax.
Russia too, despite its recent success in pulling in overseas investment,
which has been largely due to privatisation, announced in June a
wide-ranging incentive package, including a five-year profit tax holiday and
exemption of customs duties on imports of raw materials and components. The
ECE says the number of foreign investment registrations in Russia more than
doubled last year to nearly 8,000 and in March totalled 8,300. However, this
compares with 22,510 in Hungary (whose 10m population is one-fifteenth of
Russia's) and 30,458 in Romania, though Romanian joint ventures are mostly
very small.
*East-West Investment News, No. 2 Summer 1994, available from Sales Section,
UN Publications, Palais des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 10, annual subscription
Dollars 80 (four issues).

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940928

