FT942-12507

FT  29 APR 94 / DTI threatened with inquiry over delayed EU payments


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


A Conservative MEP is threatening to ask the European parliament to
investigate the Department of Trade and Industry's administration of a
European Union structural fund for customs brokers, who prepare customs
documentation for shippers.
The inquiry would be the first by the ombudsman's office, which is being set
up under the Maastricht treaty on European union. The ombudsman, who will
have wide powers to investigate EU institutions, will be appointed after the
European parliament elections on June 9.
Mr Christopher Jackson, MEP for East Kent, says there have been virtually no
payments from the scheme, set up in 1992 to help customs brokers to
diversify after the implementation of the EU single market in January last
year. European Commission documents show that Ecu30m (Pounds 23m) was
earmarked to finance diversification by EU brokers.
The DTI, which received just under Ecu1m, has paid out only Pounds 21,000.
Mr Jackson said the scheme was the worst example of poor administration by
the Commission he had seen in 15 years as an MEP. He added that the DTI had
delayed payments by imposing unnecessary conditions.
In particular, the DTI has required brokers to prove that diversification
costs have been paid before allowing transfers from the structural fund.
Mr Jackson says this breaches the regulation setting up the scheme, which
specifies 60 per cent of funds be paid in advance. 'It is clear that the
intention of the European parliament to get speedy help to customs brokers
is not being achieved. I shall be asking the Commission to prepare a report
and I am actively considering making this the first case for the new
European ombudsman,' he said.
Some brokers say the delays could force businesses to close. Spedimec, a
Kent broker which is claiming Pounds 110,000 from the fund, said it had
diversified into transport distribution, but had been forced to borrow to
keep the venture afloat. 'This project is definitely in danger. We have only
kept it going because we have put in everything we have,' a Spedimec
director said.
The DTI said there had been delays in the transfer of funds from Brussels,
and difficulties in communicating with directorate general V, the Commission
department which supervises the scheme.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940429

