FT944-2413

FT  16 DEC 94 / Councils Shake-up: Doubt over cost of reorganisation
'gamble' - The new structure


   By JOHN AUTHERS


Britain's new local government structure was yesterday described by Sir John
Banham, its architect, as a 'gamble' which is also 'a very attractive
investment in anyone's language'.
If this sounds incoherent, it at least reflects the new local government map
which has emerged from two years of consultations by the Local Government
Commission. Plans for 18 counties were announced yesterday, involving total
abolition for only two - Berkshire and Dorset. Sir John estimated the total
cost of implementing yesterday's plans at about Pounds 75m, while plans now
abandoned for creating unitaries would have cost five times that figure.
The commission is unsure whether the 20 proposed new authorities will save
money or create extra costs. It estimated that annual costs could rise by as
much as Pounds 35m or fall by as much as Pounds 10m.
Sir John said the moves were a gamble because there was no evidence that
unitary authorities could improve provision for services such as community
care or education. However, he thought it was an excellent investment
because 'if the new authorities manage to improve their efficiency by only 1
per cent they will pay for the transition costs within nine months'.
Plans for the remaining five English counties - Cornwall, Derbyshire,
Gloucestershire, Hertfordshire and Shropshire - will be announced next
month, but they have already been widely leaked, and the expected
conclusions are shown in the map.
In spite of the government's original intention to create a new single tier
of local authorities - to combine the powers of district and county councils
and improve accountability - only eight counties will be completely replaced
by all-purpose unitary authorities. A total of 45 unitaries will be created,
while 230 districts will remain as part of a two-tier structure, and 31
upper-tier county councils will survive in some form.
Common themes include the unpicking of the work of the last reorganisation
in 1974. Avon, Cleveland and Humberside, all created 20 years ago, are to be
abolished and replaced by smaller unitaries, while Herefordshire and
Rutland, both abandoned in 1974, are to be reinstated.
But this pattern is not universal. Cumbria, a creation of 1974, remains
intact, while Huntingdonshire, subsumed into Cambridgeshire at the same
time, has failed to regain its independent status.
Eight urban areas were yesterday recommended for self-governing unitary
status they lost in 1974 - Brighton and Hove, Leicester, Nottingham,
Plymouth, Southend, Stoke-on-Trent, Swindon, and Torbay - while the counties
surrounding them kept the two-tier structure.
Sir John quoted from the report made by the Redcliffe-Maud commission, whose
advice was overturned in the 1974 reorganisation. This had said that unitary
county boroughs represented local government at its best and 'most
accountable'.
In spite of this praise the Former County Boroughs Group, a council lobbying
body, attacked Sir John on an 'arbitrary U-turn' on unitary status for
several other former county boroughs and said the government should reject
the proposals outright.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941216

