FT944-2587

FT  16 DEC 94 / Nigeria under pressure to scrap economic controls


   By PAUL ADAMS and MICHAEL HOLMAN, Africa Editor


   LAGOS


A team from the International Monetary Fund has completed talks this week in
Abuja with Nigeria's finance ministry less than three weeks before the
military regime is due to review economic policy in the 1995 budget.
General Sani Abacha, head of state, is under pressure from investors and
official creditors to scrap the economic controls imposed in January and
deal with the Dollars 8bn arrears in debt service to the Paris Club.
Since early 1992 Nigeria has not serviced its debt to the Paris Club, which
accounts for more than half its Dollars 28bn external debt. Nigeria needs
some form of agreement with the IMF and a few months' good track record to
gain external debt relief and unlock international finance for planned gas
export projects.
The fund is looking for significant steps to deregulate foreign exchange and
interest rate policy, cut the budget deficit and account for all oil
revenue. There is also continued concern about the estimated 150,000 barrels
a day of oil revenue that goes into offshore dedication accounts under the
supervision of the presidency and which never enters the government's books.
The Nigerian government is being urged to curb uneconomic capital projects
and recurrent spending and to find more revenue.
Although the government forecast a balanced budget in 1994, economists
believe the budget deficit this year will be more than Dollars 4bn, which is
nearly 100 per cent of forecast expenditure and about 14 per cent of gross
domestic product, despite the failure to meet commitments to supply foreign
exchange to industry and the underfunding of joint ventures in oil
production.
There have been conflicting signals about the government's intentions,
particularly over the most contentious issue - foreign exchange policy. Some
finance ministry officials and the Central Bank of Nigeria argue for
deregulation. But Mr Aminu Saleh, a leading figure in the government,
recently ruled out deregulation.
Michael Holman, Africa Editor, adds: In an unprecedented attempt to crack
down on the country's black market in foreign currency and reinforce its
controversial exchange rate policy, Nigeria's military government has made
it an offence to disclose the street value of the naira.
In a decree issued last week, the authorities warned that to 'publish or
cause to be published exchange rates and interest rates other than that
approved by the Central Bank' would be an offence.
The penalty for individuals breaching the decree is a fine of N100,000
(Pounds 2,900 or Dollars 4,500) or two years' imprisonment, or both.
In January the government pegged the foreign exchange rate at N22 to the
dollar and closed the secondary or parallel market which allowed investors
to bring in and change dollars at the open market rate, which was between
N45 and N50 earlier this year.
The government also capped bank lending rates at 21 per cent. Privately the
government admits the measures have failed, with inflation rising to over
100 per cent on an annual basis, and the market rate of the Naira plunging
from N50 to N100 between June and November this year as receipts from the
country's exports failed to keep up with the demand for foreign currency.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941216

