FT944-10973

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (9): Speculators
ride high - Commodities


   By RICHARD WATERS


Are commodities an appropriate antidote to the malaise in bond markets?
While fixed income prices have sagged for much of this year, many
commodities - in particular base metals such as aluminium and copper - have
surged. There has not been such interest in investment circles in everything
from oil to gold since the late 1980s.
Commodity prices, a harbinger of inflation, often move in the opposite
direction to bond and equity prices. According to a growing number of
investment advisers, that qualifies them as an asset class in their own
right, deserving of a place in pension funds' portfolios.
There is an alternative view. This holds that speculative investors - in
particular hedge funds - have done much to drive commodity prices higher.
According to this argument, the resurgence in commodities has been a
self-fulfilling prophecy, creating a bubble in prices which will burst once
the speculators withdraw.
The extent of the negative correlation between commodity and long-term US
bond prices is put by JP Morgan - one of several banks to launch commodities
indices recently - at 51 per cent (based on the performance of the
components of the bank's commodities index over the past 10 years). The
negative correlation with US stock prices over the same period was 36 per
cent, Morgan says.
There are a number of caveats. First, it is easier to construct an index to
prove a historical point: the direction of prices in the future may not
follow the same pattern.
Second, many commodities analysts maintain that prices this year have
already outstripped the levels justified by the growth of underlying demand
from end users.
Metals, both precious and base, may be the clearest case. They account for
only around 10 per cent of total world production of commodities by value
(agricultural commodities make up another 43 per cent, and energy the rest).
Yet metals comprise a far larger proportion of many commodity indices, and
remain the focus of much speculative interest. Unlike agricultural products,
the balance of supply and demand is not affected by extraneous factors such
as the weather, but is driven largely by industrial demand. As a result,
much of the buying by investors is thought to have been focused on copper
and aluminium, forcing up prices.
Robin Adams of Resource Strategies, a Pennsylvania-based company, argued
that only Dollars 340 of the Dollars 600 a tonne rise in aluminium prices
this year could be attributed to a growth in fundamental demand (the metal
has since risen further). It is interest from investors (otherwise known as
speculation) that explains the other Dollars 260 a tonne.
For those who do decide that commodities justify a small corner of their
portfolios, the investment landscape of 1994 looks very different from that
which existed the last time real assets were in vogue. There is a range of
new indices against which investment performance in commodities can be
tracked and a bagload of new instruments to buy - from warrants for retail
investors to structured notes whose returns are based on commodity prices.
Besides JP Morgan, Merrill Lynch and Bankers Trust have launched commodities
indices. All three have followed Goldman Sachs, which was among the first in
the field.
These indices are very different in their character and behaviour. Some
(Goldman) include agricultural products, but most do not. A second
difference lies in the method of calculation. An index which simply tracks
the prices of commodity futures carries with it the leverage that is
inherent in futures markets.
To overcome this, the Goldman and Morgan indices use a total return
methodology. These indices are made up of three components: the change in
commodity futures prices; the extra return (or cost) involved in rolling
over futures contracts when they expire; and the return from investing
additional collateral in Treasury bonds.
Not surprisingly, these total return indices have done better in recent
years, thanks to the long bull market in bonds. Since 1979, the commodity
component has generated an average annual rise in the Morgan index of 4.84
per cent. The 'roll return' has added an additional 1.22 per cent a year,
and the collateral return 8.7 per cent more.
This highlights the underlying concern of many investors with commodities -
and the reason why many will continue to stay away. Real assets, be they
bars of gold or downtown office buildings, have underperformed paper
investments over a prolonged period, short-time price jumps notwithstanding.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

941108

