FT943-758

FT  28 SEP 94 / North Korea threatens to quit N-talks


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


Crucial talks between the US and North Korea on Pyongyang's suspect nuclear
programme appeared to have run into trouble yesterday as the US reported 'no
progress' and North Korea stepped up threats to pull out of the talks.
The two delegations met yesterday after consulting their respective capitals
on terms of a settlement which would give North Korea safer nuclear
technology in return for a freeze on its existing plutonium-generating
reactors and a pledge to open nuclear sites to international inspection.
However, a US statement after the talks said there had been no progress. Mr
Robert Gallucci, US chief negotiator, and Mr Kang Sok-ju, his North Korean
opposite number, will meet again today.
Earlier, Pyongyang repeated its threat to break off negotiations in response
to the deployment of US warships in the Sea of Japan. The move was
unhelpfully described last week by the commander of the US Pacific Fleet as
a means of putting pressure on North Korea at the Geneva talks.
'Now that the United States is seeking a military showdown, we cannot stick
to talks indefinitely,' a spokesman for the People's Armed Forces ministry
said yesterday.
'Our People's Army pins no hope on any dialogue accompanied by pressure,'
the spokesman said.
Although the two sides may be talking down the negotiations to gain
bargaining advantage, it is hard to discern any tangible signs of progress
on issues Washington says are vital to fleshing out the outline accord
reached last month.
Yesterday's statement from Pyongyang, carried by the official Korean Central
News Agency, said North Korea would 'never' allow special inspections of
military sites.
The US has insisted all along that at some point Pyongyang will have to open
to international inspection two nuclear waste dumps which could provide
clues on whether North Korea diverted plutonium for atomic weapons.
North Korea has also argued with US proposals for organising and financing
the provision of two light-water nuclear reactors, costing some Dollars 4bn,
demanded extra cash as compensation for abandoning its graphite-moderated
reactor programme, and refused a US offer to help ship to a third country
8,000 spent fuel rods which are mouldering in a storage pond.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940928

