FT943-13073

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: Sweeping shake-up hits the junior ranks


   By KEVIN BROWN


When the political heavyweights had emerged from Downing Street, it was the
turn of the nearly-men - the 54 Tory MPs and peers who won or lost posts
outside the cabinet.
From mid-morning, when they started arriving to see the prime minister, it
was clear that the reshuffle would be much more sweeping among the junior
ranks than in the cabinet.
In departmental terms, the biggest changes took place at the Treasury, where
three of the four non-cabinet ministers were replaced, and defence, where
two of the three junior ministers changed.
Overall, rightwingers prospered, although Mr Major also promoted some highly
regarded leftwingers.
As expected, there was no room for Lord Archer, tipped for a middle-ranking
job before news leaked recently of an official inquiry into alleged
share-dealing irregularities.
Five ministers of state leave the government: Sir Wyn Roberts, Welsh office;
Mr Tim Sainsbury, industry minister; Sir John Cope, paymaster-general; Mr
Nicholas Scott, disability minister; and Mr Peter Lloyd, prisons minister.
The first three are understood to have asked to step down. The prime
minister is thought to have sacked Mr Lloyd, a long-serving Home Office
minister, and Mr Scott, who has faced sustained opposition from the lobby
for the disabled.
The big winners are: Mr David Davis, the rightwing parliamentary secretary
for the Citizen's Charter, who moves up a rank to replace Mr David
Heathcote-Amory as the Foreign Office minister of state responsible for the
European Union; Mr Nicholas Soames, the rightwing agriculture parliamentary
secretary and food minister, who replaces Mr Jeremy Hanley as minister of
state at defence.
Miss Ann Widdecombe, the rightwing employment under-secretary, becomes
minister of state in the same department. Mr Gerald Malone, a rightwing
backbencher and former whip enters government at minister-of-state level,
replacing Mr Brian Mawhinney as health minister.
Mr William Hague, a junior social security minister, becomes minister of
state in the same department; Lord Mackay of Ardbrecknish is promoted from
the Lords whips' office to become an additional social security minister of
state.
Mr John Watts, chairman of the backbench Treasury select committee, enters
the government as transport minister of state, taking over from Mr Roger
Freeman as public transport minister.
Mr Anthony Nelson, the economic secretary to the Treasury, keeps his job,
but is promoted one rung up the ladder to minister of state.
Mr Eric Forth, the rightwing schools minister, replaces Baroness Blatch as
education minister of state.
Several ministers move sideways: Mr Forsyth replaces Mr Lloyd at the home
office; Sir George Young, the leftwing housing minister, replaces Mr Stephen
Dorrell as financial secretary to the Treasury; Mr Heathcoat-Amory replaces
Sir John Cope as paymaster-general; Mr Roger Freeman moves to defence to
replace Mr Jonathan Aitken as procurement minister.
Viscount Ullswater, the former chief whip in the Lords, becomes minister of
state at environment, replacing Sir George Young. Baroness Blatch moves to
the Home Office as minister of state, replacing Earl Ferrers, who moves to
the Department of Trade and Industry. At the lowest ministerial level, three
parliamentary under-secretaries leave the government: Mr Mark Lennox-Boyd,
who leaves the Foreign Office with a knighthood; Mr Patrick McLoughlin from
the DTI, and Mr Robert Key from transport.
There are eight new under-secretaries: Mrs Angela Browning at agriculture;
Mr James Paice and Mr Phillip Oppenheim at employment; Mr Robert Jones and
Sir Paul Beresford at environment; Mr Roger Evans at social security; Mr Ian
Taylor at the DTI; and Mr Roderick Richards at the Welsh Office. Mr Richards
replaces Sir Wyn Jones, formerly minister of state, signalling a downgrading
of the Welsh office.
Several junior ministers move from one department to another: Lord Henley
from social security to defence; Mr Antony Baldry from environment to the
Foreign Office; Mr Nicholas Baker from the whips' office to the Home Office;
Viscount Astor from the Lords whips' office to national heritage; Mr Robert
G. Hughes from the whips' office to the Citizen's Charter department; Mr
James Arbuthnot from the whips' office to social security; Mr Charles Wardle
from the home office to the DTI; and Viscount Goschen from the Lords whips'
office to transport.
Four government whips leave office: Mr Irvine Patnick, with a knighthood,
and Lords Strathmore, St Davids and Annaly. Lord Strathclyde moves from
under-secretary at the environment department to become Lords' chief whip in
place of Viscount Ullswater, who becomes leader of the Lords.
Earl Arran moves from Northern Ireland office under-secretary to become
Lords deputy chief whip; and Mr Andrew Mitchell and Mr Derek Conway are
promoted to whip from assistant whip in the Commons.
Four new assistant whips have been appointed in the Commons: Mr Simon Burns,
Mr David Willetts, Mr Michael Bates and Dr Liam Fox. Two assistant whips
join the government in the Lords: Lord Lucas of Crudwell and Baroness Miller
of Hendon.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

