FT941-3523

FT  16 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Beijing and the business of human rights -
US company fears of losing their fastest growing market


   By NANCY DUNNE


When Mr Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, confronted Chinese
officials in Beijing at the weekend on the vexed issue of human rights and
trading rights, it was the American who blinked first.
Since last June the administration of President Bill Clinton has vowed to
annul China's Most Favoured Nation trade status unless it improved its human
rights record. However, in spite of compromising noises made by Mr
Christopher as he left Beijing on Monday, China has not only failed to make
any 'significant' progress to which the secretary of state could point, it
has yet even to offer political cover for what appears to be a US retreat.
China has had dangled before it the possibility of permanent MFN status but
has remained insistent that the human rights of its citizens is its own
business. Its officials are of the view that the US needs China as much as
China needs the US. They might be right.
US companies have committed or invested Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.8bn) in
China. It is their fastest growing export market, according to Ms Pam
Baldinger, communications director of the Business Coalition for US-China
trade. The group of 1,000 companies warns that loss of China's MFN status,
and subsequent reprisals, would put all the investment at risk.
American exports to China soared by 19 per cent in 1992 and 17 per cent last
year. Most of the market is in sophisticated technology, capital equipment
and aerospace, industries which provide the high wage jobs Mr Clinton has
promised to increase.
More than anything, it is China's potential that draws hungry companies in
droves. According to the Business Coalition, the potential market looks like
this: Dollars 40bn over the next 20 years for aerospace; Dollars 90bn over
the next seven years for power generation equipment; Dollars 29bn over five
years for telecommunications; Dollars 18.2bn over three years for oilfield
and gas machinery and Dollars 4.3bn over the next eight years for computers.
Withdrawal of MFN would make a gift of these markets to European and
Japanese competitors. It would also cost US consumers an estimated Dollars
16bn they save buying cheap Chinese goods.
'Loss of MFN would poison the trade environment,' said Mr Bill Lane of
Caterpillar, which had a 20 per cent surge in sales of construction and
mining equipment to China last year. With Japanese suppliers still in the
lead, 'it's critical that MFN be renewed', he said.
American Telephone and Telegraph has been making deep inroads in China. Mr
Randolph Lumb, government relations vice president for AT&T, said the
company can generate Dollars 6-Dollars 8 through trade with its China
subsidiaries for every Dollars 1 invested there.
In Guangdong province, the company has beaten formidable competition from
entrenched companies such as Alcatel, the French telecoms equipment maker,
and Ericsson, the Swedish group, to win big switching and transmission
contracts. Its joint venture in Shanghai is the leading supplier of telecom
transmission equipment in the country.
Sales of switching and transmission systems are rising. AT&T Network Systems
has fibre optic and transmission joint ventures in China with switching and
microelectronic ventures under negotiation. AT&T Bell Laboratories is
working with the Chinese government to set up a research and development
operation in the country.
China also offers hope for the US commercial aircraft sector, which has been
hit hard by competition from the European Airbus consortium and by recession
abroad. McDonnell Douglas has been in China since 1975 selling aircraft and
producing components.
'It took 10 years to get that project off the ground,' said Mr Mark
Schlansky, a McDonnell Douglas spokesman. 'It required a great deal of
patience. Trust had to be built on both sides. Progress had to be
incremental. Now we've learned their values, and they've learned ours.'
One sector - textiles and apparel - projects gains if China was to lose its
MFN status. The American Textiles Manufacturers Institute says China has
become the largest foreign US textile supplier, but higher tariffs would cut
into its exports. It was unlikely that China's quota share would be
redistributed, the association said. The gain would be for US companies.
Most exporters anonymously fault the Clinton administration for taking
seriously the president's rhetoric on China during his election campaign.
Like Mr Cal Cohen of the Emergency Committee for American Trade, they argue
that the development of China's market economy promotes human rights more
than any other measure.
Companies complain that the administration has sent mixed signals. The
commerce department put China on top of its Big Emerging Markets list, a
strategy for pushing exports in 10 regions outside the European Union and
Japan. At the same time the president and the state department were issuing
threats.
Exporters are weary of the annual MFN renewal exercise. They hope that,
given any reasonable progress, the administration will give China a multiple
year renewal or look elsewhere for a less ruinous issue with which to put
presure on Beijing.
On Capitol Hill, where the Democrats used to assail President George Bush
regularly for not promoting human rights, sentiment has begun to shift
towards renewing MFN. 'There are too many jobs at stake,' said a long-time
congressional aide. 'The momentum now has gone the other way.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940316

