FT944-11064

FT  08 NOV 94 / Leading Article: Three weddings and a puzzle


Joint ventures between electronics companies are proliferating almost as
fast as the varieties of services and equipment they sell. What is going on?
Yesterday Siemens of Germany announced that it was teaming up with the
US-based Scientific Atlanta and Sun Microsystems to develop and market
technology for distributing telephone and information services. The US
telecommunications industry is also humming with talk that AT&T and the UK's
Cable & Wireless will try together to create a national US network for
mobile telephony.
Meanwhile, in a further round of the uneasy three-year partnership between
IBM and Apple Computer, the two companies yesterday at last announced plans
together with Motorola for a common computer design.
The impetus for such partnerships comes from the communications and
computing revolution and the explosion in the range of services offered to
households and businesses. This has been made possible by telecommunications
deregulation in many industrialised countries. But it is also driven by
technological change: the increase in the carrying capacity of channels, and
the emergence of new computer chips able to process much greater volumes of
data.
In this maelstrom, companies are battling to get their products established
as the standard with consumers and with designers of peripheral equipment.
The key to making money in the high-volume segments of electronics has
always been the ownership of intellectual property, whether the design of
hardware or software, when that configuration is adopted as the industry
standard.
Equipment standards
In Siemens' case, it hopes that its US partnerships will set the standard
for the equipment now being bought by cable operators and telephone
companies to deliver the new multi-media services.
The mooted link-up between AT&T and C&W has its eye on the new federal
licences to be allocated by the Federal Communications Commission for
'personal communications services' such as mobile telephony. Such a
partnership would be able to build a network offering a common brand image
and 'seamless' communications from region to region out of what would
otherwise be hundreds of small firms operating with different equipment.
Such hopes are clearly better pursued through joint ventures than through
takeovers, even where regulation permits. Speed is essential in securing
competitive advantage in such conditions, and the products concerned are
often only part of a company's range, hardly warranting a full corporate
merger. But such joint ventures need not be anti-competitive. They may
instead prove the only way through which an existing industry standard can
be challenged and bettered.
Industry dominance
Such is the case with the alliance between IBM, Apple and Motorola, formed
to reinvent the personal computer and to overthrow the industry dominance of
Intel and Microsoft. The three have had every incentive to make the
relationship work: the window for attacking Intel-Microsoft is wider than it
has been for years, as the Intel chip design faces more competition, and the
next version of Windows will not be launched until well into 1995.
But competitive breakthrough has proved elusive so far. Even if the trio
develops compatible hardware, it has not yet produced common software which
would let programmes run on computers designed by either IBM or Apple.
The reasons for the tensions shed light on the difficulties of many such
alliances in electronics. IBM and Apple have each believed that it has the
better ideas, both on hardware and software; each has been unwilling to
surrender independent research and development, let alone marketing. It is
an uncomfortable portrait of a marriage in which rivalry has triumphed over
common interest.
They may regret it. The opportunities available in electronics worldwide to
secure a competitive lead are unlikely to recur for years. Those companies
that form well-judged partnerships, and have the cultural flexibility to
enable them to succeed, are likely to prove the winners.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941108

