FT943-13139

FT  21 JUL 94 / Markets Report: Greenspan scares dollar


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Hawkish comments about inflation from Mr Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve
chairman, yesterday put the skids under the dollar's recent revival, writes
Philip Gawith.
In the course of his Humphrey Hawkins testimony to Congress, Mr Greenspan
struck a more cautious note than anticipated. This led to a sell-off in the
US bond market, and this spilled over into dollar weakness.
After touching a high in Europe of DM1.5781 the US currency finished in
London at DM1.5662. Against the yen it slipped back from a high of Y99.55 to
close at Y98.76. This compared to lows last week of around DM1.52 and Y97.
The Fed chairman's later comments, that a weak dollar was bad for the
economy, prompted a recovery during US trading. But by the close of the New
York session it had further declined to DM1.5638 and Y98.685.
In the UK, the pound paid little attention to the cabinet reshuffle, or to
retail sales and money supply figures. The sterling index finished at 79.3
from 79.5.
The D-Mark showed little change ahead of today's Bundesbank council meeting,
the last before the four-week summer recess. The balance of opinion in the
market is against a cut in the discount rate. Yesterday the Bank allowed the
repo rate to fall by three basis points to 4.88 per cent.
The lira managed to firm above the L1,000 level against the D-Mark, closing
at L996.3 from L1,001.
The market was surprised by Mr Greenspan's caution when he noted that it was
an 'open question' whether the Fed had done enough to head off inflation.
This was taken to mean that the Fed might not yet have reached the end of
the monetary tightening phase, and the dollar was initially bought on this
news. When bond prices started to fall, however, the dollar soon followed
suit, ending the day lower.
The other feature of the Fed chairman's testimony was his comment that the
'substantial' drop in the dollar was likely to fuel inflation, if not
reversed. This is the closest Mr Greenspan has come in recent months to
acknowledging that the weakness of the dollar might be a concern. He
appeared to be saying that the Fed would act to stop the currency falling
too low.
Mr Chris Turner, currency strategist at BZW, commented: 'This is not the
right time to sell the dollar on anything more than a one to two-month
horizon. Mr Greenspan has identified the dollar as a major factor in Fed
thinking.'
He said the dollar was probably now close to bottoming against the D-Mark,
but was vulnerable to falling further against the yen. If the month-end
deadline for progress in trade talks with Japan is not met, there is a
possibility that the US might resort to sanctions.
These views were echoed by Mr Keith Edmonds, chief analyst at IBJ
International in London. He added that the pattern of the dollar following
the bond market, though understandable in the short term, would not
necessarily persist. 'The danger to the dollar from a Fed tightening in
terms of it upsetting the bond market is fairly small.'
The December Eurodollar future traded at 94.24, sugg-esting that the market
is pricing three-month money at 5.76 per cent by the end of the year,
compared to 4.68 per cent currently.
The D-Mark had a steady day ahead of the council meeting. The repo rate cut
was in line with market expectations. Analysts are divided about what to
expect today, though only three out of 20 sampled by Reuters predicted that
the discount rate would be cut from its current 4 1/2 per cent level.
Ms Alison Cottrell, international economist at Midland Global Markets,
described the Bundesbank's dilemma: 'At only a couple of basis points off
the repo a week, the Bundesbank will finish its recess (August 18) at a
spread of 30 basis points to the discount rate - very close to its 25
basis-point 'margin of tolerance', and hence boxed into a corner by rate cut
speculation.'
She added: 'A pre-emptive discount rate cut, with no acceleration in the
pace of repo rate cuts, would make money management a lot easier.'
The problem with this theory is that when faced with a similar choice last
December, the Bundesbank chose to fix the repo rate for a few months.
Volumes in the short sterling market were low, but the December contract
lost ground to end at 93.92 from 93.97. Analysts said the market was in a
profit-taking mode following the sharp rise last week.
The market appeared to be slightly unnerved by the larger than expected M4
money supply growth, and later by the bearish implications of Mr Greenspan's
comments for interest rate policy. Euromarks were also weaker, with the
December contract closing at 95.12 from 95.17.
The Bank of England said it will today provide UK money markets with Pounds
2.454bn by way of repo and secured loan fac-ilities. In its daily operations
it provided the market with Pounds 639m assistance afer declaring a Pounds
650m shortage.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

940721

