FT941-12931

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (8): On the increase - More scope for a
specialist form of financing / Forfaiting


   By JON MARKS


   ONE form of specialist trade funding


forfaiting - could provide an increasing source of support for exporters
this year.
Forfaiters, usually operating from a separate unit within a bank, provide
non-recourse finance to exporters seeking to boost and secure foreign cash
flow. The good news is that the range of export markets for which they are
prepared to provide this service is expanding.
This essentially reflects forfaiters' perceptions of improved political and
commercial risk in a number of key markets - principally in Latin America,
the Asia-Pacific region, and eastern Europe. Funding for deals in Brazil,
China and Slovakia have all featured in forfaiters' books in recent months.
Moreover, forfaiting is also providing a way in to markets as difficult and
diverse as Romania, Vietnam and Peru. Forfaiters provide exporters with
non-recourse finance (essentially funds which are only repayable in the
event of supplier default) by buying trade debts from the exporter at a
discount. The debts are guaranteed (or, in technical parlance, avalised) by
an acceptable bank.
But despite the guarantees - and the additional practice of managing
exposure by selling debt paper in a secondary market - forfaiters must
closely monitor country risk developments. Happily for exporters,
forfaiters' risk antennae are detecting a growing number of positive
signals.
Brazil is emerging as an increasingly acceptable risk with some fundings
extending for up to five years. Forfaiters are encouraged by the country's
growth rate (over four per cent forecast as the final figure for 1993),
growing foreign reserves (now around Dollars 24bn) and positive current
account flows.
Brazil is indicative of a generally improving Latin American risk. 'Levels
of Latin American business have gone from minimal to significant,' says
Stephen Rothwell, a director of London Forfaiting Company (LFC). A leading
Zurich-based forfaiter agrees. 'The markets have totally opened up for Latin
America,' he says. China is a mounting attraction among Far Eastern risks.
Providing transactions carry the guarantee of a leading state bank - such as
that of the Agricultural Bank of China which, for example, has avalised a
five-year deal arranged by West Merchant Bank - forfaiters are happy to help
fund the country's vast imports of capital goods.
The Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland are key eastern European markets
where forfaiters are now more likely to provide funding. 'There has been a
deepening in the market in front-runners in eastern Europe,' says Mr
Rothwell.
FORFAITING RATES: PAGE 23

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940127

