FT942-14309

FT  21 APR 94 / Labour party in danger of split between generations


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   JERUSALEM


A realignment of Israeli politics appeared to be under way yesterday as the
Labour party of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin suspended three MPs for
disloyalty.
Among the three is Mr Haim Ramon, former health minister, who is forging a
political coalition to challenge Mr Rabin's supporters in next month's
elections for Histadrut - the trade union federation.
Political observers said Mr Ramon's initiative is a landmark in Israeli
politics similar to the creation of the SDP in Britain which could signal
the beginning of the end of the traditional Labour party. They also said it
would divert the government's attention from the Middle East peace process
at a critical time.
Mr Ramon, a popular politician widely touted as a future prime minister, is
contesting the Histadrut elections on an independent list supported by the
left-wing Meretz bloc, the ultra-orthodox Shas party and several members of
the younger generation of the Labour party. The two other members were
suspended for taking part in Mr Ramon's list.
Analysts say Mr Ramon intends to use the Histadrut elections to test public
support for the creation of new centre-left reform party capable of
challenging Mr Rabin and the traditional Labour party at the next general
elections due in 1996. According to newspaper reports, Mr Ramon has already
named his future party MASAD - Hebrew initials for the Social Democratic
party.
Mr Ramon's challenge has won support from many Labour activists, fed up with
the dominance of the trade unions and old guard leadership represented by Mr
Rabin and Mr Shimon Peres, foreign minister, who are both in their 70s.
Mr Gideon Samet, a political columnist for the respected Ha'aretz newspaper,
said the split was largely generational and that Mr Ramon was quietly being
supported by a substantial number of ambitious junior politicians who, for
the moment, have chosen to stay inside the party. Mr Ramon's hard-core
Labour supporters inside the parliamentary party include Mr Yossi Beilin,
deputy foreign minister, Mr Haggai Merom, head of the Knesset Committee, Mr
Avraham Burg, head of the Knesset Education Committee and Ms Yael Dayan.
'It is always a matter of timing for an ambitious group to emerge and it
will emerge even at the cost of bitter splits and quarrels with the old
guard,' Mr Samet said. 'The group headed by Ramon and Beilin is certainly
the power to be. The question is when and how and whether they will be able
to stay in the Labour party and take it over.'
Mr Ramon's challenge has caused considerable concern among senior Labour
leaders who accuse him of splitting the party and weakening the fragile
coalition which supports the peace process.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940421

