FT942-14798

FT  19 APR 94 / Race body prefers carrots to sticks: Employers play a big
part in the plans of CRE's chairman Herman Ouseley


   By ALAN PIKE


Calls from the Commission for Racial Equality for stronger powers to combat
racial discrimination may be answered by government action later this year.
The commission conducted a formal review of the 1976 Race Relations Act two
years ago and presented the government with more than 30 proposals for
change.
There was no immediate response and Mr Herman Ouseley, the statutory
commission's first black chairman, took on his post a year ago this week
aware that the government was unlikely to agree to the proposed reforms.
Mr Ouseley said in an interview with the Financial Times, however, that
discussions with the Home Office on possible changes have continued during
his first year in office. The commission had to recognise, he said, that
some changes it would ideally like to see remained unacceptable to the
government. In such circumstances, the discussions had tried to find
different ways of addressing concerns raised by the commission's review of
the act.
'I am confident that some time during the course of this year we will get a
result,' he said. 'I don't know what that will be yet, but I have to remain
hopeful. I should be extremely disappointed if we did not get something out
of it.'
The commission's review resulted in calls for statutory ethnic monitoring of
employees, with a duty on employers to adopt goals and timetables for
improving equality of opportunity in the workplace; powers for the
government to require ethnic record-keeping in housing, education and other
services; wider powers for the commission to conduct formal investigations;
a new definition of indirect discrimination; and a specific law against
incitement to religious hatred.
Since becoming chairman Mr Ouseley has restructured the commission to enable
it to work more closely with other agencies. While retaining its
law-enforcement role, he wants the commission to give support to employers
and others and to encourage good practice.
'I want us to work positively, but unless people know we have the law as a
weapon in our armoury, and that there are penalties to be paid for
discrimination, we are tooth-less.'
Ministers are believed to be particularly concerned that race-relations law
should not hamper employment prospects and economic growth. Against this,
however, there are pressures for tougher action - the recession has
increased the already disproportionate levels of unemployment among
Britain's ethnic minority communities, while racial harassment and attacks
and the political activities of the far-right British National Party have
grown.
The BNP won its first local authority seat in a by-election at Tower
Hamlets, east London, in September and is fighting hard to strengthen its
position in Tower Hamlets and neighbouring Newham in next month's council
elections. Both boroughs have high levels of racial violence and other
incidents.
Mr Ouseley said the commission wanted national and local politicians to give
a stronger lead in condemning the activities of groups like the BNP,
combined with action to tackle the social conditions in the inner cities
which provided breeding grounds for extremist organisations.
'We do not believe enough is happening except on the odd occasion when there
is a major event like the BNP by-election victory, when all the leaders come
out and say 'this is unfortunate', 'this is unacceptable', 'something has
got to be done', 'how awful it is'. And then we hear no more. There has got
to be a sustained attack on extremism, racism and racial hatred in our
society.'
The commission plans new ways of rewarding employers who pursue successful
equal-opportunities policies. Introduction of an accreditation scheme is
being considered. The commission is also supporting the work of a group of
leading companies, co-ordinated by Business in the Community, which is
examining ways of adding a racial-equality dimension to Opportunity 2000,
the campaign to enhance equal opportunities in the workplace for women.
'There are many successes,' Mr Ouseley said. 'We can spread good practice
and accelerate progress by giving accolades to organisations and individuals
who contribute to better race relations.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940419

