FT942-14694

FT  19 APR 94 / International Company News: Swiss drugs groups hit by
squeeze on prices


   By IAN RODGER


   BASLE


Ciba and Sandoz, two of the three big Basle-based pharmaceutical and
chemical groups, have provided fresh evidence of the squeeze on drug prices
in industrialised countries.
Both groups said their pharmaceutical sales were down 3 per cent in the
first quarter, Ciba's to SFr1.4bn (Dollars 962m) and Sandoz's to SFr1.8bn.
Roche, the other big Basle group, showed a greater immunity to drug price
cuts last week, reporting a 10 per cent rise in first-quarter pharmaceutical
sales to SFr3.7bn.
Mr Marc Moret, Sandoz chairman, devoted his statement in the group's 1993
annual report to the drug price issue. He argued that drugs play an
important role in cutting healthcare costs and denounced moves by
governments to cut drug prices. 'The pharmaceutical industry is fighting
disease, not exploiting it,' he wrote.
However, both Sandoz and Ciba forecast further profit growth this year. 'I
would be surprised if we were not able, as in the past three years, to raise
our profits steadily,' Mr Moret told the group's annual press conference.
Another Sandoz director emphasised that double-digit increases had been
achieved in each of the past three years.
Sandoz also forecast a rise in sales of between 5 and 8 per cent this year,
after last year's 5 per cent advance to SFr15.1bn. Ciba said only that it
expected an increase in operating profit.
Both groups said their weak overall sales performance in the first quarter
was due partly to the strong Swiss franc. Sandoz's sales were up 1 per cent
to SFr4.27bn while those of Ciba were 2 per cent lower at SFr5.58bn.
Within its healthcare sector, Ciba's self-medication, diagnostics and Ciba
Vision divisions showed modest growth while sales in Sandoz's nutrition
sector, led by Ovaltine and Isostar, jumped 25 per cent to SFr558m.
Roche will publish its 1993 results today.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940419

