FT942-15612

FT  14 APR 94 / Hamas vows more attacks in Israel after bus bomb


   By JULIAN OZANNE and GEORGE GRAHAM


   JERUSALEM, WASHINGTON


Israel braced itself for a surge of violence on Independence Day today after
the Hamas Islamic resistance movement bombed a bus in northern Israel
yesterday and vowed to turn the day's celebrations into 'hell' and make
'Zionists and settlers cry blood on their dead'.
Six people were killed and 30 wounded in the bomb attack on a crowded bus in
the town of Hadera. Many of the wounded were soldiers - the attack came
during Memorial Day for the country's forces killed in Arab-Israeli wars.
Police and witnesses at Hadera said the bomb exploded in the hands of the
Palestinian attacker as he approached the bus. The attacker was among the
dead.
The assault in the heart of Israel was the second in a week by Hamas, which
is opposed to the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and has vowed to make five
attacks to avenge the massacre of 29 Palestinians by a Jewish settler in a
Hebron mosque on February 25.
The bus bombing also coincided with a missed deadline last night for Israeli
military withdrawal from the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank town of
Jericho. Rightwing religious parties called immediately for the cancellation
of peace talks and the resignation of the government of Mr Yitzhak Rabin.
However, Mr Rabin, who called the attack a 'despicable murder', said he was
determined not to allow Islamic militants to wreck the fragile peace
process.
'I am convinced the only answer to these murderers is not to allow them to
succeed in their evil plot, which beyond the murder of Israelis is the
murder of peace,' he said.
In Strasbourg, Mr Yassir Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organisation chairman,
said the killing 'strikes at the heart of the peace process'.
But the PLO leader also launched a bitter attack on Israel, which he said
had thwarted the talks by 'mass killings, detention, imposing curfews and
isolating towns'.
By delaying implementation of the peace process, he said, Israel 'causes
these catastrophes because it gives the extremists the possibility to have a
good reason to act'.
In a letter to President Bill Clinton, however, Mr Arafat reiterated that he
'regretted and strongly rejected such actions because they are directed
against innocent people. . . .'
Although the letter did not expressly condemn either of the recent bomb
attacks, the US welcomed it as a step forward.
Hamas bombers see death as a way to heaven, Page 6; Minutiae mask the big
picture, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940414

