FT943-12993

FT  22 JUL 94 / MEPs give Santer grudging backing as Brussels chief


   By LIONEL BARBER


   STRASBOURG


The European Parliament offered a grudging endorsement yesterday of Mr
Jacques Santer as the next president of the European Commission, averting a
crisis with EU governments committed to the Luxembourg prime minister.
After a nerve-wracking climax to a debate in which newly elected MEPs
demanded to be treated as equals of the EU's governing Council of Ministers,
the parliament voted by 260 votes to 238 to support the Santer nomination,
with 23 abstentions.
Mr Santer, looking relieved, told MEPs in Strasbourg: 'I think the European
Parliament has shown itself worthy of the powers that have been given to
it.'
The lukewarm endorsement ends a period of uncertainty over the succession to
Mr Jacques Delors, but it foreshadows a broader power struggle between the
parliament and other institutions which is expected to come to a head in
1996 when the European Union reviews the Maastricht treaty.
After the vote, MEPs seemed pleased at having delivered an unambiguous
warning to member state governments to consult it in future, but mildly
relieved at avoiding an institutional crisis, which EU national governments
might have exploited to the parliament's disadvantage.
The Maastricht treaty gives MEPs the right to be consulted on the Commission
president-designate, as well as the power to reject the president and his
team after they present their programme for the next five years to the
parliament later this year.
Yesterday, during a debate in which Mr Santer's fitness for the top
executive job in Brussels was often questioned, the parliament turned the
right of consultation into a de facto vote of confidence.
Mr Santer, 57, a Christian Democrat who has served for 10 years as prime
minister of Luxembourg, squeezed through only after support from Greek,
Portuguese, and Spanish socialists who were reluctant to upset their
national party leaders at home.
He was also backed by the neo-fascists from Italy, and won overwhelming
support from fellow Christian Democrats. Many MEPs voiced unhappiness that
Mr Santer had emerged only as a compromise candidate as a result of
Britain's veto last month of Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Belgian prime minister
backed by France and Germany. One Dutch MEP called him 'a man of the past'.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister, predicted Mr Santer would be a
first class successor to Mr Delors. He acknowledged weaknesses in the
selection process, and pledged to consult more closely with the European
Parliament, which he said should develop its powers.
Before the vote, Mr Santer presented to Parliament a rough outline of the
priorities the Commission would follow during his five-year term which runs
in tandem with the newly elected parliament and begins next January.
Mr Santer said EU leaders and institutions should bridge the gulf with
ordinary European citizens, many of whom boycotted last month's European
parliamentary elections. It was vital to convince the public European
integration was unavoidable.
He also stressed the need for new economic growth in order to tackle endemic
unemployment which was undermining the fabric of European society.
New parliament means to be taken seriously, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940722

