FT944-11158

FT  08 NOV 94 / Israeli economy shows overheating signs: Fast growth may be
in jeopardy, the central bank governor tells Julian Ozanne


   By JULIAN OZANNE


Israel's economy is growing faster than expected but is showing signs of
over-heating with rising inflation, high wage agreements in the public
sector and an increase in private consumption.
Mr Jacob Frenkel, Bank of Israel governor, warned in an interview yesterday
that the government faced a serious policy challenge in 1995 to ensure
growth would be sustainable. Without a reduction in labour costs, government
expenditure and the public sector wage bill, high medium-term growth of 5
per cent a year could be in jeopardy.
'I think we have just the right conditions to justify a vigorous effort to
stabilise,' he said. 'Our economy is growing quickly, there are clear signs
of over-heating reflected both in the rapid rise of consumption and in a
growing current account deficit. Restrictive macro-economic policies are
warranted on the fiscal and monetary front.'
Mr Frenkel said the economy would grow 6.7 per cent this year, well above
the forecast of 5.3 per cent and last year's 3.4 per cent. The growth he
said was of a 'healthy variety', driven principally by private sector
activity, expected to grow 7.7 per cent, and a 16.3 per cent increase in
non-housing investment.
However a significant part of 1994 economic growth reflects a 10 per cent
increase in private consumption fuelled by civilian imports, which will
increase by 13 per cent. The trade deficit for 1994 is expected to widen
from Dollars 6bn (Pounds 3.6bn) to Dollars 8.3bn, causing the current
account deficit to grow from Dollars 1.4bn to Dollars 3bn.
'If you ask me, based on these figures, whether economic growth is
sustainable the answer is no because private sector consumption has grown at
a rate which exceeds the rate of income growth,' Mr Frenkel said.
Private consumption in 1994 has been stimulated by growing perceptions of
economic growth, the rapid fall in unemployment this year from 10 per cent
to 7.2 per cent and public sector wage increases of 10 per cent in real
terms.
Mr Frenkel said the real danger was the spill-over of public sector wage
rises into the private sector. 'If this happens it will affect profitability
and might have adverse consequences for investment and growth and will also
make the fight against inflation so much more difficult.'
Economists at the central bank are urging the government to reduce private
sector labour costs, slash its wage bill - which has risen 6 per cent this
year - and curb expenditure to ensure a continuing decrease of the budget
deficit, which is expected to fall to 2 per cent of gross domestic product
this year.
The bank is advocating a 3 per cent cut in the public workforce, which has
grown 5.8 per cent this year from 575,500 to 608,600 and says this could be
achieved by a hiring freeze.
Government action on public expenditure will be critical to fighting
inflation, now at 14 per cent. While the central bank has increased interest
rates 6.5 percentage points since last year, many economists believe it
should have acted faster. Mr Ptachia Bar-Shavit, economist at Bank Hapoalim,
said the central bank mistook the inflation trend in the summer of 1993,
which showed a seasonal reduction, and reacted slowly.
However, the central bank had to fight for tight monetary policy against
criticism from the finance ministry and manufacturers. It also says the main
contributor to inflation was housing costs, which are expected to rise 30
per cent this year. Government measures such as increased sale of public
land and re-designating land uses from agriculture to housing have yet to be
effective.
Mr Bar-Shavit said the government had not done enough to solve the housing
crisis and said the government should introduce a buy-back policy to ensure
builders operated at full capacity. He said housing costs would only come
down significantly when builders produced 50,000 new units a year instead of
the less than 40,000 units started this year.
The bank, however, says interest rate rises have contained the acceleration
of inflation. Together with the government, it has decided on an inflation
target of 8-11 per cent for 1995.
'Up to now we have contained the acceleration and now we are in the phase of
a gradual reduction towards the inflation target,' said Mr Frenkel.
Economists say the achievements of 1994 should not be underrated. Mr
Bar-Shavit said per capita income would grow 4.4 per cent, greater than the
OECD industrialised countries. Reduction in unemployment, given continuing
absorption of about 70,000 new immigrants annually, was also an impressive
achievement he said.
Export growth of 8 per cent this year partly reflects benefits from the
Middle East peace process. Exports of goods to Asia, excluding Japan, are
set to rise 25-30 per cent this year from Dollars 1.7bn in 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941108

