FT942-12330

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (18): History in the
north, bargains in the south - Alternative investments / Starting in stamps,
3 / Collectors will find fascinating contrasts in the postage of the
American continent. US commemoratives celebrate important events, while in
the Latin countries even rarities are still affordable


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The stamps of the Americas offer the widest possible choice for new
collectors. At one extreme there is the philatelic and postal history of the
US, perhaps the most collected, most researched, postage in the world. It is
of primary interest, not unnaturally, to American citizens, and the rarest
items are furiously competed for.
In complete contrast, the stamps of Latin American countries still offer
manifold possibilities. The growing prosperity of nations like Brazil and
Chile have brought some rich locals into the field, but a very impressive
collection of most South American nations can be put together for Pounds
50,000, and a good collection for Pounds 10,000. Anyone concerned about the
investment potential of stamps should look hard at Latin America.
A characteristic of US collecting is that the stamps must be perfect, not
just in the condition of the stamp but in such intricacies as the centring
of the image. One that is well centred can cost 30 times as much as a good
example which is off-centre.
Take one of the most famous, and sought-after, American stamps - the 24 cent
Curtis Jenny of 1918, one sheet of which shows this biplane upside down. If
an example of the Inverted Jenny is perfect, with the plane in the centre of
the stamp, it might sell for Pounds 100,000; if off-centre the price falls
to nearer Pounds 60,000. Not all the stamps from this rogue sheet have been
recovered, and this is definitely a stamp to look out for.
Another priority among leading collectors of American postage is sheets of
unused multiples: the bigger the block, the greater the value. In contrast,
there is also a great interest in novelties, in examples of postal history
destined for exotic locations, or involving famous personalities. For
example, the illustration shows a signed cover by the aviator Amelia
Earhart, carried by her on a flight from Mexico City in 1935 and bearing a
Mexican stamp in her honour, which made Dollars 9,200 at Sotheby's last
summer.
Stamp collecting does not have the cachet of picture collecting among the
very rich, and there are fewer wealthy buyers, so the prices of the great
rarities in any postage depends upon the number of keen affluent collectors
at any one time. The disappearance of just one big player can see the value
of rarities sink until they reach the pocket of the much more numerous group
of middling-rich buyers.
Still, the great rarities usually sell well. Last September, Christie's set
a new record for a single-owner collection of US stamps when it took Dollars
9.5m for the collection of Ryobe Ishikawa. It was one of the best American
collections to come on the market in decades, although Ishikawa was reported
to have spent Dollars 16m acquiring it in the early 1980s. One of only two
known covers bearing the first stamps issued by both Canada and the US, a
letter sent to London in May 1851, sold for Dollars 727,500, a record for an
American cover sold at auction.
But if the US postage seems over-researched, intricate, and dominated by
generations of rich American collectors, there are peripheral areas that
offer opportunities for outsiders: commemoratives, for example. The US was
first into this field, in 1893, with stamps to celebrate the voyage of
Columbus four centuries earlier. This set has always been sought after, and
might cost up to Pounds 10,000, but should prove a durable investment.
In the same way, the postage of the Civil War period, especially the stamps
produced in the southern states, retains its fascination. A stamp bearing
the portrait of the Confederate leader Jefferson Davis might only cost
Pounds 5; but the stamps produced locally, in extremis, by individual
southern cities, like Athens, Georgia, or Greenville, Alabama, are more
costly, but probably safe investments.
As in Europe, there is little interest in stamps issued in the mid to late
20th century: there are just too many of them. And many major collected
issues, like the Zeppelin series, have yet to reach the peak values achieved
in the ill-fated investment boom of 1978-81. But after some years of slow
recovery, the Ishikawa auction proved that the rich and serious players,
some of them new to stamps, had their confidence back.
In contrast, the stamps of Latin America seem cheap, and it is doubtful
whether their price will fall any lower. Price levels depend on the demand
of local collectors, and although a few of the new rich of South America are
becoming interested in stamps, even the greatest rarities are still
affordable.
Of course, South America gave birth to the most famous stamp in the world,
the one cent, black-on-magenta, ship in middle, issued in Demarara in 1857.
Despite strenuous searches by dealers only one stamp of this value has yet
surfaced, and although it looks like a dirty scrap of paper, the American
investor who currently owns it would expect offers between Pounds 1m and
Pounds 2m.
A good collection of a small American nation, like Paraguay, with many rare
early issues, could be acquired for around Pounds 15,000, but there are some
Latin American stamps that have a wide appeal.
Brazil was the third country (after the UK and Switzerland) to issue
adhesive stamps, in 1843, and its initial Bull's Eye series carries the same
attraction as the Penny Black. At a starting price of Pounds 100 for a good
example, it is twice as expensive as the average Penny Black. The
'steamship' stamps issued by Buenos Aires in 1858, before Argentina came
into existence, are rare and sought after, as are the British Guiana 'cotton
reels', which go up to Pounds 50,000, even though they are often restored.
These early stamps are expensive because, in wild and under-developed South
America, few were issued. Like all rare stamps, they are much more valuable
if still attached to letters, and the presence of many British engineers,
businessmen, etc, in Latin America in the 19th century should ensure that
many desirable items of postal history are hidden away in collections in the
UK.
For some Latin American countries, there is just one rich collector who has
probably acquired the definitive postage. If he sells, there could be
wonderful rarities on offer at reasonable prices.
David Feldman, the Zurich dealer, who represents some of the major buyers in
the stamp world, is in the process of selling the celebrated 'Lima'
collection of Brazilian stamps. The second part comes up for auction in
November. But, as in every art field, no one should buy for investment only:
interest and knowledge are as essential as money for the successful
collector.
Antony Thorncroft's concluding article in this series, in the next issue of
the Quarterly Review, will discuss the stamps of eastern Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940429

