FT944-14651

FT  21 OCT 94 / International Capital Markets: Investors shrug off changes
in Brazilian rules


   By PATRICK MCCURRY and RICHARD LAPPER


   SAO PAULO, LONDON


Foreign investors yesterday played down the potential impact of measures
announced by Brazil to limit foreign investment flows.
A 1 per cent tax on new money brought into the stock market is unlikely to
put off long-term investors, and although an increase in the tax on eurobond
issues could depress issuance, the measure could increase the price of bonds
currently on the market.
'The fixed-income measures were expected and the stock market tax was half
expected, although a lot of people thought it might be higher,' said Mr
Wayne Perkins, a vice-president at Banco Norchem in Sao Paulo.
The stock market tax is the first equities tax for overseas investors since
Brazil's stock market was opened to foreigners in 1991, and the government
can increase the tax to up to 25 per cent if it feels the situation is
sufficiently serious.
However the measure had been widely anticipated. Sao Paulo's stock market
index fell 3 per cent on Wednesday, amid speculation about what the measures
might involve, but by lunchtime yesterday it was virtually unchanged.
Foreign investors regard the tax as largely symbolic, especially when
compared with the potential capital gains for Brazilian shares - so far this
year the main Sao Paulo index has appreciated by nearly 75 per cent after
more than doubling in value last year.
'The market could probably live with 5 per cent tax but anything above that,
combined with the currency appreciation, would deter a lot of investors,'
says Mr Sergio Goldman, an associate director at Bear Stearns in Sao Paulo.
Nor do analysts expect international equities issues by Brazilian companies
to be affected. Mr Anthony Parker, head of Latin American equity sales at
Baring in London, said companies considering the issue of ADRs were unlikely
to change their plans.
Investors expect the increase in the financial operations tax on Brazilian
issuers of eurobonds, to 7 per cent from 3 per cent, to lead some companies
and banks to reconsider potential offerings.
'We'll probably see some postponements and companies recalculating their
costs, but the tax increase is probably not enough to affect the core
market,' says Mr Edvaldo Morata of ING Bank in Sao Paulo.
It will still be cheaper to raise funds on the euromarket than on the local
bond market, and the measures could lead to an increase in the value of
Brazilian dollar-denominated paper already in the market as investors
perceive 'scarcity'.
Issuers of a Brazilian floating-rate notes - the latest in a number of
recent euromarket issues - reported a positive response from the markets.
Creditanstalt launched a Dollars 50m FRN for its Brazilian subsidiary, with
the issue closing 25 basis points up from its re-offer price of 99.25, after
the bonds were freed to trade.
'I suspect this will lead to tightening spreads because of the reduction in
supply. Investors will be prepared to bid up for Brazilian paper,' said Mr
Patrick Butler, of Creditanstalt.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941021

