FT942-14818

FT  19 APR 94 / Labour launches funding plan for training


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent and DAVID GOODHART


A temporary cut in National Insurance contributions as an incentive to
companies to train workers is being proposed by the Labour party as part of
a new package to improve skills.
The party would also encourage 'investment agreements between companies and
financial institutions to encourage the funding of longer-term projects,' Mr
Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, told the annual conference of the AEEU
engineering and electrical union in Llandudno yesterday.
The package includes the party's proposals for a university of training, on
the model of the Open University, to provide opportunities for workers to
learn new skills.
Mr Brown called for reform of the National Insurance contribution system for
pensioners as part of a plan to integrate tax and benefits.
He told delegates that he favoured a statutory national minimum wage, but no
decision on the figure would be made before next year, when Labour's new
economic policy will be decided. This follows the call at the weekend by Mr
Bill Morris, TGWU general union leader, for a national minimum wage of
Pounds 4 per hour. This demand looks likely to be raised at the Labour
conference this autumn to the embarrassment of the party leadership.
Mr Brown was joined by Mr Bill Jordan, AEEU president, in calling on Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, to cut interest rates immediately. In his
presidential address to delegates Mr Jordan said that the economy was 'on
the move'. Even if it was not 'steady or confident growth', it was 'growth
nevertheless'.
In a wide-ranging address at what will be the AEEU engineering section's
last conference, Mr Jordan called for a reform of trade union structures. If
unions want a basic right to representation in the workplace, they must be
prepared to guarantee the 'single co-ordinated voice of employees'
aspirations in each workplace'.
He added that his own union had begun discussions with seven leading British
companies over establishing European works councils in them in line with the
forthcoming European Union directive on the subject. The companies are
Lucas, GKN, Smiths Industries, AC Delco, Phillips, Electrolux and Kvaerner.
David Goodhart writes: two of Britain's largest multinationals, ICI and
Zeneca, which have generally co-operative industrial relations, have refused
to talk to their main union about establishing a European works council,
according to Mr Keith Standring, national secretary of the GMB general
union.
Following the breakdown of negotiations between the European Trades Union
Confederation and Unice, the European employers' body, the European
Commission is pressing ahead with plans to impose a works council directive
on large European Union companies which operate in at least two EU
countries.
Many large companies such as ICI will be affected through their continental
operations, and it is widely assumed that they will not exclude UK employees
from such European forums for consulting with workers.
Mr Standring yesterday accused the chemical companies of a 'head in the
sands' approach.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940419

