FT944-6060

FT  01 DEC 94 / Verdict on the single market: could try harder


   By EMMA TUCKER


   BRUSSELS


Member states of the European Union must match their political commitment to
the single market with concrete action, by rapidly adopting outstanding
legislation and correctly applying those measures already agreed.
That was the message from Mr Raniero Vanni D'Archirafi, commissioner
responsible for the single market, presenting a report that will go to a
heads of state meeting in Essen next week.
'We're telling the European Council that the news on the single market is
good, but must be improved,' said Mr Vanni D'Archirafi yesterday. 'The
effects of the legislation adopted are beginning to feed through to the
market place but we cannot afford to rest on our laurels.'
The Commission has recently stepped up pressure on member states to adopt
all the legislation crucial for the free flow of goods, services, and
capital within the Union's frontiers.
The focus is now switching to a concern that some harmonisation legislation
is being badly transcribed on to national statute books, thereby distorting
the single market. At a Council meeting in Brussels next week, this issue
will be tackled. The Commission also plans once again to publish detailed
lists of which member states are the worst offenders.
Yesterday's report emphasised that the completion of the single market was
crucial to the political credibility of the Union. 'The single market
remains at the heart of our efforts to safeguard the competitiveness of our
industry, to create jobs and to stimulate economic growth,' it said.
Mr Vanni D'Archirafi had specific criticisms of the council of ministers.
So far this year it had failed to make significant progress in adopting the
few, but important, legislative measures that were still before it. In
particular, no progress had been made on the elimination of border controls
on people.
Furthermore, in certain areas adopted measures were not being implemented in
national legislation in accordance with the agreed timetables and their
application in practice was inadequate.
The Commission said it was 'vigorously pursuing legal proceedings' against
member states that have fallen behind on implementing single market
legislation.
It added: 'There is now clear evidence that many benefits are already being
widely felt from the 1992 legislative programme' (which set up the single
market). It cited the elimination of border controls for goods, the opening
up of public procurement markets, the removal of fiscal barriers and mutual
recognition of diplomas as areas where progress had been marked.
Key issues to be tackled over the next few years included giving full
freedom of movement of people and ensuring speedy and effective redress for
consumers. The Commission also intended to press ahead with adoption of a
definitive VAT regime. Progress also needed to be made on liberalising
energy and telecommunications.
Also on the agenda is the need to create a coherent regulatory framework for
the provision of new cross-border information services. Next week ministers
will discuss Commission proposals to harmonise data protection regimes
across the Union, a move which is being resisted by the UK.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

941201

