FT941-5452

FT  07 MAR 94 / Mandela calls for later registration deadline


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela said yesterday the deadline
for parties to register for South Africa's first all-race election should be
extended, after white right-wing groups reversed their earlier decision to
register for the poll.
Hard-line officials of the white, right-wing Afrikaner People's Front (AVF),
meeting Saturday in Pretoria, censured their moderate leader, General
Constand Viljoen, for registering a right-wing party for the election. He
registered an unknown party called the Freedom Front six minutes before the
midnight deadline on Friday. He was heavily outvoted in a meeting on
Saturday of the AVF executive, which declared a poll boycott.
Moderate members of the white Conservative Party present at the meeting
argued for election participation, but it was not clear whether they might
still break away and form an alternative right-wing grouping. They must
lodge a candidate list with the Independent Electoral Commission by
Wednesday, or the Freedom Front's registration will lapse.
Mr Mandela told supporters at an election rally in the northern Transvaal
town of Pietersburg that he would go down on his knees to persuade those
boycotting to take part. He said there would be no peace if some players
remained outside the election process, adding 'I am prepared to talk to
those who have refused to register. . . We must develop absolute patience
and the ability to understand the fears of others.'
He praised Gen Viljoen for his efforts to register a right-wing party,
saying: 'I am convinced he is genuine, with strength of character and
integrity.' This is praise which the general will scarcely welcome, given
charges from his own allies that he is too close to the ANC.
Merely extending the registration deadline, as suggested by Mr Mandela, is
unlikely to woo the white right to join the process. They are demanding a
white referendum to test support for their demand for an Afrikaner homeland.
At least 11 blacks were killed on Saturday night in the Bhambayi shack
settlement outside Durban in the latest round of political violence between
Inkatha and the ANC.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940307

