FT942-12564

FT  29 APR 94 / Speeding US growth enters slower lane


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


The US economy grew at an annual rate of 2.6 per cent in the first quarter,
an unexpectedly sharp deceleration after growth at an annual rate of 7 per
cent in the final period of last year, official figures indicated yesterday.
In a separate report the Commerce Department said new orders for durable
goods rose 0.4 per cent last month, the seventh rise in eight months.
Most Wall Street analysts had expected gross domestic product to grow at an
annual rate of 3-3.5 per cent from the fourth quarter of last year. Orders
were expected to rise by about 1 per cent.
The deceleration in growth mainly reflected a big increase in the trade
deficit in the first quarter, an erratic decline in government spending at
an annual rate of 6.2 per cent, and severe winter weather which depressed
several sectors, including construction.
Overall private-sector spending however grew at an annual rate of 4.6 per
cent in real terms from the fourth quarter.
The figures are unlikely to deter the Federal Reserve from signalling
further increases in short-term interest rates in coming months. Allowing
for distortions, the economy remained vigorous in the first quarter. GDP was
3.6 per cent higher than in the opening period of last year. Consumption and
non-residential investment were up 4 per cent and 12.8 per cent
respectively. The economy grew at an average annual rate of 4.8 per cent in
the fourth and first quarters combined - well above the economy's long-run
potential rate of growth.
The administration welcomed the report as evidence the economy was not
overheating. Ms Laura Tyson, the White House chief economist, said it should
calm fears 'inflation is about to spike upwards'. The data were consistent
with her projections of 3 per cent GDP growth this year and inflation of
about 3 per cent, she said.
Bond prices rose following release of the report but later declined sharply
as traders focused on an apparent increase in a broad measure of inflation.
The fixed weight GDP deflator increased at an annual rate of 2.9 per cent in
the first quarter against 2.3 per cent at the end of last year. Share prices
followed bond prices lower with the Dow Jones industrial average closing
31.23 points down at 3,668.31.
Many analysts are projecting a rebound in the growth rate in the present
quarter to an annual rate of 3.5 per cent or higher, reflecting a catch-up
of spending. First quarter figures were based on incomplete data and could
be revised substantially.
See Capital Markets, Page 30

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940429

