FT941-3507

FT  16 MAR 94 / Cabinet ministers meet for secret talks on Ulster terror


   By DAVID OWEN and MICHAEL CASSELL


A high-level committee of cabinet ministers met secretly at Westminster
yesterday as the government stepped up its efforts to co-ordinate a
convincing response to the latest wave of terrorist attacks.
Amid mounting pressure from unionists and Conservative backbenchers for a
security clampdown, powerful voices on the body - the ministerial
sub-committee on terrorism - are thought to have advised against radical new
counter-terrorist measures. They are understood to have argued instead that
talks with Dublin aimed at improving co-operation should be pursued with
increased vigour.
The committee of eight cabinet ministers, chaired by Mr Michael Howard, the
home secretary, is charged with keeping arrangements for countering
terrorism under review and dealing with terrorist incidents and their
consequences.
Mr John Major told MPs that the IRA could not bomb its way to the
negotiating table, while Downing Street hinted that moves might be put in
train to stage another meeting between the prime minister and Mr Albert
Reynolds, his Irish counterpart, before their next scheduled get-together in
June.
As a bomb planted close to Sevenoaks railway station in Kent was made safe,
the prime minister held what Downing Street described as 'an extremely
friendly and constructive' meeting on the political talks process and the
security situation with Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionists.
Mr Molyneaux later issued a tough statement describing Dublin's 'updated'
arrangements for dealing with terrorists as 'seriously flawed' and the lack
of results as 'quite scandalous'.
He dealt a blow to the government's hopes of pressing ahead with the
three-stranded talks process, saying that institutionalised structures for
dealing with north-south relations - such as those advocated by nationalists
 -would not serve any practical purpose and 'merely create suspicion'.
The two men are understood to have held a second short meeting in the
Commons yesterday afternoon.
Pressure for the government to ensure that a tougher line is taken against
terrorism north and south of the border will increase tomorrow when the Tory
backbench Northern Ireland committee meets.
At prime minister's questions the Tory MP Mr Terry Dicks, whose constituency
covers part of Heathrow airport, raised the issue of the three mortar
attacks and demanded a 'shoot-to-kill policy in Northern Ireland to enable
the security forces to eliminate all IRA terrorists'.
Separately, it was announced yesterday that Mr Molyneaux will next month
lead a four-man delegation to the US to meet senior politicians. The visit
follows criticism of the unionists for not stating their case in the US at
the same time as Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president.
Mr Peter Robinson, the hardline Democratic Unionist MP, called for 'urgent
efforts' to set up a united unionist front against the Downing Street
declaration.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940316

