FT942-12800

FT  28 APR 94 / Relaxed bank rules due for early passage


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


Measures to allow US banks to open branches freely outside their home states
could become law as early as next month after the easy passage of an
interstate banking law by the Senate on Tuesday.
Similar legislation has already passed the House of Representatives, and,
since neither chamber even required a voice vote on the once controversial
issue, a final bill is expected to be ready for President Bill Clinton to
sign before Congress breaks for the Memorial Day holiday at the end of May.
The patchwork of US banking legislation has frayed at the edges over the
years, and many restrictions on activity across state lines have already
lost meaning. All states except Hawaii already allow out-of-state holding
companies to own a bank within their borders, but groups have to establish a
separate subsidiary in each state, rather than simply opening a branch.
Automated teller machines already allow bank customers to draw money outside
the state in which they have an account, but the new law would also enable
them to make deposits or cash a cheque inside the bank.
'The lives of bank customers nationwide will improve considerably as a
result,' said Senator Christopher Dodd of Connecticut, who now supports the
bill, though for years his insistence on attaching an amendment restricting
banks' insurance activities blocked it.
Although the Senate and House versions are similar, some differences remain
to be reconciled before the bill can become law. One critical issue is the
extent foreign banks will be allowed to open branches.
Current law allows a foreign bank which chooses not to set up a full US
subsidiary to open a branch in one state only. The House version would allow
it to open branches in more than one state, but this is firmly resisted by
the Democratic majority in the Senate. Bankers in Kentucky are particularly
agitated about the issue, and opposition is led by their Senator Wendell
Ford, who is the majority whip.
The Treasury has urged Congress to allow broader foreign branching, arguing
that US banks essentially have this right in the European Union under the
'single passport rules', which allow a bank established in one EU country to
open branches in all others.
The principal bone of contention, however, is expected to be applicability
of state laws on matters such as consumer protection and fair lending
practices to national banks that set up a branch within the state.
The House version says such a branch should be treated essentially as though
it were a branch of a state chartered bank, which would mean state law could
be overridden only by Congress.
But the Senate would treat it the same way as a national bank which had its
headquarters in the state, which would give federal bank regulators the
power to pre-empt state law.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940428

