FT941-16786

FT  07 JAN 94 / London Stock Exchange: New York helps reverse early falls in
London - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The London stock market turned in a resilient performance yesterday, when
strength on Wall Street outweighed less encouraging factors on both the
domestic and international economic fronts. Trading volume remained heavy
and the second line stocks continued to attract attention. Once again, stock
index futures provided a lead as the equity market gyrated nervously.
The Bundesbank's decision to leave rates unchanged was not unexpected in
London. But it reinforced suggestions that the expected reduction in UK base
rates may be held back until the spring.
In early trading, a record close overnight in New York proved insufficient
to counter-balance a steep fall in Hong Kong and disappointing news on
Christmas trading from a leading UK high street retailer of electrical
goods. But further reports on the all-important Christmas season from the
retailing sector were more favourable, and an early loss of nearly 24 points
on the FT-SE 100 Index was swiftly reversed.
Institutions soon showed themselves unwilling to sell stock in the blue
chips and, driven forward by the March contract on the Footsie and by a
steadier trend in UK government bonds, share prices moved ahead sharply.
Second line issues also continued to attract buyers.
The Footsie 3,400 mark was soon recovered as the Index peaked for the day
above 3,407. Wall Street came in strongly again but London shaded off the
top as the Dow slipped back from its early day high to show an early gain of
6.47.
The final reading put the FT-SE 100 at 3,403, up 23.8. The FT-SE Mid 250
Index climbed 28.6 to a new closing peak of 3,849. The blue chip issues were
led forward by strong gains in leading oil stocks as investors looked for a
new meeting of the Opec countries this month which is expected to strive for
oil production cuts and higher crude prices.
But there were also strong rises among the brewers, food manufacturers and
leisure stocks, indicating that falls in these domestic sectors earlier this
week had been overdone. 'Investors are still unwilling to sell stocks,'
commented one leading dealer, 'and this is enough to keep share prices
solid.'
Seaq volume increased sharply to 1bn shares from Wednesday's 907.7m.
Although business in the Footsie listed issues was helped along by
arbitraging from the futures market, non-Footsie trading remained high,
making up around 63 per cent of the day's Seaq total.
The market, nervously wondering whether Christmas retail trade would bear
out predictions of economic recovery, was shaken in early deals by a gloomy
report from Dixons, the retail store. But the tone steadied after more
comforting news from Boots, also a high street retailer, and from Rhino
Group, the electronic games group.
Traders said the stock market was still somewhat uncertain, pointing to a
rash of bid speculation which threw up unlikely names including Reuters and
Fisons.
The derivatives markets have continued to cast a deep shadow over equities
this week, although there has not yet been any sign of further expiries of
over the counter share option (OTC) deals, which badly upset the stock
market at the end of last year. While views for the medium term remain
optimistic, some traders fear the effects of OTC deals in the near term.
Investors also appear cautious ahead of the January round of results from
leading British companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940107

