FT944-2512

FT  16 DEC 94 / Grozny defiant under Russian shells


   By STEVE LEVINE


   GROZNY


The first Russian shells fell yesterday on Grozny, the capital of the
separatist region of Chechnya, and local defenders began erecting earthworks
to try to sustain an expected full-scale assault. The shells fell on a block
of flats, as a Russian assault meant to crush the defiant Chechen leadership
neared the northern edge of Grozny. The concussion shattered all the windows
on the side of one building.
There was only sporadic bombardment of Chechnya yesterday, but the shelling
of Grozny is the latest in a series of tough Russian manoeuvres, despite
reports that Moscow extended its deadline for the surrender of Chechen
forces from yesterday by 48 hours, that appear to have alienated much of the
population.
The Chechens are too lightly armed to block a Russian assault effectively,
but their defence preparations made it appear that fighting would be bloody
on both sides.
Large numbers of Chechen defenders in crisp battle fatigues patrolled the
road equipped with Kalashnikov automatic rifles, armour-piercing grenade
launchers and shoulder-fired rockets. 'A tank is a rolling coffin,' declared
Mr Ruslan Gulaev, the commander of several dozen Chechens guarding the
highway.
Mixed in with the men were a group of commandos calling themselves the
Ghazivat, fighters who have sworn on the Koran to fight to the death. These
units are identifiable by their green headbands, and call President Dzhokar
Dudayev Imam of the Caucasus. 'When Russia started its aggression, we
regarded it as holy war,' said one. 'Our Imam appealed to the people to
defend their land and their faith. If we win, we become wealthy in the
future. If we die, we'll join Allah and be happy.'
Meanwhile, a brisk trade was going on at Grozny's weapons bazaar. One man
wanted to trade a radio for a box of grenades. Another picked up five
weapons jackets for his fighters. A third wanted to trade his Makharov
pistol for a Kalashnikov. 'I want to kill more Ivans,' he said.
At Pervomayskoi, a village just north of Grozny that has sustained the worst
of the Russian bombardment, many residents have taken to living underground.
There was no talk of surrendering arms, which Moscow has demanded. Instead,
the assault seems to have hardened the resolve to fight. 'If we surrender,
they'll start searching our houses and arresting our young people,' said one
housewife. 'They should have given us a chance to make it on our own.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

