FT943-12966

FT  22 JUL 94 / Brady in Peru bank investment: Ex-US Treasury secretary's
company in consortium


   By SALLY BOWEN


   LIMA


A company formed by former US Treasury secretary Mr Nicholas Brady is to
invest in Peru's commercial banking sector, rated a high risk while it
awaits a Brady plan to reschedule its debt.
A dearth of foreign financing, while the plan is being negotiated, has kept
local interest rates extremely high and commercial banking operations
lucrative.
Through his private US company, Darby Overseas, Mr Brady is participating in
a Cayman Islands-registered consortium which on Wednesday acquired one of
Peru's two state-owned banks.
The consortium, International Financial Holdings (IFH), this week picked up
Interbanc, Peru's fourth largest commercial bank, for Dollars 51m. IFH is
pledging to spend Dollars 30m more on modernisation and capital expansion.
The auction had been expected to attract five or six bids, with the
government saying it wanted to attract a big international bank. However,
the two front runners - Spain's Banco de Santander and Chile's Banco
O'Higgins - dropped out late last week.
Sale day brought three bids, two of them from local groups, at or just above
the Dollars 45m base price, which banking experts had considered low.
Immediately after the sale, COPRI, the government privatisation commission,
handed out a press release saying IFH had bought Interbanc, and giving
details of IFH's shareholders. In addition to Darby Overseas, the consortium
is reported to include Bechtel Enterprises, Shetland Securities, and
shareholders linked to Chile's Banco Osorno and a private pension fund from
Chile, Provida.
Under the bidding conditions, a bank had to participate or provide technical
advice or assistance. Banco Osorno itself is not part of the consortium, but
the involvement of some of its shareholders was considered sufficient.
Darby Overseas was set up a year ago by Mr Brady, his chief aide at the
Treasury, Mr Hollis McLoughlin, and Mr Daniel Marx, Argentine finance
undersecretary, who has since resigned to become managing director of Darby
Overseas.
IFH's purchase will be largely financed through a Dollars 60m (Pounds 38.7m)
private placement of notes, to be handled by Morgan Grenfell, acting as
IFH's financial advisers. The notes will be convertible to Interbanc shares
at the end of five years. Deutsche Bank is underwriting the issue.
The prime mover behind IFH, specially constituted to bid for Interbanc, is
Mr Carlos Rodriguez Pastor, Peru's economy minister in the early 1980s. The
latter has already participated in Peru's sweeping privatisation process: he
has a stake in the consortium which bought Aeroperu, the former state-owned
airline.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940722

