FT942-15997

FT  13 APR 94 / Virgin taps into US market with Delta seats deal


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


Mr Richard Branson yesterday stepped up his challenge to British Airways by
announcing a transatlantic partnership between Virgin Atlantic Airways and
Delta Air Lines, the third-largest US carrier. The deal could be worth
Pounds 150m in additional annual revenues for Virgin.
The partnership will help secure Virgin's longer-term future by enabling the
specialised long-haul UK carrier to tap into one of the biggest US airline
domestic networks, Mr Branson said.
It follows recent international airline alliances including an equity stake
taken by BA in USAir and a marketing agreement between Lufthansa of Germany
and United Airlines, the second-largest US carrier.
The Delta-Virgin deal does not include any equity investment, but Mr Branson
and Mr Ron Allen, Delta's chairman, said the door was open for an eventual
exchange of equity.
Under the partnership  - which still requires approval by the UK and US
governments  - Delta will purchase between 15 per cent and 20 per cent of
seats on Virgin flights to London from seven US airports  - Los Angeles, New
York JFK, New York Newark, Miami, San Francisco, Orlando and Boston.
Delta will independently price, market and sell the seats on flights, which
will carry Delta and Virgin flight codes.
Mr Branson said the so-called blocked-space and code-sharing agreements from
the US would provide additional revenues of between Pounds 100m and Pounds
150m a year for Virgin and absorb excess capacity on Virgin's current North
Atlantic services. Virgin expects to report a pre-tax profit of around
Pounds 10m this year on revenues of about Pounds 600m before the additional
revenues from the Delta deal, which is due to begin in November.
The scheme will not operate in the same way for Virgin passengers flying
from the UK to the US. Instead, Virgin flights to the US will link up with
conventional interline agreements with Delta flights, without full ticket
code-sharing.
Starting in July, members of each airline's frequent-flyer programme will be
able to earn and redeem points on the other.
The deal will enable Delta  - which operates a fleet of 563 aircraft and
carried 83m passengers last year compared with Virgin's 1.5m  - to offer
services under its own flight codes to London's Heathrow airport.
Delta, which currently operates flights out of London's Gatwick airport, had
been pressing the US government to negotiate a new 'open skies' agreement
with the UK to give it access into Heathrow. Under the current agreement,
only American Airlines and United can fly into Heathrow.
Delta stepped up negotiations with Virgin after Washington agreed last month
to extend BA's code-sharing rights with USAir for an additional 12 months
without securing greater access for US carriers into Heathrow.
'We still want to fly into Heathrow and we want open skies but we've also
got to play by the house rules,' Mr Allen said.
The Virgin-Delta deal comes just 10 days before a New York court hears a
Dollars 1bn anti-trust lawsuit brought by Virgin against BA.
Air France rescue, Page 24;
Observer, Page 25;
Lex, Page 26;
Links between European and North American airlines, Page 27

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940413

