FT941-5565

FT  05 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Stocks brush off fear of Federal
Reserve move - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The UK stock market rounded off a nervous week in good form as bond prices
moved higher in Europe in spite of renewed weakness in US Treasuries. Fears
that the US Federal Reserve might tighten policy again in the wake of
yesterday's employment and economic indicators were brushed off in European
markets, and sentiment strengthened at the close when Wall Street, too,
turned higher.
Share prices opened nervously but began to advance as bond markets
strengthened across Europe. The FT-SE Index was ahead by about 14 points
when the US economic statistics flashed across the screens in London trading
rooms.
The increase in US payroll numbers was only slightly above market tolerance
levels, while modest increases in earnings levels were received without
strain. US bonds began to ease but UK government securities, taking their
lead from German bonds, moved higher. Gains in share prices were extended,
although dealers stressed that trading volumes were unimpressive.
The pace quickened towards the close as Wall Street responded favourably to
benign money market moves by the Federal Reserve and by the close of
business in London the FT-SE Index stood at 3,278.0, plus 31.5 on the day.
The Dow Industrial Average was then about 20 points up.
The FT-SE 100 Index ended the week only a few points down as bond markets,
including UK gilts, have recovered confidence after the heavy falls suffered
last week. Sentiment is still nervous, but traders hope that Europe may have
disengaged itself from US factors for the time being, and that the expected
tightening of credit policy by the US Federal Reserve will not prevent cuts
in European rates. Reductions in UK base rates are still thought likely,
perhaps when the April tax increases hit UK consumers.
The UK government bond market responded vigorously to the improvement in
Frankfurt. By the close, long-dated gilts were a full point higher, with the
short dates, which reflect base rate hopes, ahead by  1/8 or so. UK traders
were impressed yesterday to see European bond markets apparently decouple
from US Treasuries, although Mr Nick Knight warned that Friday afternoon was
not the best time to make such judgments. He continues to advise selling
into strength in UK equities, and sees little immediate improvement in bond
markets in Europe.
Mr Sushil Wadhwani, at Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, fears a
further 5 to 10 per cent correction in global markets in the near term
although he still predicts 10 to 15 per cent returns on global equities from
current levels over the next year.
Interest also returned to the FT-SE Mid 250 stocks yesterday, taking this
Index ahead by 20.3 to 3,927.3, a gain of 7.4 on the week. But a Seaq
trading total of only 581m shares, against 676.1m on Thursday, indicated a
good deal of caution among the institutions. Retail, or customer, business
in equities was worth Pounds 1.41bn on Thursday, a comfortable but not
excessive level by comparison with this year's daily averages.
The stock market has seen only moderate selling pressure during the latest
setback and this week has brought clear indications that the institutions
were willing to buy stock at what several broking houses have identified as
a cheap market for equities.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940305

