FT942-14573

FT  20 APR 94 / World Trade News: Concern at Japan surplus crosses Pacific -
Asia now surpasses the US on the wrong side of that trade balance


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


Japan has become used to its troublesome trade surplus causing ructions. For
the most part the complaints have come from the other side of the Pacific.
But the latest set of figures released this week look set to cause concern
closer to home: last year, for the first time, Japan's trade surplus with
the rest of Asia surpassed that with the US. It grew 25.1 per cent during
the year ending March 31 to reach Dollars 55.95bn, compared with a surplus
with the US of Dollars 51.14bn.
The headline figure was heavily influenced by the 12.2 per cent appreciation
of the yen against both the dollar and the Asian currencies pegged to the US
currency. Even so, in yen terms the surplus rose 8.5 per cent.
A 16 per cent increase in Japanese exports to Asia, which reached Dollars
139bn, was mostly responsible. Exports to Singapore and Malaysia grew by 24
per cent each while those to the Philippines expanded 30 per cent.
China was the fastest-growing export market, up 42 per cent to Dollars 18bn.
Officially, Japan ran a Dollars 3.48bn trade deficit with China last year,
but the published figures exclude trade via Hong Kong with which Japan had a
Dollars 20.9bn surplus.
Mr Jiro Saito, Japan's vice finance minister, said the increase in Japanese
exports was partly caused by Asia's rapid economic growth. Certainly, Asia's
continuing economic growth is dragging in Japanese finished products.
Exports of Japanese electrical machinery to Asia were up 24 per cent at
Dollars 39.5bn last year, while exports of vehicles increased 18 per cent to
Dollars 15.2bn.
China and the countries in the Association of South East Asian Nations were
particularly important export markets for Japanese vehicle manufacturers.
Exports rose 46 per cent and 29 per cent respectively.
Mr Saito said the growth of the surplus with Asia had also been generated by
Japanese companies' rapid expansion in the region. Motivated by the
appreciating yen and high domestic manufacturing costs, Japanese groups
invested increasing amounts in production overseas in the late 1980s.
According to the Japan external trade organisation (Jetro), Japanese direct
investment in Asia increased from Dollars 4.87bn in 1987 to Dollars 8.26bn
two years later.
These new Japanese-owned factories, which have recently started full
production, are now having a significant impact on trade flows. The reason
is that most assemble products using imported Japanese components.
A recently published study by Jetro showed that in 1992 only 17 of the 114
responding Japanese companies operating in Singapore used eight or more
local sub-contractors. Exports of Japanese integrated circuits to the newly
industrialised Asian nations increased 30 per cent last year, while those to
the Asean countries rose 64 per cent.
'Ultimately we want to use local components,' said Sanyo, the Japanese
electrical and electronics group which has recently built a video recorder
factory in Malaysia, a battery plant in Singapore, and a home refrigeration
plant in Indonesia. 'It makes us more flexible and helps us respond to
market needs. But in the first few years that's difficult. It takes time to
build up local suppliers.'
This wave of investment, principally in newly-industrialised countries such
as South Korea and Taiwan, and in Asean nations such as Thailand and
Malaysia, has peaked. Japanese companies are now turning their eyes to
China. Direct investment collapsed after the Tiananmen square massacre in
June 1989, but from a low of Dollars 296m in 1988, Japanese investment
reached Dollars 1.07bn in 1992. More Japanese money was put into China
between April and September in 1993 - the last period for which figures are
available - than into any other Asian country.
The investments cover a wide variety of sectors. Honda, the automotive group
has announced four investments in China worth more than Dollars 77m since
1992. In the last year, Sanyo, which already had 10 plants in China, has
built three new factories capable of making commercial refrigeration units,
compact disc player components and non-CFC refrigerating chemicals.
Matsushita, the electronics group, is building a Y10bn (Pounds 65.8m) plant
to manufacture 1.5m video recorder units.
Economists believe that in the longer term Japan's surplus with Asia should
decline as its domestic economy recovers and pulls in imports. The problem
of Japanese component exports to overseas plants should also become less
acute as they increasingly use local parts. But in the short term that will
do little to pacify the critics.
The Japanese government looks as though it will have to become used to
reproaches from both sides of the Pacific for some time.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940420

