FT942-14915

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (2): Convergence remains
a fantasy - Standardising Europe's car prices is thwarted by exchange rate
turbulence


   By KEVIN DONE


A closer convergence in new car prices across west Europe will remain 'a
mere fantasy', as long as the European Union is confronted with frequent
significant exchange rate realignments, according to leaders of the European
car industry.
The latest survey of car prices published by the European Commission at the
end of last year showed that around 80 per cent of car prices from European
manufacturers and 90 per cent of Japanese car prices had differentials
across the EU of less than 20 per cent.
According to the Commission, Spain and Portugal are now the lowest price
markets in the EU, while Germany is the highest (based on prices in
November, 1993).
The issue of pan-European car pricing has been caught up in the growing
debate about the future of the car industry's controversial selective
distribution system, which allows the use of exclusive dealer networks.
As far as the European Automobile Industry Association (ACEA) is concerned,
however, it is currency fluctuations that have the 'decisive influence' on
car prices. 'Greater convergence of car prices in Europe will remain a mere
fantasy as long as the European Union is confronted with frequent,
significant exchange rate realignments and widely varying tax regimes,' the
association said in a recent statement.
This stance, broadly rejected by European consumer organisations, that are
seeking the removal of exclusive dealer networks, has been given significant
support by the latest European Commission price study.
The focus on carmakers' pricing policies across Europe is unlikely to ease
in the near future, however, as the issue of price differentials is
inextricably linked to the debate over the selective distribution system. In
mid-1995 the present 10-year 'block exemption', which controversially allows
carmakers to use a selective dealer distribution system in contravention of
European Union competition rules, is due to expire.
The exemption, granted in 1985, was conditional in part on car prices
between member states not differing by more than 12 per cent in the
long-term or by more than 18 per cent for periods of less than a year.
Before the currency turmoil in the autumn of 1992, the motor industry had
been warned by the EU competition authorities that a renewal of the block
exemption would depend importantly on car manufacturers' performance in
conforming with these limits on car price differentials.
Since the upheaval in the European exchange rate mechanism, carmakers have
been able to seize on the currency issue in their defence.
Car manufacturers' efforts to reduce price differences had not been
reflected in the prices published by the Commission, as they had largely
been offset by recent currency realignments versus the ECU, said ACEA.
These had varied from a 3 per cent revaluation in the Deutsche Mark and the
Guilder and 7 per cent devaluations of the Escudo and the peseta.
The Commission's latest study - the second of what is now becoming a regular
biannual exercise - does accept that 'car manufacturers have tended to
reduce price differentials for most of their models', if monetary
fluctuations are excluded.
When the effects of exchange rate changes are removed, about 90 per cent of
all car price differentials covering both European and Japanese models are
less than 20 per cent across EU member states, says the Commission.
The study shows that the biggest price disparities occur in the market
segments for small cars, while the price differentials are not as marked for
medium and large cars.
Spain was now the lowest price market in the EU according to the latest
Commission survey, but as recently as June 1992 it had been the highest
price market according to ACEA.
All European manufacturers have price differentials of more than 25 per cent
for at least one model, however. The widest price difference in November was
shown by the Seat Ibiza small car with a range of 41 per cent between the
prices in Germany and Portugal.
Seat, the Spanish subsidiary of the Volkswagen group of Germany, currently
has the widest price variations for identical models across the EU,
according to the latest study, with 50 per cent of its models having price
disparities of more than 20 per cent.
By contrast, the Volkswagen marque has significantly reduced its price
differences from 50 per cent of its models having disparities of 20 per cent
or more in the Commission's initial study in the first half of 1993 to only
10 per cent at the end of 1993.
Price differentials for Japanese models are on average lower than for
European models, the Commission says.
According to a recent study published by Ludvigsen Associates on the issue
of the block exemption, the present EU requirement for aligning prices
across the Union is one of the 'most difficult issues' facing the Commission
in framing a new regulation.
'Price differences of more than 18 per cent will continue for reasons that
have nothing to do with selective distribution,' says the report, Beyond
1995: The Future of Car Dealer Franchising in Europe. Rather than converging
with the single market, such exogenous factors as currency fluctuations and
national taxes are stubbornly resistant to harmonisation.'
The Ludvigsen report supports the move by the Commission to encourage
greater price transparency in the EU, however, through the biannual price
study. It suggests that the requirement for such transparency could be made
part of the regulation for a renewed block exemption.
It supports too the call from motor retailers for the practice of direct
sales by carmakers to large fleet customers to be curtailed. 'High volume
purchasers can obtain much deeper discounts from manufacturers than the
manufacturers' own dealers commonly can. Such customers include the daily
rental companies, and the contract hire and leasing companies as well as
large corporate fleet operators.
'The discounts available to daily rental companies, for example, often allow
the car to be disposed of for more than the acquisition price,' says the
report published last month.
The UK Retail Motor Industry Federation in particular has criticised the
'deep discounts which large fleet owners obtain from suppliers, which
distort the price structure for other buyers.'
The latest European Commission car price study noted that 'a general
downward trend' for car prices in the EU had occurred during 1993. It is
unclear how far this trend has been reflected in actual prices for the final
car buyer, however.
In the UK some carmakers are sharply cutting or even eliminating dealer
margins on selected new car models in a move to reduce the list prices in
particular of entry level models, the cheapest cars in a manufacturer's
range.
One of the first to take such action has been Volvo, the Swedish carmaker,
which has eliminated the dealer margin on its entry level cars and has
replaced it with a handling charge.
Volvo accepts that the actual transaction price paid by the customer on its
cheapest models has not changed, but the elimination of the dealer margin
had removed any discount and haggling, and the list price now represented
the transaction price.
'Before with discounts it was possible to get down to the prices we are now
advertising, but now we can include these prices in our list prices. We are
legitimising the cut-price deals that were being done before, but which we
could not advertise. Our dealers wanted a car below Pounds 10,000 again,
after our price increases last September had taken our cheapest cars well
over Pounds 10,000.'
Volvo has not yet decided whether it will extend the initiative in the UK to
other models. 'We are treating this as a pilot scheme. If it is successful,
we could look elsewhere in our range.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

940418

