FT943-12835

FT  22 JUL 94 / British & Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - Never
quite became 'one of us' / Maverick Gunn


   By DAVID WIGHTON


John Gunn built British & Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
Mr John Gunn, the man who presided over Britain's biggest ever financial
collapse, has never quite fitted the part.
His downbeat style and air of moral seriousness always set him apart from
the other flamboyant dealmakers who built and lost empires in the 1980s.
Yet few could match the scale of his achievements or the disaster which came
in their wake.
In a few heady years he expanded British & Commonwealth into a financial
services group worth Pounds 2.5bn only to see it fail with liabilities
Pounds 1.2bn.
The son of a Cheshire railwayman, he has never been quite accepted as 'one
of us' in the City, although at the height of his career he was the toast of
the town.
In his quiet determination and confidence in his abilities he has much in
common with his cricketing hero Geoffrey Boycott.
After studying German at Nottingham and Friburg Universities, where he met
his German wife and developed an interest in the country's literature and
stamps, Mr Gunn started his career in the foreign exchange department of
Barclays Bank in Manchester.
Eventually frustrated by his lack of promotion he moved to London and Astley
& Pearce, a small money broker.
Some 11 years later he created Exco to buy Astley from its main shareholder,
Gerrard & National.
Backing came from the wealthy Cayzer family, whose formidable reputation as
canny investors has only been enhanced by their association with Mr Gunn.
Exco was floated on the stock market in 1981 at a value of Pounds 60m. Five
years later, after a string of acquisitions, it was worth Pounds 500m.
In 1985 Mr Gunn walked out after disagreements with his boardroom
colleagues. Lord Cayzer, who had done very well out of Exco, offered him a
job at British & Commonwealth, the conglomerate controlled by the family's
Caledonia Investments.
Once the UK's largest shipping company B&C had developed into a highly
diversified holding company into which the Cayzers were trying to breathe
new life.
In 1986 Mr Gunn became chief executive, having convinced the family that the
group should concentrate on financial services.
'I can do what I want, more or less, subject to the agreement of the rest of
the board,' Mr Gunn said at the time and used that freedom for a Pounds 2bn
acquisition spree.
His first move was to buy Exco for Pounds 637m. Less than a year later he
spent Pounds 560m on Mercantile House which strengthened B&C's presence in
fund management by adding Oppenheimer in the US to its own Gartmore
Investment Management in the UK.
'We are looking to build up the largest non-banking financial services
company in the UK,' he said. But as Mr Gunn celebrated that year's Pounds 1m
pay cheque the Cayzers were looking to sell.
In October 1987 B&C agreed to buy back 25 per cent of its shares held by
Caledonia Investments for Pounds 427.5m.
The deal was based on a share price of 475p and was struck just days before
the stock market crash.
The shares quickly dropped by more than 150p and continued to fall steadily.
Three years later they were worthless.
In April 1988, at the age of 46, he received the Guardian Young Businessman
of the Year award. As so often happens, this marked the peak of his career
which started going badly wrong three months later with the Pounds 400m
acquisition of Atlantic Computers.
It is still debatable what would have happened to B&C had it not bought
Atlantic. But there is no doubt that it would have experienced serious
financial difficulty in the recession.
Mr Gunn had constructed a group highly sensitive to interest rates with a
large amount of floating rate debt.
As the economy slowed Mr Gunn tried to shore up the balance sheet with
disposals.
'I am not much good at anything else apart from doing deals,' he said at the
time.
But he proved less adept at selling companies that buying them.
An agreement to sell two money brokers to Mr Gary Klesch's Quadrex fell
through. The failure recently led to a successful claim for Pounds 172m by
B&C's administrators against Samuel Montagu. The merchant bank had provided
assurances that Quadrex had funds to pay for the deal which never
materialised.
In 1990, B&C raised Pounds 140m from the sale of Gartmore, which recently
returned to the stock market.
However, when it was forced to write-off Pounds 550m as a result of the
collapse of Atlantic, the balance sheet could not take the strain.
Its bankers attempted to mount a rescue but when the Securities &
Investments Board ordered firms to remove money from the British &
Commonwealth Merchant Bank there was no option but to call in the
administrators.
The administrators froze Pounds 300m of deposits at the bank which prevented
investment companies from complying with the SIB order. Nearly half the
deposits represented client money placed there by other parts of B&C which
included stockbrokers Stock Group.
At the time it was widely assumed that there would be little left for
creditors of the group, let alone shareholders. But the administration,
handled by partners of accountants Ernst & Young, has been more successful
that expected.
Creditors of the merchant bank have already been repaid in full.
The flotations of Celltech, a biotechnology company, and most recently Exco
have brought in more than originally projected and creditors of the group's
finance subsidiary, owed more than Pounds 700m, could eventually get 29p in
the pound. Some banks which are creditors of more than one part of the group
should get around half their money back.
And the final figures could be higher still depending on the string of legal
actions the administrators have started. Since the collapse Mr Gunn has
develop a new career as a 'business angel' investing in and helping small
companies. He also has two non-executive directorships at public companies,
Midland & Scottish Resources and Glenchewton.
He said yesterday he would continue to pursue these interests at the same
time as vigorously defending himself against the disqualification action.
'In my career I have been a director of literally hundreds of companies and
only had one problem.'
He accused the inspectors of 'errors and selectivity' in presenting the
evidence and expressed 'astonishment' at their conclusions given that they
say that he acted in what he thought was the best interests of shareholders.
'I am hardly mentioned when they describe what happened and then they go on
and blame me for it.' He also attacked the move to disqualify him and the
five others as directors which 'lumps us all together in a way not
sustainable on the evidence'.
He was particularly bitter about the criticism that the B&C directors should
have alerted shareholders to the problems at Atlantic as soon as they came
to light. 'We took what I think was the right prudent approach to try to
find out first exactly what the situation was. But in this case anything we
did would have been wrong. It was like a Greek tragedy, damned if we did and
damned if we didn't'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940722

