FT944-2550

FT  16 DEC 94 / Arts: The Immortal Hour - Music in New York


   By ANDREW CLARK


Britain's future may lie in Europe, but its cultural heritage still means
far more to Americans than to anyone on the other side of the English
Channel. How else do you explain the enthusiasm with which English music is
championed in the US?
Frank Corsaro and Leonard Slatkin have both gone out of their way to
introduce unusual repertoire to New York. Corsaro, known this side of the
Atlantic for his stagings at Glyndebourne, has a penchant for neglected
British operas. Vaughan Williams's Hugh the Drover and Delius's Fennimore
and Gerda are among his recent credits in the US. He has now produced
Rutland Boughton's The Immortal Hour at the Juilliard Opera Center, of which
he is artistic director.
It would be wrong to suggest the production was a revelation, but it made
the best possible case for an opera which - despite the praise once heaped
on it by Elgar and Bax - today seems irredeemably dated in language and
musical idiom.
Boughton (1878-1960) and his Glastonbury Festival, where The Immortal Hour
was premiered in 1914, are among the more eccentric footnotes to English
musical history. Boughton propagated Celtic mythology, socialism and
communal art. The Immortal Hour was never intended for mass consumption -
and yet a cult of popularity developed around it in the 1920s, when it had
more than 500 performances in London. The last major revival, at Sadler's
Wells in 1953, was a flop.
With its simple, folk-song style, The Immortal Hour taps the mystery and
romance of Celtic legend. That is its appeal. The music amounts to little
more than a handful of undemanding, poorly integrated themes, one of which -
the a capella chorus 'How beautiful they are' - is sometimes heard
independently.
The story, set in a forest, concerns a king who falls in love with the fairy
princess Etain. He dies after she abandons him for Midir, Prince of the
Immortals. There are echoes of Rusalka, Lohengrin, Pelleas. New Grove
describes it as a 'poignant depiction of love's inevitable ending in loss'.
Edward Dent said it was 'one of those rare operas to which an inward
surrender has to be made'.
I failed to make that crucial step, but I could not resist the mesmeric
beauty of the Juilliard production, which tapped the otherworldly,
dream-like quality of the work. Corsaro focused on essentials - poised
acting, visual atmosphere - and paced the drama with unerring skill, using
the auditorium for theatrical processions and for those distant choruses
that are so peculiar to this piece. Stephan Olson's decor consisted of
little more than a raked platform. John Gleason's lighting was exquisite,
exploiting the shady depths of the stage and throwing into relief the soft
colours of Constance Hoffman's medieval costumes.
The cast included one outstanding talent - Jon Villars as Midir. His tenor
has a big, heroic quality which projects effortlessly, while retaining a
lyrical core. The technique is good. With his giant frame, Villars seems
destined for a major career. Peggy Kriha's Etain was properly ethereal, and
there were effective contributions from Brian Nickel as Eochaidh, the tragic
king, and Jamie Offenbach as Dalua, the sinister spirit who manipulates the
drama. Randall Behr conducted the student orchestra with clear commitment.
Slatkin's anglophile sympathies need no introduction here, but it is
reassuring to note that he does not reserve them for British audiences. US
radio stations regularly play his Vaughan Williams recordings, and his Saint
Louis orchestra is a fearless interpreter of contemporary scores, including
Peter Maxwell Davies's Worldes Blis and Nicholas Maw's Odyssey.
Due to an unfortunate programme clash I was forced to choose between Graham
Vick's new Shostakovich production at the Met and Slatkin's performance of
Odyssey at Carnegie Hall. I chose the Met and was amply rewarded - but it is
worth recording the reaction to Maw's orchestral epic, which was receiving
its New York premiere. The hall was well-filled, but there was a steady
exodus throughout the two-hour performance. The New York Times critic said
he was jealous of those who left, and characterised the score as 'a mighty
parliament with no majority'. Newsday described it as an ungainly beast
which 'only a mother could love'.
That probably says more about American conservatism than the inherent merits
of Maw's music, which is scarcely calculated to appeal to minimalists. But
there was unanimous praise for Slatkin and his orchestra, whom I heard the
following evening in Mahler's Third Symphony. Carnegie Hall is halfway
through a two-year Mahler cycle. Slatkin's clean, efficient performance may
have gone down well in Saint Louis, but it did not have the personality
which the occasion demanded in New York. The drama of the first movement was
matter-of-fact; the finale lacked depth and expression. Only the mezzo
soloist, Nancy Maultsby, seemed truly inspired.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

941216

