FT942-15959

FT  13 APR 94 / Merger stance upsets defence industry in US


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


A Pentagon review of the application of anti-trust law to mergers in the
shrinking US defence industry is disappointing companies in the sector.
Although the report calls on the Justice Department and the Federal Trade
Commission to take the Pentagon's views into account when they assess the
anti-trust implications of a proposed defence industry merger, it stops
short of recommending changes to existing laws or regulations, and rejects
exempting the defence industry from anti-trust rules.
The US defence industry has been shrinking steadily as the Pentagon's
procurement budget has fallen from its peaks in the early 1980s. Top
officials such as Mr William Perry, defence secretary, and Mr John Deutch,
his deputy, say they expect a further one-third contraction over the next
five years.
But some companies complain that the consolidation of their industry needs
has been held up by the inappropriate application of anti-trust rules to the
sector.
Industry executives were particularly concerned when the Federal Trade
Commission in 1992 blocked the acquisition of Olin Corp's ammunition
division by Alliant Techsystems, on the grounds that the merger would create
a monopoly supplier of 120mm shells used in the Abrams tank and of 30mm
lightweight ammunition used in the Apache helicopter.
Some defence industry analysts say the Pentagon could very well have swayed
the FTC, but did not in fact argue very strongly in favour of the
Olin-Alliant merger.
Critics of the FTC's intervention say, nevertheless, that it ran against the
reality that in many military fields there is now only room for a single
supplier, and that the Pentagon - itself a monopsony or single buyer - is
well able to defend itself against price-gouging.
Anti-trust officials argue, however, that they have shown considerable
flexibility in assessing defence mergers and have, in fact, objected to only
1 per cent of such deals over the last decade.
Big mergers such as Northrop's Dollars 2.2bn (Pounds 1.5bn) recent agreement
to buy Grumman or Martin Marietta's takeover last year of the General
Electric aerospace division have not drawn anti-trust objections.
See Editorial Comment

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940413

