FT941-5699

FT  04 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Closing rally leaves share prices
little changed - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The stock market remained very nervous yesterday but regained confidence
towards the close when UK government bonds recovered early losses. The
Bundesbank's decision to leave key lending rates unchanged failed to upset
investors and the mid-afternoon low point in the UK stock market reflected
weakness in both US Treasuries and on Wall Street.
The final reading on the FT-SE 100 Index of 3,246.5 showed a loss of only
1.6, compared with a fall of just over 17 points recorded earlier. The rally
in London reflected a somewhat belated response to firmness in other
European markets.
Markets remained confident that short-term interest rates will be 'nudged
lower' across Europe. Optimism was unaffected by the absence of a move by
the Bundesbank yesterday, since any dramatic move in Germany had seemed
unlikely in the wake of the jump in money supply disclosed on Wednesday. Nor
was the stock market affected by the comment from the chief secretary to the
UK Treasury that 'the government is content with current economic
conditions'.
But institutions were cautious ahead of the US payroll statistics, which are
due today and could provide the trigger for the further tightening by the
Federal Reserve of which markets are still in fear. Reports that the US had
decided to reinstate the Super 301 trade order for sanctions against Japan
came too late for the London market.
Seaq turnover dipped to 675.8m shares from Wednesday's 762.9m. But the total
of retail, or customer, business in equities for the previous session rose
to Pounds 1.84bn, an indication that fund managers may be coming round to
the view, expressed by James Capel, London's leading agency broker, that the
equity market is 'a buy' at current levels. Other brokerage houses have
expressed similar advice; NatWest Securities seeing a 'buying opportunity'
and BZW 'exaggerated fears'.
Modest support across the broader range of the market took the FT-SE Mid 250
Index ahead by 5.2 to 3,907.0. There was demand for consumer stocks,
including brewery and media issues. But further substantial losses were
recorded in the financial sector. Merchant banks and those lending banks
with securities dealing subsidiaries continued to suffer as investors
weighed the possible losses in markets over the past fortnight.
By the close of business, around 40 per cent of the shares in the Footsie
100 list were showing gains, albeit mostly minor ones, and the market looked
more confident than for some time.
Traders commented that the institutions had been selectively buying stocks
in which the falls of the past two weeks appeared to have been overdone.
The market continued to track both stock index futures and bond prices
closely and showed little inclination to develop any trend independent of
these two mentors.
The opening of the market this morning is expected to depend largely on the
overnight performance of Wall Street, which was 12 Dow points down when
London closed last night.
Some strategists pointed out that European bond markets, which have made the
running for equities for the past fortnight, may be disengaging themselves
from trends in the US Treasury securities - but agreed that this theory will
be tested today when the US payroll statistics arrive.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

940304

