FT943-13287

FT  20 JUL 94 / UK Company News: MMS pays Pounds 57m for BAe's satellite
side - Merged group will have turnover of Pounds 750m and employ 4,200 in
France and the UK


   By BERNARD GRAY and JOHN RIDDING


Matra Marconi Space, the satellite joint venture between GEC-Marconi and
Matra, yesterday confirmed that it was buying the satellite business of
British Aerospace.
Talks have been held over the past two years and MMS is paying Pounds 57m
for the business which had a turnover last year of Pounds 151m and made a
profit of less than Pounds 5m. It employs almost 1,000 people at Stevenage
in Hertfordshire and Filton in Bristol.
The merged group will have a turnover of Dollars 1.14bn (Pounds 750m) and
employ 4,200 at sites in Paris, Toulouse, Portsmouth, Bristol and Stevenage.
No redundancies will follow the deal, and Mr Armand Carlier, MMS chief
executive, said that the company was short of technicians and engineers. BAe
has, however, halved the workforce in its space business in the past two
years.
BAe Space is being sold with net assets of Pounds 57m, including freehold
land in Stevenage and Pounds 20m of cash which is principally customer stage
payments which will be used to fund work in progress. The deal will not
require MMS to write off any goodwill, and is being funded from its cash
resources.
The order book of the combined company will be slightly more than Dollars
2bn. The principal projects include the Skynet 4 D/E UK defence satellites,
the Telecom 2C/D French civil/military satellite and the ERS 2 European
radar observation satellite.
There have been on and off discussions between the companies for some time
and serious negotiations for the past six months. Mr Noel Forgeard, chief
executive of Matra Defence Espace, the space and defence arm of Lagardere
Group, said the deal would confirm Matra Marconi Space as Europe's leading
space company and its largest satellite manufacturer.
Mr Dick Evans, chief executive of British Aerospace, said the sale of the
space systems business was a further step towards concentrating the
resources of BAe on its principal businesses in defence and aerospace. 'This
agreement is a logical development in the consolidation of the space
industry in Europe.'
Each of the sites is likely to specialise once the companies are integrated,
with Bristol concentrating on science projects such as the polar platform,
and Stevenage concentrating further on military satellites such as the
Skynet.
BAe and Matra have also been in discussions about the merger of their
military missiles businesses for the past 18 months. Mr Forgeard said that
negotiations with British Aerospace concerning the merger of the missile
divisions were 'well advanced', adding that he hoped for an agreement by the
end of the year. 'Most of the difficult points have been overcome,' he said.
'But we cannot give a precise prediction of the timing.'
It is understood that the missile businesses will be merged on the basis of
a 50:50 joint venture, but BAe will have to make a cash payment to Matra
because Matra has the larger order book. Negotiations over the value of the
order books and size of the payment are continuing.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940720

