FT944-14424

FT  22 OCT 94 / Arts: Early works of a genius - William Packer on
Michelanglo at the National Gallery


   By WILLIAM PACKER


The National Gallery's admirable series of study exhibitions, Making &
Meaning, focussing on particular works in terms both of the artist's
intentions and techniques, continues with a look at the early career of
Michelangelo. The period in question is the very end of the 15th century and
Michelangelo's first extended working visit to Rome.
He arrived from Florence in 1496, aged 21 yet already free from his early
apprenticeship in the studio of the brothers Ghirlandaio, Domenico and
David. His five-year stay was to see not only the confirmation of his
stylistic independence as a painter, but an astonishing burst of activity as
a sculptor and a sequence of masterpieces - the Bruges 'Madonna and Child',
the Rome 'Pieta', the 'Taddei Tondo' from Florence and the 'Pitti Tondo'
from the Royal Academy, all represented here in casts of the highest quality
 -that established him at once as an artist of the first rank and the
fullest maturity.
Sculpture took him back to Florence in 1501, to carve the monumental
'David', and it was sculpture that had brought him to Rome in the first
place. Having been advised to pass off a carved 'Sleeping Cupid' as an
antique, he learned that his Roman dealer had cheated him and so set out to
claim it back. He failed, and the 'Cupid' ended up in the hands of Isabella
d'Este at Mantua, along with a genuine antique of the same subject. It has
long since been lost, passing perhaps into the collections of Charles I and
destroyed in the Whitehall fire of 1698. Who knows? Two such similarly
exquisite 'cupids' are in this exhibition, one a Roman fountain-head of the
2nd century, from the Uffizi, the other a 16th century pastiche from Corsham
Court.
It is tempting but over-fanciful, no doubt, to take this last for the lost
Michelangelo. What is certain is that questions of false attribution and
dissimulation hung about him even at the very outset of his career. Small
wonder then that they do so still. The paintings, rarer than the sculpture,
have always been the more problematical. Only three panels are known from
Michelangelo's early career, of which the Uffizi's 'Doni Tondo' of the Holy
Family, tentatively dated about 1504, is the only one complete and
undisputed.
The other two, both of them unfinished, are in the National Gallery's own
collections. The earlier of them, from around 1497 and painted in egg
tempera, is known as 'the Manchester Madonna' and clearly carries with it,
if not the mark, at least the influence of Ghirlandaio. That is not to say
that it is not entirely authentic to Michelangelo. The easy, graceful
naturalism of the Virgin's gesture is alone enough to affirm the presence of
a younger hand and a fresher eye, to say nothing of the simple, sculptural
monumentality of the composition as a whole. The comparisons in detail with
the sculpture are conclusive. That has not stopped certain scholars from
proposing the existence of a corpus of work by a shadowy 'Master of the
Manchester Madonna'. This theory is immediately scotched, however, by direct
comparison with an example from Vienna of this putative master. There is no
comparison.
But it is the mysterious 'Entombment', dated about 1500 to fix it to a known
commission for an altarpiece for Sant'Agostino and painted in oil, which is
the greater puzzle. A drawing from the Louvre of a kneeling nude is
supposedly a study for the figure of Mary at the lower left of the
composition. A lone scholar has suggested it is not by Michelangelo at all,
and he has a point. For while this study is close enough in spirit, it
displays an openness and almost awkward linearity in its working that is not
quite up to the denser and more fluid modelling of Michelangelo.
But does a single dodgy drawing call into question the authenticity of the
entire painting? Was a drawing by someone else never useful to an artist? Do
inconsistencies in the handling and the drawing suggest anything more than
that one artist accepted help from another? Does lack of documentary
reference to a work, that was clearly full of formal problems and no less
clearly left off abruptly, necessarily require its removal from the canon?
Such arguments do seem so often to be put forward in a spirit of all or
nothing, when the probable reality was something altogether more practical
and mundane. Paintings take time, ideas shift and change, things go wrong.
My own view is that 'the Entombment' is a magnificent failure in a time when
the sculpture was going from spectacular to glorious success. It was not to
be until the Sistine paintings of only a few years later that Michelangelo
would be able finally to resolve, in terms of painting, the easy yet
monumental naturalism that he had already achieved in such sculptural
marvels as the 'Pieta'. The comparisons passim, between the paintings, the
sculpture and the ceilings soon to come, effectively make the point.
Making & Meaning - the Young Michelangelo: The National Gallery, Trafalgar
Square WC2, until January 15. In association with Esso UK.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

941022

