FT944-10943

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (5): From macro to micro - Harvard economist
leads call for change of tack - Stefan Wagstyl explains the significance of
the Porter Report


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


Almost everyone in India can tell a story about the country's economic
inefficiencies. Faulty telephone lines, flight delays and power cuts are
part of daily life for most middle-class Indians. They complain and propose
solutions, but rarely does anyone attempt to analyse these problems in a
systematic way.
Economists, both Indian and foreign, have concentrated their attention on
the country's macro-economic performance, and have spent less time looking
at the nuts and bolts of industry and commerce.
The Confederation of Indian Industry, the employers' organisation, has tried
to restore the balance by sponsoring a three-year study which focuses on the
competitive position of Indian companies. The study, which was completed
last month, was carried out by Professor Michael Porter of Harvard Business
School, an international authority on competitiveness, and his associates,
Professor Pankaj Ghemawat and Mr U. Srinvasa Rangan.
The authors' message is that, having achieved macro-economic stability
following the 1991 balance-of-payments crisis, India should now concentrate
on micro-economic reforms to promote internal and external competitiveness.
They call on the government to remove barriers to free markets, to private
state-owned industries, to permit employers to cut redundant labour and
concentrate public spending on the greatest needs, namely education and
poverty-alleviation.
Mr Porter, who delivered his conclusions in a lecture to businessmen last
month, urges India to focus on income growth and not indulge in arguments
over income distribution which are no more than 'struggles to split chapatis
(Indian breads) which result in shrinking them'.
The study calls on the government to act quickly saying that India now has a
window of opportunity, with the favourable impressions generated overseas by
the post-1991 reforms. 'We need another burst of reforms, a collection of
things that add up to something significant as was the case with the
decisions taken in 1991.'
Mr Porter has run into criticism from government officials and some
businessmen who have retorted that there is nothing new in his
prescriptions. Mr Porter was the first to admit that many of his specific
proposals have already been discussed in India. But his message carries
weight because it is supported by an unusual amount of analysis and
comparative data drawn from India and from its leading economic rivals,
including China, Indonesia and South Korea.
Mr Porter's main recommendations are:
Improve the environment in which companies compete. Like other economists he
urges India to invest in infrastructure - unlike most of them, he puts as
much, if not more, emphasis on improving the efficiency of existing
infrastructure as on building new capacity. For example, he says India's
power shortages could be solved simply by raising generation and
distribution efficiency, including cutting theft and corruption.
Raise education standards. Mr Porter says that despite pockets of
excellence, India's education levels are poor. 'You can't have a productive
economy if most of the people in a factory can't read and write.' The
globalisation of markets and the spread of technology mean that India cannot
rely on cheap labour for international competitive advantage because the
value of unskilled labour is falling. India should invest in skilled
manpower and the application of high technology to all industries. 'There
are no low-tech industries. There are only low-tech ways of competing,' Mr
Porter says, contrasting India's primitive shoemaking industry with Italy's
advanced one.
Promote competitiveness. As well as exposing Indian companies to
international competition by reducing trade barriers, the government must
promote internal rivalry between Indian companies. It must break monopolies,
including state-owned ones, and cartels, encourage inter-regional trade and
specialisation and use government procurement policies to promote quality
rather than quantity of production. The government should also act to end
unnecessary secrecy, which blocks the free exchange of information. 'India
is unique in difficulty in accessing information.'
Mr Porter argues that foreign companies have a role in importing capital and
technology. But they should not be done at the cost of reducing competition.
He questions whether the government has been wise in extending
counter-guarantees to private groups which are planning to invest in power
generation.
He says it is 'axiomatically wrong' to guarantee returns in a free economy.
He also doubts whether it was correct last year for Coca-Cola, the US drinks
company, to have been permitted to buy Parle Exports, India's biggest
producer.
The study also has some tough advice for Indian companies:
Stop being opportunistic. Too few Indian companies have strategic plans, say
the authors, and prefer to grasp at business chances as they appear. Without
long-term planning they cannot hope to compete internationally.
Focus the business. Companies are over-diversified and over-extended through
vertical and horizontal integration. Instead of trying to do everything they
should concentrate on the business segments where they have the greatest
competitive advantage.
Formulate clear plans for exports. Export markets need long-term commitment
in production and marketing. Foreign alliances should not be ends in
themselves but designed to achieve specific targets.
The authors believe, based on the experience of other countries, that it is
crucial for India to develop clusters of competitive industries, on the
lines of Italy's shoe industry, where there are strong links between shoe
manufacturers, machinery makers and design studios. The successful diamond
polishing industry, for example, should progress from processing small
stones to large ones and diversify into jewellery

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941108

