FT943-790

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (12): Move sooner
rather than later for the best deals - Property / The effects of recovery


   By SIMON LONDON


Companies planning to open a head office or relocate in Europe will be able
to drive a much harder bargain than this time last year. The cost of
occupying prime office space in most city centres has continued to fall, and
the European rentals index compiled by Jones Lang Wootton fell by 5 per cent
in the year to the end of June.
Indeed, since the peak in 1991 the index has now fallen by 23 per cent. The
excesses of the late 1980s have been paid for in full, so that, in real
terms, European rental costs are now back to the levels of 1987.
But the overall figures hide a wide range of performances. Rents in
Barcelona have fallen by more than 20 per cent over the past year, and in
Brussels by 16 per cent. Yet prime London office rents were stable during
that period.
This partly reflects the fact that national economies were at different
stages of the cycle. But office markets which were most overheated during
the boom years have inevitably suffered most in the downturn. Rents in
Barcelona rose six-fold between 1983 and the end of 1990, vastly outpacing
the European average, but have almost halved since then. In contrast, office
rents in Amsterdam rose much more slowly through the 1980s, and have barely
changed during recession.
Yet the latest survey evidence suggests that prime office rents have now
stabilised in most European markets as recovery has started to take hold.
Although agents do not rule out further slippage in the second half of this
year, if the pace of economic recovery disappoints, companies looking to
relocate will probably get the best deals by moving sooner rather than
later.
Despite the ravages of recession, JLW's survey of occupancy costs - which
includes net rents, service charges and local taxation - showed that London
is still Europe's most expensive office location, only a shade behind Hong
Kong and Tokyo in the world pecking order. The fashionable 8th arondisement
of Paris is not far behind, even though overall Paris rents have fallen by
12 per cent in the past year.
Perhaps surprisingly, Moscow, Warsaw and Prague are also among the most
costly tier of European office locations: at Dollars 1,000 per square meter,
the cost of prime office space in the Russian capital is not much less than
in London. Strong demand from tenants and a shortage of quality office space
is the underlying reason for soaring occupancy costs.
It remains to be seen what effect big new developments will have on rents in
such emerging office markets. For example, Warsaw's 20,000 square meter
Atrium Business Centre is now under construction, with the first phase
scheduled for completion early next year. While at least one substantial
pre-letting has already been agreed, the full development will greatly
increase the city's stock of office space.
The pace of development in established European business centres is much
slower. With little new supply coming on to the market, the office vacancy
rate in central London has fallen from 14.8 per cent to 11 per cent in the
past 12 months, according to Knight Frank & Rutley. Against that background,
rents for new or well refurbished offices are already showing signs of life.
Although London is ahead of continental European cities, a similar story of
falling vacancy rates and at least stable rents is likely to emerge
elsewhere over the next year.
Still, prime office rents give a distorted view of occupancy costs.
Companies looking for industrial, as well as office, space will find some of
Europe's biggest industrial cities offer surprisingly good deals. The
average cost of industrial space in Antwerp, Rotterdam, Barcelona or Milan
is considerably less than Dollars 100 per square meter - against Dollars 219
in Paris and Dollars 169 in London.
But even property specialists concede that cost and the availability of
suitable office space are not at the top of the list of priorities when
companies are choosing a business location. A survey of 500 European
companies by Healey & Baker found factors such as transport links,
telecommunications and the cost and availability of staff were given a
higher priority. Such formal surveys also miss the intangible reasons that
lie behind relocation decisions: all property agents tell tales of business
locations chosen for the proximity of a golf course.
Thus while London and Paris are among the mostly expensive cities, they also
rank among the most highly regarded in terms of transport links (although
Frankfurt came top of the list in this regard) and telecommunications - and
probably hotels and shopping, had the respondents had been asked. That helps
to explain why the companies questioned still viewed London as offering the
the best value for money, despite its high costs.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940927

