FT942-12840

FT  27 APR 94 / Dhaka business halted by strike: Bangladeshi PM under
pressure


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   DHAKA


Dhaka, the Bangladeshi capital, was brought to a halt yesterday by the
second general strike in a month called by opposition parties in an effort
to put pressure on the government of Mrs Khaleda Zia, the prime minister.
The parties are calling for an early general election under a caretaker
government well before Mrs Zia's term expires in 1996. They want to take
advantage of what they see as waning support for the ruling Bangladesh
National party, which fared badly in municipal elections last month in Dhaka
and Chittagong, the second city.
Mrs Zia, widow of the murdered former president, General Zia ur Rahman,
shows no sign of acceding to demands of the opposition - the Awami League,
headed by Sheikh Hasina, daughter of Sheikh Mujib ur Rahman, Bangladesh's
independence leader, and the Jatiya party of the former president and
military dictator, General Hossain Ershad, who was overthrown in 1990 and is
now in jail on corruption charges.
Diplomats say much Bangladeshi politics consists of feuds between Mrs Zia,
Sheikh Hasina and Gen Ershad's followers in which policy differences are
unimportant.
Nevertheless, the recent council elections showed some voter opposition to
Mrs Zia's economic policies - especially a World Bank-endorsed
liberalisation programme which includes plans for cuts in state-owned
industries.
Opposition parties claim that, because the government was defeated in the
council polls, the Bangladesh National party will try to rig the general
election. They argue that the fact that the 1990 poll won by Mrs Zia was
fought under a caretaker government is a useful precedent. A senior aide of
Sheikh Hasina argues that caretaker governments are a good way of ensuring
fairness and stability in a young democracy.
Businessmen fear that the strikes are already disrupting trade and
undermining efforts to promote the country among foreign investors. While
Bangladesh receives large amounts of foreign aid - commitments of about
Dollars 2.2bn (Pounds 1.5bn) a year - it gets very little private
investment.
Mr Mahbub Jamil, president of the Foreign Investors' Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, says: 'We are still concerned about basic things such as law and
order and government stability, so how can we hope to attract investment?'
Unfortunately for the government, the recent spate of unrest has coincided
with two events which might have generated positive international publicity
 -Mrs Zia's economic mission to Japan, the largest aid donor, in late March,
and the laying of the foundation stone in early April for a Dollars 700m
bridge across the Jamuna river in central Bangladesh, the country's largest
ever investment.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

940427

