FT941-3554

FT  16 MAR 94 / Ciller to pay at polls for cash crisis: The Turkish
government's first political test after presiding over a sharp fall in the
lira and a liquidity squeeze


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


Turkey's prime minister, Mrs Tansu Ciller must have told them their cheque
was in the post. That at least is how one observer explains the gloomy faces
of Turkish motorway contractors when they left a meeting with the prime
minister still owed seven months in payments.
After less than a year in office, Mrs Ciller's conservative-led coalition is
facing a desperate search for cash to meet its ongoing expenses.
It is a problem that will almost certainly affect the performance of Mrs
Ciller's Truth Path party (DYP) in municipal elections across the country on
March 27.
Turkey is in the middle of the most damaging financial crisis since the
banking collapse of the early 1980s. After a decade of capital market
reform, recent currency turbulence has underlined just how vulnerable the
economy is to policy error.
With interest rates on government paper having risen to 125 per cent and the
international bond markets for developing country debt suffering the jitters
in the wake of the rise in US rates, Turkey is finding it increasingly
costly to borrow. Privatisation receipts have not been as large as
projected. Meanwhile, most of the tax changes recently introduced will not
have an impact on revenues until 1995.
The government's problems deepened last week when it was forced to 'pull'
its Dollars 750m global bond issue. There are civil servants and public
works contractors to pay, farm prices to subsidise, and debts to service,
and bankers are worried a big liquidity crunch is on the way.
The road builders are just the latest creditors to come knocking on the
government's door. The contractors had to settle for a package of tax relief
and three-year bonds in lieu of the Dollars 700m owed for work completed.
The work programme for 1994 has been sharply curtailed.
The government's response to the crisis and the run on the lira has been far
from convincing. Sir Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, during a
visit to Ankara last month, urged the Turkish authorities to introduce
austerity measures to underpin the gains from the 12 per cent devaluation in
January.
Instead Mrs Ciller set alarm bells ringing by suggesting Treasury bill
liabilities should be converted into new five-year paper, in effect a
domestic rescheduling.
What was puzzling was the Treasury's announcement that it is to issue
convertible bonds in the state telecom company, even though the telecom
company is still not privatised and all moves to prepare it for sale remain
blocked by the courts. There were even press reports, quoting government
officials, that undercover agents had been ordered to infiltrate the money
markets in the belief that it was Kurdish separatists who were trying to
destabilise them.
The crisis reflects the loss of local and international confidence in Mrs
Ciller's leadership. The bold rhetoric that accompanied her appointment has
never been matched by the reality of her policies. Her reformist instincts
have been frequently blocked by opposition from her coalition partners, the
Social Democratic Populists.
'Everyone has lost out,' said one disillusioned Turkish businessman.' The
central bank's reputation has been damaged, so has the Treasury's. Reserves
are depleted. And the small investor has got badly burnt.'
Polls suggest that in the municipal elections on March 27 Mrs Ciller's DYP
will limp in a poor fourth behind the Motherland party Anap, the main
opposition party, the Social Democratic Populists, and the Islamic based
Refah RP.
The election is the first real test of Mrs Ciller's popularity since she was
voted party leader by the DYP congress last June.
A professional economist and a political outsider, Mrs Ciller seemed to
offer the best hope of restoring the country's fortunes and forging its
western identity. Today if Mrs Ciller survives the current turmoil, it will
probably be less the result of any real political achievement than the fact
that the DYP is unable to find a credible alternative leader.
Her policies, centred on finding ways to finance the budget rather than
addressing the need to bring the deficit to heel, are attacked by leading
economists. Her attempts at more structural changes, such as pushing through
large-scale privatisation, tax reforms and curbing civil service pay rises,
have been limited because of divisions in her coalition and have done little
to ease budget pressures.
Also criticised has been her management style on which the resignations of
two successive central bank governors have been blamed. What was seen as her
mishandling of the 12 per cent devaluation in January badly dented the
bank's prestige. Moreover central bank reserves have fallen by as much as
Dollars 3bn since the beginning of the year to about Dollars 4.5bn early
this month.
Some bankers say Mrs Ciller has in large part brought the troubles on
herself. The local bond market has all but dried up as a direct result of
her unorthodox and ultimately failed attempt to push down domestic bill
rates. The current uncertainty has pushed rates on government paper up 30
points since the second half of 1993. Even at 125 per cent for one-year
paper, there are few buyers. As one banker put it: 'It's no longer enough to
have an interest rate policy. Something more is needed.'
After 7 per cent growth in 1993, forecasts for this year are being marked
down. One western economist says Turkey could see negative growth in 1994,
making it even more difficult for business to rebuild.
In such a climate, said one economist, bankruptcies would be unavoidable,
particularly for those dependent on government payments, such as
contractors. Banks too, will feel the pinch, caught out with large foreign
exchange exposure at a time when the lira's depreciation is accelerating.
Today Turkey displays all the symptoms of an economy where inflation is
heading out of control. No one wants to hold lira. On pay day, Turkish civil
servants rush to the exchange shops. Even divorces are sometimes settled in
hard currency.
Some foreign banks worry the lira could fall even more sharply unless a
serious structural reform programme is introduced.
Few Turkish observers hold out much hope of that in the current political
uncertainty.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940316

