FT941-3583

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (21): Financial magician's
stockpicking tricks fail to astonish - Jim Slater's latest book is an easy
read, writes Philip Coggan, but the information it contains scarcely seems
to justify the cover price / Personal finance


   By PHILIP COGGAN


Investment Made Easy: How to Make More of Your Money
By Jim Slater
Orion, Pounds 24.99
328 pages
Old figures from the 1970s are gradually being rehabilitated. Jimmy Carter
is now perceived as a well-intentioned soul, Abba songs are enjoying a
revival, even Richard Nixon is being granted elder statesmen status.
So perhaps it is unsurprising that Jim Slater is making a comeback. At one
time, his reputation as a financial whizzkid seemed irredeemably tarnished
by the collapse of the Slater Walker conglomerate in the mid-1970s.
Now he has a stock-tipping column in the Independent, and this is his second
investment book in two years. Indeed, Mr Slater, for whom the word chutzpah
might have been invented, has already devoted an entire Independent column
to plugging this book.
The good news is that his latest book is, by the standards of the genre, an
easy read. The bad news is that the information it contains scarcely seems
to justify the cover price. The first half is a trot through the highways
and byways of personal finance. This is fine as far as it goes, but can be
obtained better (and cheaper) elsewhere.
To be fair, what Slater has to say about endowment policies (he doesn't like
them) is very sensible. Perhaps a greater surprise to the newcomer is that
such a renowned stockpicker has so many kind words to say about
index-tracking funds. Nevertheless, one doubts whether many people will want
to pay Pounds 25 to receive his thoughts on such subjects.
I am sure the main appeal of a book from Slater is the belief that he has
the knack of picking wonder stocks. In this sense, his labyrinthine
wheelings and dealings in the 1970s, which prompted so much criticism at the
time, may just add to his appeal as a financial magician.
Such investors will turn to the second half of his book, headed 'More Active
Investment', for the section on shares. What they will find is a boiled down
version of Slater's previous book, the Zulu Principle (to which he makes
repeated references). Those who have read the earlier book - published for a
more modest Pounds 18.99 - will not need to read this again; Slater
enthusiasts are probably better off with the earlier tome.
Of course, one might argue that Pounds 25 is a snip if the reader can
discover the secret of successful stock market investment. But will they?
Slater's main enthusiasm is for growth shares - companies with a long record
of strong earnings growth. He emphasises the PEG, the relationship between a
share's prospective price-earnings ratio and the company's expected earnings
growth rate. The aim is to find companies with PEGs of less than 1 - that
is, where the expected growth rate is higher than the p/e.
Growth stocks can, of course, be highly profitable. The problem is that they
command a high price, and if their earnings disappoint, the fall in share
price can be both sharp and swift. Stock markets can be temporarily dazzled
by such companies, so relying on prospective p/es and forecasts for earnings
growth can be dangerously misleading.
Slater himself refers to the dangers. At one point he writes: 'During 1993,
after some painful investment experiences with shares like Sage and Micro
Focus, I decided to avoid investing in any further computer software
companies.' What he does not mention is that Sage received quite a lengthy
write-up in the Zulu Principle, and that both stocks were tipped in his
Independent column. Bad luck on those who followed his earlier advice.
Other stocks tipped by Slater may have done well. But as a quick test of his
methods, I looked at the performance of the six shares which would have been
picked out of the FT-A 350 Index in May 1993, on the basis of Slater's
criteria: Betterware, Inchcape, Rentokil, Rothmans, Tibbett & Britten and
Wellcome.
While Slater says, 'I want to make it clear that I am not recommending the
purchase of any of these shares', this is largely because circumstances will
have changed between May 1993 and the time the reader buys the book.
Nevertheless, since he spends much space trumpeting the method, it seems
reasonable to ask how well those shares have performed since May. The answer
is, not very well. In the nine months between May 1 and February 1, 1994,
the six shares rose by an average 3.83 per cent (after allowing for some
tricky calculations on Rothmans); over the same period, the All-Share Index
was up by 25.6 per cent.
Of course, someone using Slater's methods today might easily produce a
portfolio of outperforming shares. The point is, not that formulaic
stock-picking methods cannot work, simply that they cannot work all the
time. So do not read Slater's books and columns for the stock tips, but for
the financial analysis they contain. And hope they publish a cheap
paperback.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940315

