FT944-11014

FT  08 NOV 94 / UK Company News: GEC and BAe talks led to 'standstill'
agreement


   By BERNARD GRAY, Defence Correspondent


GEC and British Aerospace negotiated a two-year agreement in July 1993
barring either company making a hostile bid for the other, as part of
friendly discussions on a merger of all of their defence interests.
The 'standstill' agreement does not expire until July 1995, and contains
clauses forbidding either company from talking about the deal.
In the competition between the two companies to buy VSEL, the shipbuilder,
GEC asked the takeover panel, which governs City deals, to force BAe to
disclose the existence of the standstill agreement. It is understood GEC
wanted the pact made public because it felt that it has a material impact on
the value of the shares BAe is offering VSEL shareholders.
The panel considered submissions from GEC and BAe and declined to act.
Unless such agreements have a direct financial impact on either company, the
panel is reluctant to force disclosure. There is not thought to be a
requirement to disclose the information under Stock Exchange rules either.
Both companies made confidential financial information available to each
other in 1993, including management reports and long-range profits
projections. BAe insisted that in return for providing the share-price
sensitive data GEC should accept a standstill.
BAe refused to confirm or deny the existence of the agreement yesterday. 'We
have many contracts with GEC all of which were freely entered into by both
sides,' said Mr Richard Lapthorne, BAe's finance director. 'However, we do
not comment on any specific contracts.' GEC also declined to comment.
The standstill agreement is apparently considered to be legally binding by
both sides, and firmly prevents a hostile bid by GEC for BAe until the
middle of next year.
'Unless Lord Weinstock (GEC managing director) is prepared to make a bid and
defy the BAe board to waive the standstill in shareholders' interests, he
cannot move,' said one financier close to the deals.
GEC has made no secret of its interest in merging BAe's defence operations
with GEC-Marconi, the company's defence arm. However, Lord Weinstock's
well-known caution means that he is reluctant to act without complete
information.
Since BAe had had well-known financial difficulties in 1991-1992, GEC was
keen to gain as much information as possible on BAe.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941108

