FT942-15781

FT  13 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Interest rate optimism dented before
the close - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A strong first half to yesterday's trading session in the London stock
market ran out of steam well before the close when bond prices turned down
both in Germany and the UK. The FT-SE 100 Index gave back about two-thirds
of its early gain but the broader market remained very firm and trading
volume was the highest for several weeks. Hints that a large rights issue
was in the offing circulated at the close of trading.
Investors focused again on the chances of a cut in interest rates in Germany
when the Bundesbank meets tomorrow. Hopes were raised when the German
central bank confirmed that today's money market repo tender would again be
at a variable rate. Markets quickly reflected hopes that the repo rate would
fall again, opening the way for a reduction in the Bundesbank's key interest
rates.
But optimism cooled later as markets came to the conclusion that the
Bundesbank may lower the Lombard rate but is less likely to cut the more
significant discount rate until after the IMF meeting at the end of the
month, at which global interest rates are expected to be discussed.
Towards midsession, the Footsie was 31.1 ahead at 3,180.7, encouraged by
gains of around half a point at the long end of the gilt-edged market. The
principal hurdle of the day was cleared when the US producer price index for
March showed a gain of 0.2 per cent, in line with analysts' targets on both
sides of the Atlantic.
But London became less settled as German bonds softened and Wall Street
drifted easier to show a decline of 7.14 on the Dow Average in UK trading
hours. The gain on the FT-SE 100 Index was whittled away to give a final
reading of 3,159.1 for a net gain of 9.7.
Market pundits were pleased to see the market close above 3,150 on the
Footsie scale and also noted that the FT-SE Mid 250 Index had remained solid
to finish 28.8 ahead at 3,808.3. However, there was some disappointment at
the return to volatile trading in both equities and gilts.
Trading volume was boosted by a succession of deals in one of the market's
small and usually thinly traded stocks; nevertheless, the day's Seaq total
of 906.2m shares represented a 50 per cent increase from the previous
session. Monday's retail, or genuine customer, business in equities was
worth Pounds 1.35bn.
Higher trading volume in equities this week has featured the London market's
return to full-powered trading after a three-week period overshadowed by the
approach of the Easter weekend and the end of the UK tax year, both tending
to inhibit fund managers from taking up new investment positions.
Once again, the market had to make progress without much support from such
major sectors as pharmaceuticals and banks. Oil shares, which have sustained
an advance for several sessions, were on the sidelines yesterday, although
the exploration issues featured in the rights issue rumours at the close.
The stock market has now bounced back by around 2.4 per cent from the low
point of pre-Easter trading, when investment confidence became badly
unsettled by fears that the US Federal Reserve might be about to tighten
credit policy more harshly than European markets would be able to absorb.
Today brings the latest consumer price and retail sales statistics from the
US and could provide a further test for market sentiment.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

940413

