FT944-10969

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (12): Pivotal issue
is pension plans - Europe / A look at the crucial question affecting
investments


   By GILLIAN TETT


If you believe the optimists, Europe could, in the long term, be on the
verge of an investment revolution. If you listen to the pessimists, though,
the short-term outlook suggests that investment liberalisation across the
European Union is still lagging behind many other parts of the world.
Either way, as European fund managers evaluate their long-term investment
strategies, few doubt that the crucial question that could shape capital and
equity markets in coming years will be the direction taken by Europe's
pension systems.
The issue has become increasingly controversial in recent months following
the collapse of the European pension funds directive. A pivotal aim of the
directive, first proposed by Sir Leon Brittan, the British commissioner,
back in 1989, was to create a more liberal investment structure in Europe's
pension system, in keeping with the principles of the single market.
Pension systems across the EU are a patchwork of different practices. The UK
and Ireland, for example, are dominated by funded pension systems. France's
pension structure, however, is based around a 'pay-as-you-go' system.
Meanwhile, Germany's system is dominated by a book reserve system, in which
the pensions liabilities are held on the balance sheet of sponsoring
companies.
These different systems have resulted in radically different investment
profiles. In the UK, which has relatively few controls over the degree of
portfolio diversification, domestic equities accounted for more than half of
the pension fund assets in 1993, while international equities represented
about a quarter of the assets, and domestic bonds forming less than a tenth.
But in most of the other European countries, the bulk of assets is directed
towards domestic bonds, with considerably lower net returns - albeit greater
security.
In Germany, for example, legislation stipulates that private pension funds
cannot hold more than 5 per cent of their assets in overseas equities. In
practice, in 1991 international assets represented less than 1 per cent of
German funds, with domestic bonds accounting for some 70 per cent.
Meanwhile, in France, the proportion of assets held in domestic bonds has
been steadily increasing, from 53 per cent in 1983 to 62 per cent in 1993,
while international investment in equities is non-existent.
The pension fund directive had the potential to radically change this
situation by forbidding member states from imposing low ceilings on both the
extent of overseas investment and investment in equities. Because UK fund
managers have greater expertise in equities and in cross-border investment,
they could have a competitive edge in winning mandates under the proposed EU
directive.
But though an outline agreement over this directive was in sight by the end
of last year, the stumbling block was the question of how far countries
could stipulate that pension schemes' overseas assets should be matched with
comparable levels of domestic liabilities.
The liberal 'three' of the UK, Ireland and Netherlands - who together
account for 93 per cent of overseas pension fund investment in the EU -
favoured little, or no restrictions.
Belgium appears to be joining the liberal wing and is preparing to abandon
the requirement that at least 15 per cent of assets be invested in domestic
government bonds.
But at the opposite end, there was little interest in encouraging pension
schemes to invest outside their home borders. Countries such as France
demanded a tougher 'currency matching' requirement of 80 per cent.
The European Commission sought to reach a compromise level of 60 per cent,
pointing out that this should be sufficient even in 'liberal' countries such
as Britain. (The Frank Russell group in London, for example, suggests that
the optimum level for international investment for a British scheme, for
example, will usually be between 30-50 per cent).
But, in practice, no agreement was reached, and this summer the directive
was scrapped. The Commission insists the initiative is not entirely dead,
and says it will still seek to pursue its aims for greater liberalisation by
other means. One of these may be taking countries to court to enforce the
Capital Liberalisation Directive and other provisions in the Maastricht
treaty which prohibit barriers to the freedom of movement of capital. But
the legal force of the Capital Liberalisation Directive remains uncertain,
since it includes a 'prudential requirements' provision which states that
liberalisation is only enforceable if there are adequate prudential
safeguards for investment across the entire EU.
The events are a blow to many British fund managers, who had been hoping for
a captive market for their business across Europe. But how far the demise of
directive alone has altered the longer-term development of European
investment remains unclear.
On the one hand, cynics point out that even if the directive had come into
force it would have been unlikely by itself to have forced much overnight
change in the conservative behaviour of continental European pension fund
managers, which leaves many of them favouring the security of bonds.
But, on the other hand, irrespective of the collapse of the directive, it
appears that many European countries are anyway gradually moving towards
pension reforms that may incorporate greater liberalisation and privately
funded bias.
The main reason for this is demographic pressures, as the rising numbers of
pensioners pose an ever greater burden on the working population. The
Federal Trust, a British think tank, for example, calculates that if the
current pension system is not altered, public expenditure on pensions over
the next 40 years will rise by more than 30 per cent in Belgium and the UK,
40 per cent in Germany and Italy and a staggering 70 per cent in France.
These trends are already forcing some shifts. This summer the French
parliament passed a bill allowing for the establishment of private pension
funds for the self-employed. Proposals are being considered for wider
reforms, though these are unlikely to receive serious consideration until
after the French presidential elections next year. And though few observers
expect any rapid switch out of domestic bonds into overseas investment, the
prospect is creeping on to the agenda.
'The question of investment into equities or bonds is a very big topic at
the moment,' says one fund manager in Paris.
In the longer term, if countries such as France or Germany do shift towards
an Anglo-Saxon model the potential impact would be staggering. Philip Davis,
an economist who has previously worked at the Bank of England, for example,
believes that if French pension funds were to reach the size of UK funds,
they would total Dollars 235bn.
The equivalent development in Germany would create Dollars 400bn worth of
assets, compared to the Dollars 355bn total capitalisation of the German
stock market.
A shift of this magnitude, Mr Davis concludes, could have a huge
significance on global markets. 'Heightened volatility and lower returns on
equity are among the potential consequences,' he says.
Meanwhile, in the short term many British investment institutions are
already edging into Europe. Andrew Dalton, vice-chairman of the UK Mercury
Asset Management group, for example, says that his group has recently
established a presence in Germany to work within the areas of German law
which allow them to offer their services, primarily to the corporate sector.
'The demand is coming in the market place for the product - it is clearly
something that must grow,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

941108

