FT942-16288

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (4): New faces, same
policies - Chile


   By DAVID PILLING


The faces of Chile's new administration may be different but the policies
remain the same. President Eduardo Frei, who in March took over the helm of
an economy that has averaged 6 per cent annual growth over 10 years, has
stressed that continuity will be the abiding theme of his six-year
administration.
Less than 48 hours after donning the presidential sash, Mr Frei was
addressing a conference of international business leaders, acknowledging the
part foreign capital had played in driving export-led development and
inviting fresh participation. Foreign investment in 1993 reached record
levels of Dollars 2.7bn, 6 per cent of GDP.
Unlike in some other Latin American countries, most of these inflows were
neither short-term nor attracted by state sell-offs. Much was directed at
medium- and long-term projects, principally in the mining and industrial
sectors, while nearly Dollars 800m came through the purchase of American
Depositary Receipts (ADRs) issued in New York by private Chilean companies.
Such levels of investment testify to confidence in the soundness of Chilean
macro-economic fundamentals. These include foreign reserves of Dollars
10.3bn (more than a year of imports), regular budget surpluses, inflation
(though slightly stubborn) at 12-13 per cent and south-east Asian levels of
savings and investment at 21 and 27 per cent respectively. According to Mr
David Lubin, an economist at Samuel Montagu recently in Chile: 'Anyone not
impressed by these figures is just trying to be clever.'
One area that has prompted some concern, though, has been the widening
current account deficit which reached Dollars 2.1bn last year, nearly 5 per
cent of GDP. This was largely caused by falling prices for raw material
exports and surging demand for imports which together produced a trade
deficit of Dollars 978m, the first in nearly a decade. Mr Lubin, however,
says Chile's ability to sustain the deficit through foreign investment,
without increasing the debt stock, is convincing evidence of economic
health.
Furthermore, expectations that the deficit would widen this year are
beginning to look pessimistic, with the first two months of 1994 showing a
slight trade surplus.
Chile, which trades nearly two thirds of its GDP, is also witnessing the
internationalisation of its financial system. Eight Chilean companies are
actively traded in New York through the ADR mechanism and more than 10
others are hoping for international placements this year. Foreign interest
in Chilean paper helped to drive up the Santiago exchange last year: the
IPSA index of most-traded shares recorded real gains of 50 per cent.
Mr Eduardo Aninat, the new finance minister, is committed to continued
international integration though the promised opening up of the capital
account will be undertaken 'tremendously cautiously'. Mr Aninat points to
progress made through recent capital markets reform which permits trading in
new instruments and allows private pension funds to invest a greater
proportion of their Dollars 16bn assets abroad.
Chile also hopes to polish its image through a free trade agreement with the
US, either bilaterally or through accession to the North American Free Trade
Agreement (Nafta). Mr Aninat hopes a deal can be struck by 1995. By then,
Chile should also be a part of the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation (Apec)
bloc, a region that accounts for a third of its exports.
Signs of Santiago's growing confidence, reflected in last year's triple
B-plus country risk assessment from Standard and Poor's, has attracted
foreign investment to increasingly long-term projects. British Gas and
Houston-based Tenneco Gas, which are negotiating participation in a Dollars
1.65bn project to pipe natural gas from Argentina, do not expect to recoup
their investment for 20 years. Until recently, such long-term strategies
would have been unthinkable.
Chilean copper deposits, the richest in the world, are also a magnet for
foreign capital. Last year a US/Canadian consortium of Cyprus Amax and Lac
Minerals agreed to pay Dollars 555m for 51 per cent of the El Abra deposit
which they estimate will require Dollars 1bn development costs. Although
there are difficulties, the large sums on the table demonstrate the premium
Chile is reaping for political and economic stability.
Few analysts disagree with Chile's belief that there are few obstacles in
the medium term to sustained annual growth of 6 per cent, though in the
coming year this is expected to fall to 4-4.5 per cent.
If anything, opportunities for the foreign investor should increase. The new
administration, which has set a Dollars 33bn target for investment in
infrastructure by 2010, will be looking for substantial input from private
capital. President Frei has also hinted that the stalled privatisation
process may be revived, though the biggest prize of all, state copper
company Codelco, is for the moment strictly off limits.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940411

