FT944-5831

FT  01 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Norilsk problem helps drive up
nickel prices


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


Nickel prices yesterday jumped to their highest level for two and three
quarter years, helped by fresh fears about production problems at Norilsk in
Russia, which is the world's biggest producer and accounts for about 15 per
cent of total output.
The market's concern about Norilsk's situation was echoed by Mr David Allen,
vice-president for public and government affairs, at Inco of Canada, the
Russian group's biggest rival. He said that in recent months Inco had
changed its assumptions about Norilsk's ability to maintain production at
last year's level. 'Our own visits, and everything we read, suggests Norilsk
will not be able to do that.'
The Russian group was so short of money it was failing to pay its workforce
for weeks on end and cannibalising equipment to keep going. 'You can't go on
for long like that without costs increasing and output falling,' said Mr
Allen.
Norilsk needed 'a huge amount of capital and there is no sign that it is
getting any'. It did not collect much from the recent shares issue. He
pointed out that, in the longer term, Norilsk would have to do something
about its enormous environmental problems - its smelters are among the
world's worst polluters.
Inco signed a technical assistance protocol with Norilsk in February 1993
but this had 'got absolutely nowhere', said Mr Allen. 'It is very difficult
to conduct relations with them. They have shown no interest.'
He said Inco helped Norilsk, at the Russians' request, by organising a
teach-in in Toronto about privatisation. This involved western bankers and
consultants invited by the Canadian group. 'Yet today they (Norilsk
executives) sometimes won't answer telephone calls or faxes from us.' Mr
Allen said the relationship between the two groups was 'not hostile, but it
is not particularly productive'.
Mr Allen was in London following the formal inauguration this week of an
Pounds 8.5m nickel coating facility at the group's refinery in South Wales.
Yesterday's market concerns about Norilsk helped to take the price of nickel
for delivery in three months to Dollars 8,200 at one point where it met
strong resistence. Nevertheless, it closed at Dollars 8,157.50 a tonne, up
Dollars 332.50 on the day and Dollars 637 above this week's low point.
Worries continued to focus on the after-effects of an accident at a power
plant supplying the group in northern Siberia early last month. Traders in
London suggested early yesterday that about 25,000 people had been
evacuated, pipes had frozen at the smelter and Norilsk's line carrying
concentrate (an intermediate material) was out of action. Norilsk insisted
that it would honour its commitments to customers and a Norilsk city
official told the Reuters news agency that heating to homes was being
maintained 'at a low but acceptable level'.
However, about 32,000 people in the small Arctic town of Talnakh, 25km north
of Norilsk, were without heating or water because of a water pipeline break.
Repairs were almost completed, an official insisted.
Inter-Tass news agency said that in Murmansk, on the Kola Peninsula, only
one-third of the required heating was delivered to houses because of the
heavy debts - totalling USDollars 62m - owed to energy producers.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941201

