FT941-12810

FT  28 JAN 94 / Property: Ministers in a muddle - Planning and transport
policies must be better co-ordinated


   By STUART ROBINSON


In a bid to appease lobby groups concerned about the threat to town centres,
Mr John Gummer, UK environment secretary, last week fired a salvo against
out-of-town developments.
Putting the heart back into cities 'means discouraging development on
green-field sites on the edge of cities', he said in a speech to the Town
and Country Planning Association, a group of business and planning
interests.
Mr Gummer promised to consider revising PPG6 - a planning guidance note
issued in October 1992 which stresses the need to revitalise town centres
rather than promote out-of-town stores - if developers' proposals and the
response of local authorities failed to reflect its broad thrust.
Mr Gummer's message was clear but it was patently counter to the approach
taken by other ministers in the DoE, the Department of Trade and Industry
and the Department of Transport.
His position is in contrast to the DoE's long-standing policy of supporting
out-of-town proposals. Last year, Mr Tony Baldry, environment minister,
stated that PPG6 did not constitute a shift in policy for town centres and
retail developments. In another speech, Mr David Curry, planning minister,
advocated the need to promote sites on the periphery of towns.
This apparent confusion over out-of-town development is symptomatic of a
deeper problem in government policymaking: the chronic lack of co-ordination
between its planning and transport policies.
The case for co-ordinating transport and land-use planning goes back 30
years to the publication of the Buchanan report on the long-term impact of
traffic growth. One of the report's chief conclusions was that land-use
development needed to be planned in conjunction with road and public
transport provision.
Shortly afterwards, the DoE was created to oversee both planning and
transport functions. This was reinforced by several other innovations in
strategic thinking that brought planning and transport under the same wing.
However, this new approach was never properly implemented. The DoE was
separated from the Department of Transport, and land-use and transport
planning became increasingly independent of each other.
The division between land-use and transport was epitomised in the
development of London docklands. Encouraged by the Thatcher government,
which rarely put transport at the top of its agenda, the LDDC was forced to
attract jobs to docklands with little thought given to the provision of
public transport.
The chickens came home to roost when it was realised in the late 1980s - at
the height of the property boom - that in one development alone there was
enough office space to house 55,000 workers who would be serviced by a light
railway that could only accommodate 11,000 passengers an hour. This anomaly
eventually led to a government announcement last October to extend the
Jubilee line, linking Docklands with central London.
Another example of the split between transport and land-use planning is the
transport department's decision to proceed with plans to widen the western
sector of the M25 to 14 lanes, where policy constraints such as the need to
preserve the green belt, are at their greatest.
This contrasts with policy in the East Thames corridor which covers large
tracts of east London and the Thames estuary - an area suffering from
problems such as unemployment.
In spite of the government's claim that it is trying to promote growth in
east London, there has been little obvious progress on public or private
transport schemes in the region. This is partly due to the appalling
confusion arising from 'on-off' decisions on projects such as the Channel
Tunnel rail link, the East London river crossing or Crossrail.
Too often, public transport schemes have to depend on securing private
sector funding. This demand is not imposed on road building, which arguably
enhances property values still more. When the private sector is asked to
look at road or rail schemes, the plethora of choices and the uncertainties
of government policy make a constructive response difficult.
The transport secretary, Mr John MacGregor, and his cabinet colleague Mr
Gummer must tackle this inconsistency of approach towards transport and
planning policy. If they can then they will go a long way towards helping
the government attract private-sector finance. They must:
set out which modes of transport they favour;
prioritise the infrastructure projects needing finance;
indicate the complementary pattern of urban development schemes they favour;
and
ensure that this approach is followed through by both their departments and
local authorities alike.
Investors cannot work in a vacuum. They need a framework and not a black
hole. And this framework must be shown to work.
The author is head of planning at Hillier Parker, a firm of chartered
surveyors

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940128

