FT941-4074

FT  12 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: A mystery explained - Bonds


   By MICHAEL DYSON


Trading Eurobonds is a major part of the way institutional investors operate
but, contrary to popular belief, the market does not exist purely for their
benefit.
As Eurobonds offer some of the best yields available, every investor should
consider them. To prove anyone can acquire them, I visited the City branches
of several large clearing banks and asked their share-dealing services if I
could buy, and hold, a Eurobond through them.
They did not make it easy - but the problem seems to be that few people know
what a Eurobond is, let alone how to deal in one.
Bonds are simply a loan from the investor, in return for which there is
normally a fixed rate of interest and a fixed repayment date. In the
meantime, the loan can be bought and sold in the same manner as shares. The
most common example is UK government bonds, or gilts.
The prefix 'Euro' originated late in the 1950s when eastern European
countries transferred large amounts of dollars from American to European
banks. In 1993, Pounds 21bn worth of new issues were launched in sterling
alone, approximately 10 times as much as non-Eurobond issues.
Eurobonds trade in bearer form: that is, the share certificates are like
cash and the holder of the bond is assumed to be the owner. Each certificate
has coupons attached representing the interest payments; these must be
removed and presented for payment.
With a weekly turnover of more than Dollars 100bn, it is not practical - or
safe - for each buyer and seller to exchange their certificates in person.
Most stockbrokers overcome this by settling via one of the two main Eurobond
clearing houses - Euroclear (Brussels) and CEDEL (Luxembourg)  - but there
are charges for doing so. Eurobond dealing and handling charges generally
are higher than for gilts, but the impact on yields declines with larger
orders.
All bond markets have seen extreme turbulence recently; as a result, bonds
have produced negative returns of up to 8 per cent in 1994. The positive
side is that income-seekers can achieve high yield levels that have not been
available for months.
Michael Dyson is a director of BZW Capital Markets Ltd. This is a
market-maker and cannot deal with private clients direct. Readers interested
in buying bonds should approach a broker.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940312

