FT944-2427

FT  16 DEC 94 / EU ban on milk hormone extended


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


European Union agriculture ministers yesterday agreed to extend a ban on the
controversial milk-boosting hormone bovine somatotrophin (BST) for cows
until the end of the decade following widespread resistance to the product.
Mr William Waldegrave, agriculture minister, was alone in voting in favour
of the synthetic hormone, despite strong consumer opposition to its use in
Britain.
BST, which is produced by Monsanto and Eli Lilley, the US biotechnology
companies, is an artificial version of a naturally occurring hormone in cows
which enhances milk output.
Mr Waldegrave said scientific evidence supported the use of BST. Consumers
and animal welfare activists are concerned about its effects, including an
increase in the incidence of mastitis in cows.
There was some confusion over the wording of the Council of Agriculture
Ministers' final decision on BST. Monsanto said the council had agreed that
some farmers could make limited commercial use of the hormone in order to
gain practical experience of its effects. UK government officials said this
would be restricted to field trials.
The product received approval in the US six months ago and since then it has
been used by 10,000 dairy farmers on more than 800,000 cows, Monsanto said.
The European Commission was concerned about the economic damage that could
be done by increasing milk output at a time when quotas are in place to
limit production. The ban on its use will now last until the milk quota
restriction runs out at the end of 1999.
The commission has agreed to prepare a report on further scientific trials
by 1998. Consumer groups have called on the commission to prevent any milk
produced as part of the trials from entering the food chain.
Monsanto said there was no reason why milk produced using BST should not be
sold to consumers. The company produces BST near Vienna and Eli Lilley has a
production site outside Manchester.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941216

