FT943-13197

FT  21 JUL 94 / Compaq soars and gains share from PC rivals


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


Compaq Computer yesterday reported a 53 per cent jump in sales for the
second quarter as the US personal computer manufacturer continued to win
market share from competitors.
The company shipped a record number of computers in the quarter to reach
revenues of Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.64bn) up from Dollars 1.63bn in the same
period of 1993. During the quarter it also introduced a record number of
products, ranging from high-performance notebook computers to servers for
computer networks.
Net income more than doubled to Dollars 210m, or 78 cents per share, from
Dollars 102m or 40 cents per share.
Compaq's results came one day ahead of IBM's. The industry leader is today
expected to unveil strong earnings for the quarter, in contrast to the heavy
losses sustained in the same period of 1993, when it took an Dollars 8.9bn
restructuring charge.
Analysts estimate that IBM's quarterly PC revenues grew by about 10 per
cent, suggesting it is losing ground to Compaq, which aims to overtake Apple
Computer and IBM to become the largest seller of PCs by 1996.
Compaq's figures were in line with Wall Street projections but the company's
stellar performance over the past year has heightened expectations and its
stock was trading at Dollars 32 in mid- session yesterday, down from
Tuesday's close of Dollars 33 1/4 .
'The growing worldwide acceptance of the Compaq brand has helped propel the
company to another record sales quarter,' said Mr Eckhard Pfeiffer,
president and chief executive.
Calming investor concerns that PC market growth may be on the wane, Compaq
said it anticipated growing demand in the second half of the year. The
company is building new production lines to expand its operations worldwide.
Inventories stood at Dollars 2.24bn at the end of the second quarter, up
from Dollars 1.12bn at the end of 1993. Mr Daryl White, chief financial
officer, said this was in anticipation of strong demand, particularly in the
fourth quarter. 'Our inventory level, in terms of weeks of inventory, has
not increased from the second quarter of last year,' he added.
Compaq also announced partnerships aimed at new market segments. Compaq and
PictureTel, a video conferencing equipment company, have formed an alliance
for the design and manufacturer of PC-based 'personal conferencing'
products. Microsoft, the leading PC software company, has teamed up with
Compaq to develop video servers for interactive television applications.
Compaq has also announced a joint venture with Oracle to develop database
software for Compaq servers.
For the half year Compaq reported revenues of Dollars 4.8bn, up from Dollars
3.2bn in the first half of 1993. Net income more than doubled to Dollars
423m, against Dollars 204m, while earnings per share rose to Dollars 1.59
from 81 cents.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940721

