FT943-844

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Company News: Tokyo relaxes rules to allow
derivatives trade


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Japan yesterday took a small step on its long road to financial deregulation
by permitting banks to trade in two forms of financial derivatives.
The finance ministry's decision to allow forward rate and forward exchange
agreements from next Monday enacts a proposal included in the most recent
government deregulation package in June - under pressure from Japanese
commercial banks.
This will be of only moderate practical use to banks operating in Japan, but
it does bring highly-regulated Tokyo more in line with other financial
centres in this specialised area of financial derivatives.
It means banks and their customers will be allowed to trade foreign exchange
and fixed interest instruments outside the regulated futures exchanges,
giving them the scope to set agreed interest and currency rates.
Until recently, the finance ministry was reluctant to permit this kind of
contract on the grounds that it was close to gambling for cash prizes,
forbidden under Japanese law.
But the ministry is now becoming increasingly concerned about the amount of
securities and banking business leaving Tokyo for cheaper and less regulated
markets in Asia and Europe.
This concern has yet to translate into a desire to make Tokyo's capital
markets as free from official regulation as New York or London. Accordingly,
deregulation of the instruments concerned will be only partial, as is the
case in many other financial services.
Banks wanting to trade the new instruments will have to reveal essential
details to the ministry, such as the currency, the parties to the contract,
and the method and period of settlement. They must make regular reports to
the ministry on the conditions of transactions, said an official.
Parties able to take part in the transactions will include commercial banks,
securities houses, companies with credit ratings, and companies listed on
the main stock exchange or over-the-counter market, said the ministry.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940927

