FT944-6109

FT  30 NOV 94 / Government Bonds: Budget package fails to provide support
for gilts


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN and MARTIN BRICE


UK government bonds fell by more than  1/2 point yesterday as Mr Kenneth
Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer, presented his 1995-96 Budget.
A heavy drag on gilts came from US Treasuries which fell steeply on a sharp
rise in a consumer confidence index there.
However, the chancellor's downward revision of the public sector borrowing
requirement (PSBR) for the current financial year to Pounds 34.5bn, from the
earlier estimate of Pounds 36bn, also damped market sentiment. 'This was a
bit of a disappointment. We had been hoping for Pounds 30bn,' said Mr Huw
Roberts at NatWest Markets.
The Budget contained some market-friendly news, including plans to set up an
open market for gilt sale and repurchase agreements (repos) and a downward
revision of the PSBR in 1995-96 to Pounds 21.5bn from the current estimate
of Pounds 28bn. The PSBR was set at Pounds 13bn for 1996-97 and at Pounds
5bn for 1997-98, down from original estimates for Pounds 21bn and Pounds
12bn respectively. These forecasts gave gilts a small lift in after-hours
dealings.
However, dealers said so much good news had been discounted in the run-up to
the Budget that the actual package provided no support. 'The market held in
very well during the morning on hopes for a good Budget, but when it turned
out to contain few positive surprises, weakness in the other markets pulled
gilts lower,' said one dealer. He also said that supply, in the form of taps
of existing bonds being sold by the Bank of England and next week's gilt
auction, was weighing on gilts.
The December long gilt futures contract on Liffe was down  21/32 at 102
27/32 .
Fresh indications that the US economy has a full head of steam, in spite of
efforts by the Federal Reserve to slow it, pushed down Treasury prices
yesterday.
At the close the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  9/16 at 93
15/16 ,yielding 8.032 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note was down  1/8 at 99 21/32 , yielding 7.421 per cent.
A report from the Conference Board that consumer confidence for November hit
101.3 - a four-year high - sent the price of the 30-year Treasury down
nearly three-quarter points early in the afternoon. The price decrease drove
the yield higher than 8 per cent for the first time in three sessions.
On Monday the long-bond yield touched 8 per cent briefly, but did not hold
on to that level. Economists had expected consumer confidence to be closer
to 88 per cent.
Trading was extremely slow in the afternoon as investors waited for a host
of economic figures due later this week.
Some economists expressed scepticism about the consumer confidence figures,
but those comments did nothing to calm investor fears that the Fed has not
done enough to rein in inflationary pressures despite increasing interest
rates six times this year.
Early reports indicate that retail sales will be strong this holiday season,
and several recent reports have shown underlying strength in the economy.
Earlier this month, the Fed reported that the US economy was using 84.9 per
cent of its capital stock for the production of goods, the highest level
since February 1980.
Thus, economists fear that even though some figures, such as the producer
price index, show the economy to be slowing, there is substantial pressure
at points in the economy that could lead to inflation in the near future.
Also upsetting the market were comments by two Fed governors who would not
rule out another interest rate increase in the near-term if there were
continued signs of inflation.
Mr John Laware and Mr Alan Blinder told Market News Service that, despite
some signs of slowing, they see the economy as quite strong and would act to
stem that if trends continue.
Although a further interest rate increase would benefit bonds by slowing the
economy, interest rate instability generally keeps investors out of the
market because of its tendency to undermine prices.
German government bonds fell yesterday, pulled down by US Treasuries, and
the December bund futures contract on Liffe ended at 90.88, down 0.38.
Norwegian bonds reacted positively to the referendum rejection of European
Union membership. The yield on the benchmark 10-year bond fell from 8.39 to
8.26 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 56

941130

