FT944-14434

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: Dangerous liaisons - Michael Thompson-Noel enjoys
other people's affairs


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


THE PENGUIN BOOK OF INFIDELITIES edited by Stephen Brook Viking Pounds 17,
376 pages
Cecil Parkinson, the Tory politician, will blush - or swell - to hear it,
but his fame as an adulterer looks likely to last, judged by his inclusion
in Stephen Brook's witty and life-enhancing anthology of infidelities
throughout the ages.
The scope is broad. As the dust-jacket says: 'The reader will find scenes of
tenderness and of sorrow, of bitterness and of rage, of ecstasy and of farce
. . . The depravities of ancient Rome are compounded by the exuberant lust
of the Earl of Rochester's poems . . . We learn of the exploits of such
famous adulterers as James Boswell, Lord Byron and Cecil Parkinson.'
Parkinson? You would have thought that interest in his homely little
adultery with his homely former secretary, Sara Keays, which caused him to
resign from the Thatcher government, had faded by now, given the tide of
misbehaviour, in circles high and low, that has swamped us in the meantime.
Yet here he is, accorded a spot in an all-time hit parade of bounders,
seducers and other sorts of heart-breakers.
Infidelity, says Brook, is dangerous, for it confounds the stable order. But
it is also exhilarating, at least to those concerned. And it is certainly
commonplace. A study of American marriage published seven years ago reckoned
that half of all Americans have been adulterous at some time. Another study
put the figure at 70 per cent.
With some exceptions, most societies take a dim view of adultery, though in
most places female lapses tend to be punished more severely than male.
Almost all the writers you would hope to see represented in this anthology
are represented, from Amis (both) to Boccaccio, Wilde and Wharton,
Strindberg and Suetonius. But connoisseurs will notice several obvious
omissions. The reason, says Brook, is simply quality of writing. For
example, both Henry Miller and Anais Nin are absent because he cannot bear
their prose styles. On the other hand, 'classic texts' of infidelity,
including Troilus and Cressida, Anna Karenina, Madame Bovary and the novels
of Colette, are represented by substantial excerpts.
There are plenty of jokes: 'You know, of course, that the Tasmanians, who
never committed adultery, are now extinct' - Somerset Maugham.
And plenty of surprises. I was especially captivated by the notorious Miss
Chudleigh, who fascinated the Earl of Bath, nearly married the Duke of
Hamilton, went to a ball in a gauze dress and caught the eye of George II,
secretly wed the future Earl of Bristol, conquered Frederick II, bigamously
married the Duke of Kingston, inherited his fortune, retired to Russia and
finished up in France, where she purchased a royal palace for Pounds 50,000.
She died in 1788, aged 68, after other love affairs. She was painted in her
gauze dress, wearing a ravishing smirk. The dress was a single garment,
quite transparent, and probably explained her career.
In company like that, Cecil Parkinson and his secretary come across as very
dismal potatoes.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

941022

