FT943-13201

FT  21 JUL 94 / Merck-Celltech dealon asthma drug


   By DANIEL GREEN


The biggest corporate deal yet to be signed by a UK biotechnology company is
set to be announced today between Celltech and Merck, the biggest US drugs
manufacturer.
The two will collaborate on an asthma drug invented by Celltech. Codenamed
CDP840, it has been successful in early clinical trials. Merck will largely
pay for the much more expensive later rounds of trials.
The deal will bring Merck and Slough-based Celltech into direct competition
with Europe's biggest drugs company Glaxo, which has a deal with Icos, the
Seattle-based biotechnology company, to develop a similar drug.
It reinforces Merck's challenge in asthma, a sector worth at least Dollars
4bn (Pounds 2.6bn) a year and growing at 15 per cent annually. Glaxo
dominates with two drugs, Ventolin and Becotide. Other big-selling products
in the area are made by Astra, of Sweden, Fisons, of the UK, and Boehringer
Ingelheim, of Germany.
Merck has already signalled its intention to fight its way into the asthma
sector and has a drug of its own in the later stages of clinical trials
called MK-476. It would be launched a year or two before the Celltech
product and both could be on the market by the end of the decade.
For Celltech, the deal represents a vote of confidence in its product
pipeline, as well as bringing in cash. The drug belongs to a class,
phosphodiesterase IV inhibitors, which holds out the promise of a once-a-day
tablet to replace steroid inhalers.
Several other companies are working on similar drugs, including Icos/Glaxo.
Celltech claims that its drug is either further down the development route
than rivals or performs better in clinical trials even at high doses.
It has now completed phase I trials at Guy's Hospital, London, and Phase II
trials are scheduled to start in September.
Celltech has been in talks with at least eight companies on collaborating
over the asthma drug since it decided last autumn that it wanted a large
partner to shoulder the burden of running large-scale clinical trials.
It already has a collaborative deal with the German chemicals company Bayer
to develop a drug for treatment of septic shock.
US drugs groups, Page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940721

