FT942-14866

FT  19 APR 94 / Quiet revolution pays dividends for EBRD: Anthony Robinson
reports from the bank's annual meeting in St Petersburg


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


'I hate to do this - please excuse me,' murmured Mr Jacques de Larosiere as
he jumped the milling queue of bankers, consultants and lawyers forced by
the rigidity of Soviet-trained security men to wait outside St Petersburg's
Manezh palace on Sunday night.
This quiet apology from the courtly president of the European bank for
Reconstruction and Development on his way to an official reception neatly
underlined the change of style at the bank since the ousting of its
mercurial founding president, Mr Jacques Attali, nine months ago.
The former managing director of the IMF and chairman of the Bank of France,
yesterday pleased shareholder governments at the bank's annual meeting by
unveiling a more pragmatic approach to its activities and promising closer
co-operation with other investors and international financial institutions.
He also pleased the bank's east European clients by promising to increase
the EBRD's presence on the ground in post-communist Europe and the central
Asian states.
'It's a leaner, more hard driving organisation,' commented Mr Laurence
Summers, the US representative, who added he was now more confident the US
Congress would be more amenable to approving Washington's Dollars 73m
contribution to the bank's capital.
Speaking in the historic Tauvrichisky palace, which housed pre-revolutionary
Russia's parliament before being turned over to Lenin's Petrograd Soviet, Mr
de Larosiere outlined a more clearly focused strategy for assisting the
region's fledgling private banks and businessmen and raising the bank's
leverage with co-investors.
To date, the bank's financial commitment of Dollars 3.7bn to 156 projects
has attracted co-financing which pushes the total value of EBRD-linked
projects to Dollars 11.7bn. This is around 15 per cent of foreign direct
investment in the region, he added.
The symbolic decision to hold the bank's third annual meeting in the former
Russian capital, built by Peter the Great as Russia's 'window on the west',
was pushed through at Mr Attali's insistence two years ago. That decision
has been vindicated. Apart from attracting potential investors it justified
a meeting between ministers from the Group of Seven leading industrial
countries and top Russian economic decision makers which provided an
opportunity to focus on Russia's problems and opportunities.
At their meeting with Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister,
the G7 leaders emphasised the virtues of currency stability, the key role of
positive real interest rates and the need for the Russian authorities to
convince potential foreign investors that they were really wanted.
Above all, the G7 sought to impress upon Mr Chernomyrdin, the former 'Czar'
of the Gazprom gas utility that is Russia's most jealously guarded economic
'crown jewel', that western investors would seriously invest in energy
projects only if they were allowed to take equity stakes and a satisfactory
degree of managerial control.
Yesterday, Mr Chernomyrdin acknowledged that 'not all Russian enterprises
welcome foreign investment' and promised his government would 'do all it can
to bolster the psychological aspects of foreign investment'. It would also
continue the tighter money policies introduced by Mr Boris Fyodorov, the
former finance minister, which had reduced inflation to around 10 per cent a
month, he added.
But, in one of the dozens of seminars and presentations over the past four
days, the Institute of International Finance (IIF), the banking fraternity's
own think-tank, revealed with brutal clarity the cost of Russia's past
policy errors.
The IIF calculates that Russia exported oil, gas and other products worth
Dollars 90bn over the past three years. But Dollars 40bn was never
repatriated, largely because of negative rouble interests rates, failure to
control inflation and the same lack of a proper legal framework for business
and investment which deters foreign investors.
This capital flight is virtually identical to the inflows of foreign, mainly
governmental and institutional, money, which has flowed into Russia over the
same period. The outflow means Russia has had virtually no practical benefit
from western financial assistance.
But it also shows the potential role which Russian capital, however dubious
its origins and legal ownership, can play in reconstructing the Russian
economy, provided Moscow adopts the policies and creates the institutions
which have already proved successful in central Europe, and which have been
pressed on Moscow with such insistence at the EBRD conference.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940419

