FT941-5636

FT  05 MAR 94 / Iraqi expert to be MI6 chief


   By MOTOKO RICH, DAVID OWEN and JIMMY BURNS


An intelligence officer understood to have won his spurs gathering
information on the Iraqi weapons procurement network is to be the new chief
of MI6.
The Foreign Office announced yesterday that Mr David Rolland Spedding, who
turns 51 on Monday, has been appointed to the Pounds 82,925-a-year job as
head of Britain's secret intelligence service.
Mr Spedding is a career diplomat and civil servant specialising in Arabic
affairs. He was heavily involved in the Gulf War effort. It is understood he
has not given evidence to the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
This is the first time a new chief has been announced and only the second
time the head of MI6 has been named. Sir Colin McColl, the present chief,
was named in 1992 when Mr John Major, the prime minister, decided that the
intelligence services should be put on a statutory footing.
Two weeks ago the intelligence services bill, which will make MI6 more
accountable to parliament, received an unopposed second Commons reading. The
Lords have already approved it.
Mr Spedding will take over the service's 2,000 employees in September, after
a year as its director in charge of operations. Mr Spedding joined the
service in 1967 and trained as an Arab specialist in Lebanon.
Although he has spent most of his intelligence career in the Middle East or
specialising in Arabic affairs in London, he was posted to Santiago, Chile,
from 1972 to 1974.
The Foreign Office said Mr Spedding was chosen as the 'best man for the job'
although it was not revealed whether there was a shortlist for the post. It
is expected he will serve for the same length of time as Sir Colin - about
five years. The openness that marked the announcement of Mr Spedding's
appointment only extends so far, however. Unlike Ms Stella Rimington, the
head of MI5, who was photographed last summer, Mr Spedding will not be
posing for cameras. The Foreign Office said: 'Forget about photographs. I
don't think you can count on it.'
Mr Spedding will assume the top job shortly after MI6 moves its headquarters
to a Pounds 230m building at Vauxhall Cross in south London.
His appointment came two days after the Kremlin accused a senior manager in
Russia's arms industry of passing defence secrets to MI6 officials in the
British embassy in Moscow.
Mr Spedding attended Sherborne school in Dorset, where Mr David Cornwell,
better known as the spy novelist John Le Carre, was also educated.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940305

