FT941-4238

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (3): Source of charm and
frustration - Foreign investors have to grapple with an antiquated telephone
network, an inordinate amount of red tape, uncertain property claims, and a
scarcity of good quality office space and accommodation / Czech Republic


   By PATRICK BLUM


Prague, with its old historic centre practically untouched by modern
developers, may be one of the best preserved capitals of the former
communist bloc.
But what gives the Czech capital much of its charm can also be the source of
much frustration for foreign investors who have to grapple with an
antiquated and overloaded telephone network, an inordinate amount of red
tape, uncertain property claims, and a scarcity of good quality office space
and accommodation, not to mention appalling levels of pollution.
After two years of slow progress following the 1989 'velvet revolution' that
overthrew the communist regime, the property market took off in 1992 with
demand exceeding supply by 2 1/2 times and causing prices to rocket.
A two-tier market developed, with speculative developments - mostly
refurbishments - aimed at extracting the maximum rents from foreigners, on
the one hand, and a Czech market with very low prices that had been fixed
during the communist period with no reference to market values, on the
other.
Strict planning and building constraints, combined with strong tenancy
rights and rent controls, exacerbated the shortage of office space, and
contributed to inflated prices that have made Prague more expensive than
Vienna, Milan or Brussels.
'In 1992, about 30 per cent of property coming on the market was reasonably
priced, but the rest was well over-priced. The market got carried away with
people selling at German prices,' says Mr Robert Neale of property
consultants Healey & Baker.
Prices peaked at about DM65 for offices in prime site properties at the end
of 1992, but have fallen since to DM55-DM60 for the best locations and to
about DM50 elsewhere.
'In the early days there was a huge demand, but people got frightened off by
the high prices. Now the demand has been scaled down because the economy
will not grow as quickly as originally thought,' says Mr Alan Vincent from
consultants Richard Ellis. He believes prices will fall further as companies
seek simpler but more functional accommodation.
Price was not the only deterrent for companies looking for a central
European location. The bulk of the property on offer has been
refurbishments, and these tend to lack the flexibility and facilities
available in new accommodation. Many were of poor quality.
Richard Ellis calculate that roughly 70 per cent of the 12,000 sq m of
office space that came on the market in 1992 was refurbished property.
Refurbished accommodation represents 40 per cent of some 43,000 sq m of
office space supplied in 1993 and a forecast 40,500 sq m of new office space
expected this year.
'Most of those refurbishments should have been gutted out. Unfortunately
many people did superficial refurbishments, painting over the cracks. The
market has always been starved of quality space, and to some extent it still
is,' says Mr Neal.
Only a few developments offer high quality. The International Business
Centre (IBC), a joint development by France's Caisse des Depots and
Compagnie Generale de Batiment et de Construction, is regarded as offering
the best accommodation at the moment. The 24,000 sq m development was
completed last year and more than 70 per cent has been let, say Healey &
Baker. Tenants include Societe Generale, Johnson & Johnson, and mostly
companies with a foreign interest. The development is adjacent to the Atrium
Hotel and a large conference centre, and while it is slightly off the city
centre, it is close to the metro line and the north-south motorway.
The Charles Bridge Centre developed by Fingroup offers more than 3,000 sq m
of mixed-use space for offices, suites, shops and restaurants. It is a small
development but it has a unique location and views across Charles Bridge and
the river. The development, consisting of three fully-refurbished historical
buildings overlooking the Vltava river, is due to be completed in March.
Office space has been let at DM52 a sq m, mostly to foreign companies.
There are several other small developments under construction, or planned,
around the city centre including some refurbished palaces. The biggest
project in the centre is on Na Prikope, a mainly pedestrian street, where
the Caisse des Depots has bought a site for which it hopes to win planning
permission to build 10,000 sq m of shops and 20,000 sq m of offices. This is
the only large prime site development in the pipeline.
Because of planning restrictions and lack of financing, Prague missed out on
the larger developments seen elsewhere in post-communist eastern Europe. But
this may not be such a bad thing in the long term, says Mr Neale.
'Developers are limited especially in the centre, but this should have a
positive effect on rents and yields.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940311

