FT943-12938

FT  22 JUL 94 / Portillo expected to toughen language of employment


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


Mr Michael Portillo, the new employment secretary, will represent a big
shift in rhetoric on labour-market policy but may have little room for new
policy initiatives, according to Whitehall officials and political
colleagues.
Mr Ira Chalphin, employment policy director at the Institute of Directors,
welcomed his promotion and said he believed that Mr Portillo would be more
interested than Mr David Hunt, his predecessor, in another round of union
legislation.
The rightwing agenda for further reform of industrial relations includes the
banning of strikes in essential services, the removal of unions from
official positions in bodies such as the Health and Safety Commission and
Acas, the conciliation service, the privatisation of the conciliation
function and the rationalisation of the industrial tribunal system.
Many directors of the employer-led training and enterprise councils view Mr
Portillo's arrival with trepidation. The Pounds 2bn which the Tecs spend on
training, with the Pounds 1bn spent by the Employment Service agency on
active labour-market measures, are the two main expenditure items of the
department.
One official said: 'He looks at any large expenditure items very closely,
and he seems to hold the Treasury view that much of the spend-ing on
training does not represent good value for money.'
However, the two main policy initiatives bequeathed by Mr Hunt - the
Jobseeker's Allowance and the modern apprenticeship scheme - are unlikely to
be substantially changed by Mr Portillo.
At the Treasury he has already been involved in the formulation of the
Jobseeker's Allowance, which tightens the conditions for receiving benefit
and shifts the emphasis from passive welfare to active job-seeking.
He is likely to be more politically aggressive than Mr Hunt on European
issues, Labour party policies such as the minimum wage, and the idea of
social partnership.
Mr Hunt, although a disappointment to many union leaders, did use the
language of dialogue and was happy to hold regular discussions. That is
unlikely to continue with Mr Portillo. Mr John Monks, general secretary of
the Trades Union Congress, said: 'We will take him as we find him.'
His first big test on European issues could come this month when Mr Padraig
Flynn, the European Union social affairs commissioner, unveils his white
paper on social policy. This is expected to lead to a new programme of
social directives.
One official said: 'He is not likely to have a big policy impact but he will
use the position, rather as Norman Tebbit did, as a political platform to
make general points about economic incentives and the virtues of
individualism.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940722

