FT941-4054

FT  12 MAR 94 / Food and Drink: FT winners - Appetisers


On Monday, the computer at Transmedia's office selected at random the names
of 1,000 FT readers who had used their FT/Transmedia card during our
restaurant promotion and credited them each with Pounds 50. Letters are
going to all the lucky winners.
Transmedia has now advanced Pounds 1.3m to 270 restaurants in England,
Scotland and Wales. Since the card was launched in January, Transmedia has
passed on more than Pounds 100,000 in savings to FT readers.
The speed with which the card has taken off in the UK impressed even Mel
Chasen, Transmedia's founder, during a visit to London. What has impressed
is how quickly British restaurateurs have taken advantage of Transmedia's
cash resources to improve their facilities.
With Transmedia's assistance, restaurateurs have: financed extensions;
opened one new restaurant; bought espresso machines; taken delivery of
larger-than-usual wine orders to enjoy bigger discounts; paid for new
furniture; refurbished; and, in two cases, bought a water purification and
bottling system which turns tap water into the restaurant's own bottled
mineral water.
The star attraction in Christie's sale of fine wines on Thursday, which
realised more than Pounds 211,000, was dame jeanne of Chateau Petrus 1945.
Christie's, which had never before sold a dame jeanne, assumed the role of
Archimedes. By immersing the bottle in water, inside a sealed bag, it
established its volume as 3.87 litres, slightly more than five normal
bottles.
From a vintage considered by many to be the greatest of the century, the
bottle fetched Pounds 12,100, including buyer's premium, and went to a
European collector.
The sale was significant in that it came only a week after Hong Kong
announced an increase in excise tax on wine from 21 to 90 per cent.
For the past three years, Hong Kong buyers have dominated the fine wine
market for red bordeaux, particularly for the best vintages from 1961 to
1982. Unless the tax rise is modified, implications for the London wine
trade may be severe.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940312

