FT942-12344

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (4): One expert's
income suggestions


With so many different products available, we asked fee-based adviser, Julie
Lord of Cardiff-based Cavendish Financial Management, for her
recommendations:
'One of the problems with setting up a unit trust portfolio to provide
regular income is that the amount of income will not always be the same,'
she explained.
'Abbey Life Extra Income Pep provides monthly income at a level of base rate
plus 2 percentage points (subject to a maximum of 13 per cent). The
investment is currently about 55 per cent into EC blue-chip companies, with
up to 40 per cent in special financial securities such as put options, to
limit any downside. The intention is to provide a realistic level of income,
not capital growth.
* * *
'Scottish Equitable High Income Plus provides a regular quarterly income of
9.25 per cent net (to basic-rate taxpayers) guaranteed for five years.
Capital is invested in the FT-SE Tracker fund which will give back 100 per
cent of capital if it grows by 5.95 per cent per annum. In any event, at
least 40 per cent of the original capital will be returned, in addition to
the income received.
'Distribution bonds are an extremely simple, tax-paid (for basic-rate
taxpayers) regular income-producing investment. Two of the oldest, Sun Life
and M&G High Yield fund, have an annual compound growth rate since launch in
1979 in excess of 15 per cent a year. Sun Life's distribution bond currently
has a 5.15 per cent yield, with distributions in May and November. M&G has a
yield of 4.42 per cent, payable in March, July, September and December.
* * *
'Finally, and not for the cautious investor, there is the Govett Monthly
Income scheme currently paying 10 per cent gross per annum in monthly
instalments. The fund invests 60 per cent in UK equities (mainly utilities),
from which it expects a 5 per cent yield and a further 40 per cent in
foreign bonds, pushing up the current yield to more than 11 per cent.
Neither income or capital is guaranteed, and the capital value has fallen.
This is a good investment for part of an income portfolio, but it involves a
much higher risk.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940429

