FT944-5835

FT  01 DEC 94 / Government Bonds: Yield curve flattens as investors shift
into longer gilts


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN and MARTIN BRICE


The UK yield curve flattened yesterday as the shorter maturities came under
pressure from interest-rate jitters and investors shifted into longer
maturities.
Upbeat economic forecasts by Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer,
in his Budget speech on Tuesday revived worries about an
earlier-than-expected rise in UK base rates.
'Although people were expecting an upward revision in growth forecasts, it
has highlighted the pressure which will be on the government to accept any
recommendation from the Bank of England to put rates up,' said Mr Robert
Thomas, gilt strategist at NatWest Markets.
This fuelled 'a growing fear in the market that Clarke and (Bank of England
governor Mr Eddie) George will agree to put rates up when they meet next
week', said a dealer. He reported significant selling of three, four and
five-year paper and some buying at 10-years and beyond.
The longer maturities fared better than the short end, despite - or some
said because of - the Bank's announcement that it plans to auction Pounds
2bn of 8.5 per cent gilts due 2005 next Wednesday. 'The market was
pleasantly surprised by the fact that it was not more than Pounds 2bn,' said
Mr Thomas.
The December long gilt futures contract rose by  5/16 point to 103 1/16 .
US Treasury prices were mixed yesterday with short dated securities down
slightly and the long bond up in reaction to differing signals about the
extent of inflationary pressures in the economy.
Late in the session the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  5/32 at 94
9/32 yielding 8.000 per cent. At the short end, the two-year note was down
1/32 at 99, yielding 7.404 per cent.
The variance in prices led to a flattening of the yield curve, which
generally means the market is expecting an economic slowdown. But economic
data released yesterday gave mixed indications about inflation.
Afternoon trading was light as investors waited for important data on
industrial prices and jobs due out today and Friday.
Early in the morning the Commerce Department announced it was revising its
estimate of third-quarter gross domestic product upwards to 3.9 per cent
from 3.4 per cent, which sent bond prices down modestly. But later the
market reversed course after capacity utilisation figures for October were
revised downward.
Investor reaction was mixed to a report from Chicago purchasing agents that
business activity rose 67.4 per cent in November, up from 64.3 per cent in
October. Although there was a sharp increase in the 'prices paid' component
of the report, the investor reaction was divided. While some sold because on
portent of inflation, others stepped in to take advantage of rising yields.
German government bonds were lifted by a combination of factors yesterday
and the December bund futures contract on Liffe ended at 91.28, up 0.42.
Bunds started the day cautiously, and in the afternoon firmness in the US
Treasury market fed into bunds.
Ms Alison Cottrell at Kidder Peabody said that remarks by Mr Helmut
Schieber, Bundesbank director, on interest rates, were well received by the
market.
His remarks combined with some short covering and the cancellation of two
issues of bonds by the Treuhand in December, led to the rise in bunds.
Italian government bonds drifted in limbo late yesterday as Mr Silvio
Berlusconi, prime minister, was meeting trade unions to discuss the budget
and pension reform. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Italian government
bond was largely unchanged, drifting up from 11.99 per cent to 12.01 per
cent as the Italian market underperformed Germany, which rose.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

941201

