FT944-6107

FT  30 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Agricultural research group
tackles financial crisis - Problems caused by 'a false complacency about
food security'


   By JOHN MADELEY


A financial crisis affecting a world-wide network of 17 agricultural
research centres is being tackled by plans to make investment in research
more attractive to governments and international banks.
The centres are funded by the Washington-based Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research, which is made up of over 40 aid
organisations and private sector investors. Most of the funds come from aid
budgets; Britain last year contributed Dollars 9.5m.
The 17 centres, which include the International Maize and Wheat Improvement
Centre in Mexico and the International Rice Research Institute in the
Philippines, account for only 4 per cent of worldwide spending on
agricultural research. But they have developed most of the high-yielding
varieties of rice, maize and wheat, and are widely regarded as having an
influence on national research and agricultural development much greater
than their size would suggest.
In the past few years they have changed from being centres concerned with
increasing food output at virtually any cost and are now stressing the
protection of the environment and the sustainable increase of food output.
But funds for agricultural research have declined in recent years, in line
with cuts in aid from Western countries. In May this year, the World Bank,
the CGIAR's largest donor, offered extra funds for 1994 and 1995 which
reversed the decline, giving the centres about Dollars 270m a year, in both
years. This is Dollars 40m a year higher than seemed likely six months ago,
when many of the centres were making cuts.
At the CGIAR's recent annual meeting in Washington the group's chairman,
World Bank Vice-President Mr Ismail Serageldin, pointed to radical changes
that were needed for the centres to secure funding beyond next year.
Mr Serageldin said the centres had 'a tremendous success record', but had
suffered 'from the general reduction of attention to agriculture and
agricultural research everywhere in the world. There is, in our judgment,
But he said the financial crisis that had affected the centres had 'unmasked
some problems about how decision making had been done'.
At present, donors give the centres both 'core funding' for their general
work and money for specific programmes. In future, donors will be able to
chose to fund a project or part-project, but will have to build in a certain
amount for overheads.
'It would then be clear where the money has come from, and where it's going,
and this would be more popular with donors,' said Prof Eric Roberts of
Reading University, who is chairman of the board of the International Crops
Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics in India.
Under the revamped system, the international centres will also try to forge
stronger links with national agricultural programmes.
The centres have attracted criticism for not getting the results of their
research into farmers hands. Prof Roberts said that the centres would now be
trying to attract on to their boards more representatives of national
research programmes.
A new research agenda is needed, said Mr Serageldin, 'to address the
problems of tomorrow. The changes we are making are to enable them (the
centres) to be even more effective'. The centres are broadening their work
to take entire farming systems, the environment and population pressures
into account, he said 'but they are not abandoning the effort to consolidate
the gains of the past as regards production'.
The CGIAR network will be streamlined at the start of 1995 when two
international livestock centres, in Ethiopia and Kenya, will integrate their
activities into a new body, the International Livestock Research Institute,
based in Nairobi.

The Financial Times


London Page 57

941130

