FT943-12834

FT  22 JUL 94 / British & Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - Financial
advisers criticised / Advisers' role


   By NORMAN COHEN


John Gunn built British & Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the UK-based merchant bank, was criticised yesterday
by the Department of Trade and Industry for its role as the financial
adviser to collapsed British & Commonwealth in its bid to acquire Atlantic
Computers - a bid which proved to be B&C's undoing.
BZW's role is now the subject of a series of writs, and it in turn has
issued writs, in connection with events at Atlantic Computers and B&C.
The thrust of the DTI's criticism of BZW is that even professional investors
could have been misled into thinking that BZW endorsed B&C's view that the
purchase was a wise move. The circular asking B&C shareholders to approve
the Atlantic acquisition said: 'Your directors, who have been advised by
Barclays de Zoete Wedd, believe that the acquisition of Atlantic is in the
best interests of stockholders.'
BZW told the DTI that this could not be taken as an endorsement of the
board's decision and said its role had been limited to offering financial
advice. The DTI concluded that on this more limited area - essentially a
co-ordinating and facilitating role in a bid - 'we have seen nothing to
suggest that BZW did not perform these functions in a wholly satisfactory
manner.'
Although the UK Takeover Code requires the target company to obtain
independent financial advice on behalf of shareholders, there is no
obligation on the part of acquiring companies. BZW had argued that this role
was understood by merchant banks in the City.
However, the DTI concluded that the wording of the circular would have led
most professional investors to assume it had actually taken a view on the
merits of the acquisition. The report noted that BZW invoiced B&C for Pounds
600,000 in connection with arranging the bid and an additional Pounds
400,000 for other matters including 'an appraisal of Atlantic'.
The DTI concluded that BZW had adopted 'an insufficiently robust approach'
during its investigation of Atlantic.
The DTI also criticised Outram Cullinan & Co, the strategy consultants now
owned by Coopers and Lybrand, for their role in evaluating the benefits of
the buy.
While noting that OC&C had warned B&C that its analysis was hindered by the
refusal of Atlantic to supply key information, it failed to reiterate that
at a B&C board meeting where the decision to acquire Atlantic was made. In
its defence, Coopers said the firm had expected B&C to undertake further due
diligence and it had not realised that the meeting was the one where the
decision to buy Atlantic would be taken.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940722

