FT941-16791

FT  07 JAN 94 / World Stock Markets: Taiwan hits another new high


   By REUTER


   TAIPEI


Taiwan's stock market fluctuated wildly yesterday before closing slightly up
at a new 3 1/2 -year high, Dennis Engbarth and Reuter report in Taipei.
Turnover, at TDollars 185.9bn, was the heaviest since February 1990.
Brokers were unsure whether the market, which surged in the final weeks of
1993 on a rise in political confidence, foreign capital inflows, and hopes
for direct sea links with China, was entering a correction. 'Everybody knows
the overheated market is due for a correction at some point, the question is
when,' said Mr Harris Liao of Harvest Securities.
Most analysts believe that the market will remain vibrant but mercurial in
early 1994, but that the momentum may fade in the second quarter due to
revived concern about politics and economic growth.
The December rally was sparked by the better than expected showing of the
ruling Kuomintang (KMT) in county and city mayoral elections in late
November.
The results encouraged the government to announce financial sector reforms,
including liberalisation of foreign capital entry and exit rules. A
ministerial commission proposed lifting restrictions on entry and
repatriation of capital. Officials decided to propose raising the 50 per
cent ratio of foreign investment permitted in the securities, banking and
insurance sectors.
The market received a further boost last week when Mr Chiang Ping-kun,
minister of economic affairs, said that he aimed to encourage port
authorities in Taiwan and mainland China to open nego-tiations on setting up
direct freight links in 1994.
Also last week came news that a new securities capital gains tax statute
would not significantly enlarge the tax liability of most investors.
Among factors aiding prospects in the next few months are a decline in
interest rates since August, availability of new funds from local investors,
and growth of corporate profits. Political concerns may return in the second
quarter as the National Assembly debates a proposal for direct presidential
elections and other constitutional revisions.
There are also some economic doubts. Growth is officially forecast at 6.2
per cent in 1994, compared with 6 per cent for 1993, but private sector
analysts doubt whether the official estimate of more than 8 per cent growth
in merchandise exports, compared with below 5 per cent in 1993, can be
realised.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940107

