FT942-14729

FT  19 APR 94 / Discount stores cost more than bargained


   By ANDREW BOLGER


A plan backed by Rewe, one of Germany's largest food retailers, to open
discount stores in the south-east of England has proved more expensive than
anticipated.
Rewe has a 29 per cent stake in Budgens, the small UK retailing chain which
yesterday said the conversion of nine of its stores to Rewe's Penny Market
format had exceeded costings.
Shares in the UK group fell by 5p to 29p after it warned trading profits
from the 89 stores operating the traditional format were likely to be 15 per
cent lower than in the previous year.
However, Mr Christian Williams, executive director of Budgens, said the
group was sticking by its plans to open 40 discount food stores in the
south-east over the next two years.
Budgens said it had originally estimated the nine stores could be converted
for about Pounds 600,000. As well as higher initial development costs, these
stores experienced a decline of their customer base until a new regular
discount store clientele could be attracted, which had now been achieved.
The transition period was expected to incur additional losses of Pounds 1m
for the financial year to May 1.
Mr Williams was still confident about prospects for the Penny Market
concept, which is based on the private German group's chain of 1,800
discount stores. The new outlets stock between 1,200 and 1,300 lines - fewer
than the average Budgens store, which has 6,000 to 7,000.
Mr Williams said: 'Discount stores have done well in the north of England
and the Midlands, so there seems no reason why they should not succeed in
the south-east.'
Budgens said its year-on-year sales were down, reflecting the 3 per cent
deflation in prices being experienced by the group. It was trading
resiliently despite the opening of competing stores and aggressive rivalry
on price.
The group also said it had made a disposal profit of more than Pounds 1.6m
on the sale and leaseback of a secondary warehouse beside its main depot in
Wellingborough, Northants.
Last year Rewe underwrote a Pounds 30m loan stock issue by Budgens, which
will be used to expand the Penny Market chain. Rewe has an option to raise
its stake in the UK company to 47 per cent in September next year, which
would require it to launch a full bid.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940419

