FT943-13071

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: Mawhinney smoothes his way to transport
position


   By DAVID OWEN


There will be few smoother operators in Mr John Major's reshaped cabinet
than Dr Brian Mawhinney, the new transport secretary.
During his two years as number two at health, the dark-browed Ulsterman's
consistently polished public performances have helped to earn him a
reputation for competence and unflappability in what has traditionally been
a difficult department for the Conservatives.
In doing so, he has managed to dodge the banana-skins which have lately
stalled his old boss Mrs Virginia Bottomley's meteoric rise.
In fact, the velvet-smooth public facade masks a tough streak which will
stand Dr Mawhinney in good stead in his new role, but which has not always
endeared him to civil servants.
'If he is not pleased with you, you certainly know all about it,' said one
MP.
'A number of people in the Northern Ireland Office look upon his possible
return with dread,' according to one Whitehall insider, speculating that
this former Northern Ireland minister might one day go back to the province
as secretary of state.
But even his detractors acknowledge that he performed capably and
effectively during his six-year stint in the Northern Ireland Office.
The phrase for which his spell at the Ulster office is most frequently
remembered came in December 1991: 'This is the latest Christmas message from
the IRA,' he said, surveying the scene of devastation around Craigavon
police station left by a 2,000lb bomb.
It is a sign of how skilfully he has navigated the most treacherous shoals
on the health beat - such as tobacco advertising, dentists' fees and the
future of London's hospitals - that his time there too may be best
remembered for a Christmas-related gesture.
In October 1992 he moved to prevent doctors prescribing Christmas pudding on
the National Health Service.
'No matter how tasty, I am amazed that some GPs have prescribed this and
even chocolate digestive biscuits to their patients,' he said.
A radiation biologist by training Dr Mawhinney won Peterborough in East
Anglia from Labour in 1979.
This puts him in the same vintage as Mr Major, then a little-known former
banker.
With his practical, and largely non-ideological approach to politics, Dr
Mawhinney, 54, remains every inch the Major loyalist.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

