FT944-2712

FT  16 DEC 94 / London Stock Exchange: Impending expiry and bid failure
upset equities - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


News that merger discussions between SG Warburg and Morgan Stanley had been
terminated hit the UK equity market like a bombshell and eroded much of the
recent takeover enthusiasm in London.
The news, coupled with determined efforts by some marketmakers to drive the
market down ahead of this morning's expiry of the December Footsie future,
saw an early attempt by the FT-SE 100 Index to break through the 3,000
barrier come to nothing.
At the end of a session fraught with anxiety for some of the speculators
that have piled into the merchant banks and utilities areas, the FT-SE 100
Index settled 7.2 down at 2,973.4, only marginally above the day's low of
2,973.2.
The late slide in the FT-SE 100 also impacted on the market's second-liners,
with the FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which posted a 16-point gain in mid-morning,
closing only 8.3 ahead on balance at 3,413.9.
Adding to the speculators' worries was a sharp fall in shares of Northern
Electric. However, many of the other regional electricity stocks continued
to make rapid progress amid a general feeling that a spate of takeover bids
in the sector could materialise in coming months. Water stocks, too, were
viewed as takeover targets.
Market observers were surprised at the late sell-off, pointing out that
European markets had been expected to take heart from another impressive
showing from Wall Street, which shrugged off slightly disappointing news of
the Philadelphia index and powered ahead shortly after the opening when it
was trading around 20 points higher.
Brokers were by no means disheartened by the day's news. 'UK plc is at just
the right stage of the cycle to attract a surge of takeover activity; the
stock market is not overbought, inflation is under control and there are
plenty of cash rich companies looking to expand and pick up good quality
assets. January and February will be good months to be in the stock market,'
was the view of one senior broker.
Earlier, the UK market had performed well, coming within two points of the
3,000 mark on the FT-SE 100, after news that retail sales remained sluggish
in November, news that was seen as consistent with trends revealed in the
last Confederation of British Industry survey of distributive trades.
With the market still bubbling from talk of plenty more takeover bids to
come in the near future, the FT-SE 100 was trading around 13 points up when
details of the aborted merger talks between SG Warburg and Morgan Stanley
filtered into the market.
Dealers said many speculators simply panicked and there was talk of severe
losses among private investors.
Towards the close of business, however, there was keen support for Warburg
shares amid stories of other potential bidders already holding talks with
the UK's premier merchant bank.
But with Morgan Stanley seen as keen to take in a top investment management
group, there were good gains in that area of the market, groups such as
Gartmore, Henderson Administration, Johnson Fry, M & G and Perpetual all
attracting support.
As Warburg tumbled, so did the FT-SE 100. It dipped into the red over the
lunchtime period and continued to slip away for the rest of the session.
Although subdued by the day's events, dealers expressed satisfaction at the
upturn in activity in recent sessions. Turnover fell just short of 700m,
with non-FT-SE 100 stocks accounting for 59 per cent of the total. The value
of customer business this week is well up on recent trading sessions, with
Wednesday's figure reaching Pounds 1.58bn, compared with Tuesday's Pounds
1.6bn and the previous week's best of Pounds 1.34bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

941216

