FT942-14266

FT  21 APR 94 / Red faces over white cliffs backlash


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


The government signalled a retreat last night as its plan to mark the 50th
anniversary in June of the D-day Normandy landings with nationwide
celebrations turned into a public-relations fiasco.
Dame Vera Lynn, the singer and wartime 'forces sweetheart', added to the
backlash against the alleged trivialisation of the anniversary by suggesting
she might withdraw from the celebrations' centrepiece. Responding to a
demand from the Normandy Veterans Association that the government scrap a
planned jamboree in London's Hyde Park, Dame Vera said her attendance would
be conditional on the veterans' approval.
Amid mounting criticism from organisations representing soldiers who took
part in the Allied invasion of France in 1944, Downing Street sought to
limit the political damage by distancing Mr John Major from the detailed
planning.
But Field Marshal Lord Bramall, a former chief of the defence staff and
cited earlier in the week by the prime minister as a key supporter,
indicated he was among those unhappy with the carnival-style approach.
Mr Peter Brooke, the national heritage secretary, responded by signalling
the government may modify plans for the jamboree after a meeting with
veterans' representatives today. He said: 'We are obviously concerned to
make sure that it is something which responds to their view of what the day
should be. . . .that obviously takes a more commemorative flavour.'
Another suggestion - backed by Lord Bramall - was that the Hyde Park event
might be postponed until next year's 50th anniversary of the Allied victory
in the war.
The furore also saw an outbreak of Whitehall infighting between the defence
ministry, responsible for the military commemorations, and the heritage
department, which is co-ordinating civilian celebrations. The MoD blamed the
heritage department for failing to take sufficient account of the
sensitivities of veterans before announcing plans for street parties and
other events.
The veterans insist such activities would detract from the solemn nature of
the anniversary. A total of 37,000 soldiers died and 200,000 were wounded
before the Allies wrested control of Normandy from the German forces.
Observer, Page 29

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940421

