FT944-2692

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (6): Mercedes move spurs
market realignment - Buses / Eric Gibbins looks at the rationalisation
taking place in the sector


   By ERIC GIBBINS


Fierce competition in European bus manufacture is leading to reorganisation
and rationalisation. As a result, the past 12 months have seen extensive
activity in this sector. The forecast, back in July, by Helmut Werner,
president and chief executive officer of Mercedes-Benz AG that a realignment
in the bus market was in prospect has since been proved correct. In fact,
Mercedes has had a hand in it.
Subject to European Commission approval under its cartel law, January 1,
1995, sees the start-up by Mercedes of a new company to control its bus and
coach operations. This move by the world leader in bus and coach manufacture
is arguably the most significant of the action plans of European bus
manufacturers to get their industry back on track.
In his July comment, Mr Werner said that the market had become so small that
adequate capacity utilisation was no longer ensured for all manufacturers.
Anyone trying to prevent the introduction of measures designed to safeguard
the industry's future refused to acknowledge reality. Mr Werner emphasised
that individual companies had for some time been unable to influence what
was happening in this market. The market's development in the foreseeable
future and the competitive situation could not be ignored.
Mr Werner disclosed that the new company would consist of Mercedes-Benz's
bus and coach activities in Mannheim and its operations in Turkey. It will
also include Kassbohrer, the family-owned bus and coach manufacturer, which
had then just been acquired by Mercedes. The aim, he said, was to form a
medium-sized company 'to improve customer proximity and efficiency in what
is a difficult market'.
The plan is for Kassbohrer (with its production sites in Ulm, Neu-Ulm and
Ligny in France) and the Mannheim plant of Mercedes to constitute the
industrial line of a future European bus company together with Mercedes-Benz
Turk, which also manufactures complete buses.
Once, the new company is in place, buses are to be distributed in a
dual-trademark strategy combining Kassbohrer and Mercedes-Benz, but keeping
the Kassbohrer trademark, Setra.
A fall-out from the Mercedes/Kassbohrer deal was the acquisition by Volvo
Bus of Kassbohrer's Danish body-building subsidiary, Aabenraa
Karosserifabrik, which builds bus bodies in aluminium mainly on Volvo
chassis.
The difficult times experienced by the bus industry in Europe came to a head
towards the end of 1993 when the United Bus Group in Holland filed for
creditor protection. The members of the group - DAF Bus, Den Oudsten and
Bova in Holland, DAB in Denmark, and Optare in the UK - were all affected by
this. However, management teams at Den Oudsten, Bova and DAF Bus quickly
made successful moves to buy out the Dutch companies with similar Danish and
British teams moving in at DAB and Optare.
DAB's stay with the management team was short-lived when Sweden's Scania Bus
Division acquired the Silkeborg-based company. Said Scania: 'DAB will
continue production of its current product range, which includes a low-floor
bus and a flexible, somewhat smaller service bus. Long-term, Scania's and
DAB's product ranges will be co-ordinated and replaced with a
jointly-developed bus range.'
The summer saw takeover fever. Apart from the Kassbohrer and DAB moves,
Sweden's Volvo announced its acquisition of Drogmoller, the German quality
coach bodybuilder, while Berkhof, the Dutch bodybuilder, announced the
purchase of the bus and coach operations of Belgium's Jonckheere Bus and
Coach. Volvo was already using Drogmoller to build bodies on its latest
coach for the German market - the B12/5000. This reflected a co-operative
deal between Volvo and Drogmoller involving product development and the
marketing of complete coaches.
The reason given for the purchase by Berkhof of Jonckheere was that the
Jonckheere family, the existing shareholder, wanted to involve itself more
in other Jonckheere companies. Berkhof pointed out that survival had been
increasingly difficult for small bus construction companies. It predicted
more and more amalgamations. As a result of the acquisition, the new group
has a yearly production capacity of about 1,000 large buses.
The takeovers have meant the loss of some joint ventures. A notable
casualty, for example, has been the deal, struck just 12 months ago, between
Iveco and Kassbohrer to design, produce and sell new 12m and 10m city bus
and articulated bus ranges. These were to be introduced at Iveco's Valley
Ufite plant in Italy and at Kassbohrer's plant at Ligny in France.
One joint development programme that has survived is that between Volvo and
Renault at the Heuliez Bus company in France in which both the Swedish and
French companies each continue to hold a substantial (37.5 per cent)
interest.
There are, too, some companies that are beating the European bus recession.
The most notable concerns a British company, Dennis Specialist Vehicles of
Guildford. This long-established bus builder (1995 is its centenary year) is
recording record sales - more than 1,100 buses will be built this year
(1994) and next year the target is 1,400. This does not include several
hundred bus kits for export.
With traditional western European markets proving weak, the main bus
manufacturers have continued to look east. Scania has just announced that it
has started co-operating with a Russian consortium to build bodies and
market buses in Russia, using chassis from Sweden. RussScan is the name of
the company involved.
This Scania move followed an earlier agreement in Riga, Latvia, for Scania
bus assembly by AutoSkan, Scania's Latvian importer. This development
occurred at the same time as a deal by Volvo Bus with a company called Sokol
in Ekaterinburg (Sverdlovsk) to build some 300 Volvo-based buses a year in
that locality.
Another company to develop in eastern Europe is the German bus builder,
Neoplan. A letter of intent was signed in the summer with Russian interests
for Neoplan 15m buses to be built under licence and operated in Moscow.
This joint venture involves Autobus Zil and the Moscow Committee for the
Management of State Property. Buses will initially be built at Neoplan's
Pilsting plant in Germany by a team from Zil. Manufacture will later be
shifted to Moscow, mainly using components supplied from Germany. The
long-term aim is for Zil to build 1,000 Neoplan buses a year.
Neoplan also started building coaches in Hungary early in the year providing
competition for the main domestic manufacturer, Ikarus, which itself has
been heavily involved with western component manufacturers, including
Detroit Diesel, Perkins, DAF components, and Cummins on the supply of
engines. Renault VI is the latest to become active in this sector with the
supply of power units to the LVOV bus plant in the Ukraine.
Renault VI's biggest involvement in eastern Europe is in the Czech Republic
where this year it has been integrating its product into vehicles of Czech
bus maker, Karosa, which the French company partly owns.

The Financial Times


London Page III

941216

