FT943-797

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (8): Inward
investment the main objective - Trevor Nuttall examines the grants structure


   By TREVOR NUTTALL


Grants and financial incentives have been part of the regional policy
armoury for several decades in western Europe, with two main objectives
usually being pursued:
To increase the growth (and improve efficiency) of the indigenous sector of
the economy; and
To attract inward investment, either from other neighbouring European
countries, or more likely from the big international investors, particularly
the US and Japan.
Other secondary objectives have also often existed, such as stimulating new
technology or encouraging decentralisation. The latter used to be important
in Britain, and is still very much the case in France.
The attraction of inward investment has, however, become the main purpose
for offering incentives in most countries, and there is no doubt that
internationally mobile firms are influenced by the amount of grant and/or
tax incentive available; though other factors, such as transport and
telecommunications, manpower and accommodation costs, and the social
environment, are all important influences, too.
While the policy of national governments has traditionally been the biggest
single influence, the European Commission has begun to play an increasingly
important role in recent years, and all the signs are that this influence
will continue to grow.
Its aim has been to try to impose consistent ground-rules throughout the
European Union, leading to greater emphasis on aid ceilings, eligibility
conditions and 'transparency' (including hidden grants).
In addition, financial and other constraints in most countries during the
last few years have led to a gradual downward pressure on the level of
grants. In the process of trying to reduce overall expenditure, EU member
states, encouraged by the commission, have become more selective and have
increasingly targeted financial assistance to encourage job-creation,
high-technology projects, exports, and sometimes the growth of small and
medium-sized enterprises.
In general, there has been increased emphasis on grants as opposed to
loan-related subsidies and fiscal concessions. A good example of this is the
recent change in the Italian regional policy package, a central feature of
which is grant support, as opposed to the previous package of tax
concessions, subsidised loans and social security concessions.
Central and regional governments, as part of a move towards greater
selectivity, are also favouring specific projects or locations, while still
operating within the broad policy framework.
In the UK, for example, there has been a gradual decline in the amount of
grant expenditure during the last decade. While this fall was briefly halted
in 1986 (partly because of an economic upturn, and partly because of
transitional grant arrangements), expenditure in 1990 was approximately half
the level at the start of the eighties.
This has been achieved partially by a reduction in the population coverage
of assisted areas (mainly in 1993), but also by a more stringent application
of the rules.
Other countries have reacted differently to budgetary constraints. In
France, for example, support has been focused increasingly on larger inward
investment projects, while in the Netherlands there has been some
restriction in spatial coverage, coupled with much more restrictive
eligibility criteria.
Other factors also have a bearing on the attractiveness to overseas
investors of the incentives (which are often paid out at lower rates than
the maximum levels available). In many countries, the approval of
applications is a long, drawn-out process which can discourage investors. In
others, there are only limited funds available, whereas in the UK the
regional grants scheme is demand-led.
The peak of activity in international relocations was reached in the 1970s
and 1980s, when the EC and other international trading groups, such as Nafta
and the Pacific Rim, became more important as sources for projects -
especially during the lead up in the late 1980s to the Single European
market (which was seen as possibly leading to increased restrictions on
imports).
While there were some very high-profile greenfield investments during this
period, ongoing investment by existing overseas companies remained the
largest element of foreign direct investment (FDI)
Significantly, big American and Japanese corporations decided (reluctantly
in the case of many Japanese companies) that it was more important to be
inside the EC than to try and sell to the Community from their domestic
locations. Many US multinationals had established plants in Europe
(particularly the UK) long before the 1970s, but decisions were made to
expand them in many cases or to invest overseas for the first time.
The UK, despite being only in the middle of the European grants league
table, has traditionally been by far the most successful country after the
US in attracting inward investment.
In total, FDI in the UK was approximately Pounds 9.2bn in 1992, an Pounds
800m increase on the previous year, but a much lower level than 1989 and
1990. The UK still attracts about one third of all incoming EU investment.
Intra-country movements during the next few years are likely to be
influenced by the same factors, except that the growing importance of the EU
single market, coupled with the improvements in infrastructure (particularly
transport) is likely to lead to centrifugal pull towards the
London-Paris-Berlin axis. There is already some evidence of the
centralisation process, and unless the EU takes strong remedial action, it
will probably accelerate.
This golden triangle (sometimes referred to as the 'hot banana', stretching
from south-east England through Benelux and Germany into Italy), which
covers only 5 per cent of the EC's land mass but approximately 25 per cent
of purchasing power, contrasts starkly with the peripheral areas of PortugaL
Spain, southern Italy, Greece, Ireland, Scotland, which have 45 per cent of
land area and only 15 per cent of purchasing power.
This does not mean that the peripheral areas in the UK and elsewhere are
doomed to permanent unemployment and decline. For them to share in the
prosperity of the golden triangle, however, measures will have to be taken
both to attract new investment, and to encourage local investment.
Trevor Nuttall is head of the grants advisory service at Arthur Andersen,
Leeds.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940927

