FT944-6105

FT  30 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Pakistan sets out its stall for
oil investment - Efforts to present a more welcoming aspect to foreign
companies


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


Pakistan will try to attract new British investments in the petroleum sector
this week, stressing the benefits to investors of the country's recent
reforms.
Ms Benazir Bhutto, the prime minister, opens a Pakistan investment
conference in London today at which investors in various sectors, including
petroleum, will be urged to step forward with new investment plans.
Among the important developments in the petroleum sector this year, the
government has committed itself to processing all requests for exploration
from foreign companies within three months. Previously it could take more
than two years before a company was granted an exploration licence. Foreign
investors have also been assured full freedom to repatriate capital and
profits, and will be allowed full ownership of local companies.
Pakistan has an important stake in the success of this effort, in particular
for the improvement of its balance of trade. Last year, the country imported
oil worth over USDollars 1.8bn, about a sixth of its total import bill. It
requires up to 280,000 barrels of oil a day but produces just under 60,000.
Aside from encouraging investors to become more active in exploration, new
agreements have been signed recently for the setting up of six new oil
refineries. At present Pakistan has capacity to refine up to 140,000 barrels
a day at three plants. These plants, however, are in need of large scale
repairs and modernisation, senior officials say.
The government estimates that it will receive investments worth over Dollars
1.9bn for oil refineries from private investors by the end of this decade.
Its optimism over the success of its effort is based largely on estimates of
over 197m barrels of crude oil in reserves. These are mainly located in the
south-western province of Baluchistan and the southern province of Sindh.
'We hope to further accelerate these activities,' says Mr Anwar Saifullah
Khan, minister for petroleum and natural resources. 'We take weeks in taking
a decision rather than years,' he says, adding that the new measures have
given fresh encouragement to oil companies.
Mr Khan is encouraged by recent agreements with Occidental Petroleum and
Union Texas to drill more exploratory wells. He expects Shell and Omani oil
company also to be given exploration licences and claims that in addition to
the 18 foreign oil companies doing business in Pakistan, at least 30 more
have shown an interest in examining the possibilities of exploratory work.
The petroleum minister is convinced that developments in this sector will be
crucial for the success of the country's effort to set up new power
generation plants, especially oil-fired thermal units. 'With the setting up
of all these thermal units, you'll need a lot of oil' he says.
Despite the government's commitment, some analysts are still nervous over
possible setbacks. Concern is running high that law and order problems could
affect the work of oil companies, especially in remote parts of Sindh and
Baluchistan. These could include armed robberies and demands for huge
pay-offs from tribal chiefs before allowing exploration work to begin.
Recent reports that the government of Baluchistan and the federal government
in Islamabad have still not agreed on important issues, such as the division
of royalties, has added to such concerns. Mr Khan denies, however, that
there are any disagreements.
Nevertheless, Mr Wazir Ahmed Jogezai, a former deputy speaker of the
parliament in Islamabad and a politician from Baluchistan, warns that such
'bottlenecks' must be removed before the new incentives can succeed. 'The
foreign investor has got to be given an assured law and order situation.
What would you do in the wilderness of Baluchistan if you have an area and
you can't really get in there?' he asks.

The Financial Times


London Page 57

941130

