FT941-5695

FT  04 MAR 94 / Survey of World Tyre Industry (1): Deflated, not punctured -
Out of the black, into the red. That is the picture painted by the financial
results of some of the world's leading tyre makers. But amid this gloom,
John Griffiths finds some comfort, as the industry prepares for a revolution
in manufacturing techniques


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Tyres, often described dismissively as small, round and black, are made by
an industry which is big - nearly Dollars 55bn turnover last year - global
and at present streaked with red.
Some 15 months ago the world's six biggest tyre makers, who between them
control nearly 80 per cent of all sales, thought they were about to be
compensated for recession-induced job cuts and other painful restructuring.
They expected recovery to take firm root, and to reap profits from their
leaner operations as vehicle sales expanded and consumer confidence rose in
the important replacement tyre sector.
Instead, sales in North America, the world's biggest tyre market, have
remained flat. In western Europe, the second biggest market, new car sales
last year suffered their steepest decline since the second world war,
plunging by more than 14 per cent. The truck market fared even worse, down
28 per cent.
Latin America proved a bright spot as a result of expansion in Brazil, and
parts of the Asia-Pacific region continued their strong growth (from a small
base). But with Japan and its motor industry also in the doldrums, overall
conditions last year should have provided little to cheer about for the tyre
makers.
When the full roll call of financial results becomes available over the next
few weeks, they will show that for most of the big manufacturers profits
either fell sharply again or there was a descent back into red ink.
The notable exception was Goodyear Tire and Rubber, demoted from first to
third in the world league table of producers, but still the clear market
leader in North America.
Goodyear dipped into losses for the first time in many years at the start of
the 1990s. But the ensuing restructuring throughout its operations left it
leaner and fitter to take advantage of the considerable upturn in original
equipment and replacement market business which did take place in North
America at least in 1992.
Meanwhile, incoming chairman Stanley Gault was quick to dismantle some of
the ossified Goodyear retailing and distribution structures in North
America. The dedicated Goodyear brand outlets which had long formed the
backbone of Goodyear's replacement market sales in North America were opened
to competition from Goodyear's second-tier brands like Kelly-Springfield,
and a determined pitch made to supply the 'own brand' market of big
independent retailing chains such as Sears Roebuck. Partly as a result of
this, Mr Gault was able to report last month increased market share inside
North America and worldwide tyre sales for the company up 4.2 per cent over
the whole year.
Goodyear's results continued to be helped by disposals of non-core
businesses and the activities of non-tyre subsidiaries. Nevertheless, income
before extraordinary items and accounting changes was up 33.1 per cent to
Dollars 488.7m, the second highest in the company's history. More
importantly, operating margins continued to improve, particularly in the
final quarter.
That, at least, bodes well for the industry as the other big players seek to
repair ravaged profit and loss accounts. Groupe Michelin of France, now the
clear world market leader following its acquisition of Uniroyal Goodrich of
the US several years ago, is expected to show very substantial losses for
1993 after reporting a net interim loss of just over Dollars 600m.
However, such a gloomy figure reflects not terminal decline but the very
radical restructuring Michelin has undergone - at high short-term cost - in
order to knock itself into more efficient shape for when recovery does set
in.
Indeed, analysts believe that so much cost has already been taken out of the
business that Michelin will move quickly back into substantial profit this
year even in the absence of significant market growth.
In just over two years some 15,000 jobs have been lost world-wide. The
company is in the middle of a FFr3.5bn (Dollars 580m) cost-cutting programme
on top of a similar, FFr3bn exercise during 1991 and 1992. Not surprisingly,
the treatment of these exercises as extraordinary provisions has made profit
and loss accounts look grim, with some Dollars 460m included in 1993's first
half results.
Nevertheless, 'we are confident that we can reorganise the business so that
when real recovery occurs in Europe or the US we will be in a position to
take good advantage of it', said one senior Michelin executive. 'By the end
of 1994 we don't exactly expect the situation to be wonderful but the
assimilation and restructuring of Uniroyal Goodrich should have been
completed and we can go for growth.'
Bridgestone of Japan, whose purchase of Firestone of the US in the late
1980s swept it into second place in the world rankings ahead of Goodyear,
has also had a great deal of difficulty absorbing its large acquisition, and
its problems have been increased substantially by the steep downturn in
vehicle and tyre markets in Japan, and the inexorable rise in the value of
the yen.
As a consequence, profits tumbled by more than 50 per cent in the first half
of last year and the full-year figures are expected to show little
improvement.
A similar story of declining profitability can be found at Continental, hit,
like Pirelli, particularly hard by the collapse of vehicle sales in its
European heartland.
Unlike Pirelli, however, Conti is at least clinging to profitability,
whereas the Amsterdam-based Pirelli Tyre Holding is still seeking to stem
the losses arising from its own heavy restructuring, which has included the
closure of plants in Italy and Greece and redistribution of its tyre-making
activities. These include the end of car tyre manufacturing at
Burton-on-Trent in the UK, which is becoming one of three European centres
for truck tyre manufacturing.
Both Continental and Pirelli still bear faint signs of the bruising received
during Pirelli's 1992 abortive takeover attempt of the German tyre maker.
The failure of the takeover bid means, in the view of some analysts, that
the concentration process which has gone on among the industry's principal
companies for much of the past decade - and which has now led to its
domination by just a handful of global corporations - is over, barring some
unforeseen new crisis.
Competitive pressures have no prospect of receding, however. The big western
and Japanese producers are facing rivalry at the cheaper end of the market
from developing Asian producers outside Japan such as Hankook and Kumho of
South Korea, as well as East European companies looking outwards once more
after the collapse of Communism. Among the latter the respected European
Rubber Journal ranks Slovenia's Sava Kranj 32nd in its 'top 50' list of the
world's principal tyre makers, with the Czech Republic's Barum Holding not
far behind in 35th.
Most of their challenge is directed at the replacement market, which
accounts for 70 per cent of total world sales and which provides most of the
industry's profitability.
Equally, as the economies and vehicle populations of these regions rise,
they also offer the prospect of growth for competitive western producers
successful in establishing a manufacturing presence, or creating joint
ventures and technology transfers. Nearer to Europe, Turkey is also poised
for substantial growth and hardly a leading tyre maker is not expanding
capacity there.
Not least there is China, with its more than 1bn people and vehicle markets
which have barely been tapped. It is primarily a truck market, with
production consisting mainly of old-technology truck cross-ply tyres. But
Pirelli recently signed a letter of intent for a joint venture to produce
car tyres near Beijing, and other rivals are establishing or seeking to
establish an early foothold in such a potentially giant market. Indicative
of the potential, sales of vehicle and agricultural tyres totalled 42m last
year, out of world total tyre sales of 848m. The story is similar in eastern
Europe, which absorbed only 37m tyres last year.
With the industry overall operating at less than 80 per cent of total
capacity, it is clearly in no position to impose significant price increases
in either the original equipment or replacement sectors.
But there are a number of positive factors. North America now looks poised
for steady if unspectacular growth. And when recovery in Continental Europe
and Japan does set in, the sharply lowered cost bases of the leading players
should indeed allow them to benefit swiftly in terms of profitability.
That process should be helped further by revolutionary new, flexible
automation being introduced to manufacturing processes which will increase
productivity and, in the long term, should further drive down costs.
Efficiency improvements in the retailing and distribution chains of the
leaders are also helping volume sales and margins, while the aggressive use
of second and third tier brands owned by the principal tyre makers, such as
Pirelli's Ceat and Courier, Michelin's Kleber and Continental's Semperit, is
helping them more adequately to cover all sectors of the market.
The introduction of some premium sector tyres, with either very high
performance or fuel economy-boosting 'green' tyres is also having a positive
effect on the margins of their manufacturers.
Meanwhile, at least some - but by no means all - of the price increases
sought for the replacement market show signs of sticking.
And some of the leading players even see signs of hope for their original
equipment business. Margins are traditionally wafer thin in this sector.
Vehicle makers are in a position to drive a hard bargain because it is
worthwhile for a tyre maker to accept lower margins on original equipment,
as once its brand is on a new car it is likely to be fitted subsequently
throughout the life of the vehicle.
However, partnerships are gradually supplanting the old adversarial
relationship between vehicle makers and all their suppliers. 'In the last
few months the car makers appear to be beginning to understand our problems
and that we must have profits, too, if we are to develop together as
technical partners', according to one senior European tyre executive.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940304

