FT941-3310

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (20):
How automation cuts the invoice paper chase - Document image processing: two
case studies


   By JOHN KAVANAGH


Matching invoices to orders and goods-received documents tends not to be a
favourite job or a high priority for business people, writes John Kavanagh.
British Gas North Eastern, which has six districts and a Leeds headquarters
receiving 200,000 invoices a year from 8,000 suppliers, has automated the
paper chase with document image processing and has reaped considerable
benefit.
Paper movement has been drastically reduced, people holding up the process
have been pinpointed and cash flow has improved.
The paper chase used to involve an order document going to a supplier and a
copy being signed off as the goods-received note when the items arrived.
Invoices were sent to the finance department in Leeds, which passed them to
the relevant districts to be matched against the goods-received notes. These
notes and the invoices were then returned to Leeds for the details to be
keyed into the payments system. The documents were finally recorded on
microfilm.
Mrs Christine Kelly, invoice supervisor, recalls: 'There was paper flying
about everywhere.'
The invoice unit installed software from Image Systems Europe on its
existing office network of ICL personal computers and Novell network
software, which was already used for basic office automation such as word
processing and spreadsheet processing.
The PCs were fitted with large screens to display full images of documents
and two Fujitsu scanners and three Sony optical disc systems were added, all
supplied by Image Systems Europe. One of the optical disc drives is reserved
for copying each day's work, for back-up.
Goods-received notes and invoices are all scanned in as they are received
from districts and suppliers. The order number is keyed in and stored with
each document as the main reference point: an order number includes a code
representing the district which made the order.
The amounts on the invoice are also keyed in and put through a validation
program to ensure, for example, that the figures add up and that the VAT has
been calculated correctly.
This information has to be keyed in because document scanning systems handle
complete images and cannot recognise individual parts of different documents
to capture an address or total figure.
When the system receives an invoice it uses the order number to search for a
matching goods-received note. If it does not find one it automatically
directs a query to the relevant district office where staff can access the
central optical disc system through their own PCs.
Matched invoices are passed automatically to the payments system on the
region's ICL mainframe computer. The mainframe link is also used to retrieve
information such as supplier details from central files.
The system has brought significant staff savings and enabled fewer people to
deal with the same amount of work while providing better service. The paper
chase has been largely eliminated and keyboard data entry and verification
have been vastly reduced.
Cash flow has improved because more suppliers are paid on time. 'We no
longer pay them late - or early,' says Christine Kelly. 'Suppliers would
phone to ask for payment and it was difficult to find the right bits of
paper. We now have easy access to all the documents and can see if payment
is due.'
People's reluctance to check goods and sign goods-received notes was the
biggest problem before but the system has got to grips with this. 'It's
fantastic in this area,' Mrs Kelly says. 'Before, we knew we had queries but
couldn't keep track of them. We now know exactly where queries are and can
gee people up to act on them. We can now be proactive rather than reactive.'
Software details:
Product: Image Systems Europe tailors each document image and work flow
management system to the customer's needs. British Gas uses a version called
ISE Accounts Payable, which can match order documents to invoices and link
to accounts payable systems. A fax facility is available. The system was
launched in 1991. Number of users: six for ISE Accounts Payable: three
British Gas regions, Tesco, Top Rank and Woking Borough Council. The company
has 55 document and work flow management systems installed in the UK and
Europe.
Supplier: Image Systems Europe, formed as a UK company in Sheffield in 1990.
Turnover in 1993-94 was up by 48 per cent at Pounds 2.14m.
Price: Pounds 100,000-Pounds 150,000, including software, scanner and
optical disc system but excluding PCs and networks.
Hardware and operating systems: Novell networks, Unix computers and IBM-type
PCs running OS/2.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940316

