FT942-14880

FT  18 APR 94 / Takemura, role for ideals: The personalities sharing Japan's
search for a new prime minister


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


Policy has largely been neglected in the power struggle that has paralysed
Japanese politics. But policy differences are at the heart of the rift that
has threatened the fragile coalition government.
Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary and leader of the New
Harbinger party, or Sakigake, is a central figure in the unfolding drama,
with his uncompromising rejection of Mr Ichiro Ozawa, co-leader of the Japan
Renewal party and the figure behind many of the coalition's accomplishments.
Both Mr Takemura, a member of the left-leaning faction of the coalition, and
Mr Ozawa, a right-winger, broke away from the Liberal Democratic party last
year, but they have serious policy and personal differences.
On the surface, the crack has seemed to stem from personal enmity. Mr
Takemura's idealism and low-key style have been seen as the antithesis of
the cold pragmatism and abrasive manner of Mr Ozawa.
As chief cabinet secretary, Mr Takemura has been embarrassed by moves within
the coalition to undermine him which, it is widely believed, were initiated
by Mr Ozawa. The former prime minister, Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, had been close
to Mr Takemura when the coalition was formed last year but appeared unable
or unwilling to protect him.
While Mr Takemura frequently stresses the importance of transparent
government, Mr Ozawa's forte is cutting deals in smoke-filled rooms. On
several occasions, Mr Takemura has criticised Mr Ozawa's tactics as opaque
and undemocratic.
Mr Takemura persistently refused to enter discussions last week after
indications that the coalition would be dominated by Mr Ozawa's JRP. This
personal dispute made it impossible to paper over differences the two have
in policy direction and highlighted the fragility of a coalition formed more
for political convenience than out of shared interests. The squabbling of
recent months is in contrast to expectations of more open government when
the coalition took office last year.
While Mr Ozawa favours a more active role in maintaining international
security, Mr Takemura believes Japan should stick to its pacifist
constitution.
Japan's contribution to world peace can be made through non-military means,
such as environmental protection, he writes in a recent book, 'A Small but
Sparkling Country, Japan'.
He spent a year in his youth at a Zen temple and urges Japanese to focus on
the quality of their lives rather than the quantity of goods in their lives:
'Even if Japan is an economic power, it should not become a country that is
called proud, shallow and greedy.'
But with Mr Takemura having staked his role in the coalition government on a
showdown with Mr Ozawa, it looks as though his idealistic views were no
match for Mr Ozawa's manoeuvrings.
As other members of the coalition look increasingly keen to discard ideology
in their quest to remain in power, Mr Takemura and his fellow Sakigake
politicians have been left on their own.
Alluring call of the Buddha, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940418

