FT942-14280

FT  21 APR 94 / Ulster committee to debate jobs


   By DAVID OWEN


The new Commons Northern Ireland committee yesterday chose employment
creation as the subject of its inaugural inquiry and set a date of May 18
for its first public hearing.
Speaking as a European Union report concluded that Roman Catholics in the
province were more than twice as likely to be out of work as Protestants,
Sir James Kilfedder, the committee's chairman, said the choice reflected the
deep concern about jobs felt by MPs on the committee.
Sir James, the Ulster Popular Unionist party MP for North Down, said the
inquiry would take in issues related to inward investment. In the course of
the inquiry the committee - which intends to make a symbolic first visit to
Ulster within four weeks - would have to meet in Northern Ireland 'from time
to time'.
The announcement came on the eve of the first meeting of a joint council of
the Confederation of British Industry and the Irish Business and Employers
Confederation under an initiative to boost trade between the province and
the Irish Republic.
Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, said the joint council had set
itself the target of doubling north-south trade - now estimated at Pounds
1.5bn - over the next five years. At a dinner in Belfast last night, Mr
Davies said there was 'no reason' why the target should not be achieved -
'particularly if we see further steps towards a cessation of violence and a
political settlement'.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, who is just back from a
trip to the US and Canada, said there was 'a definitely favourable bias in
the US towards investment in Northern Ireland - notwithstanding our media
image that we here are running a Clint Eastwood scenario 24 hours a day'.
Yesterday's EU report said there had been no 'substantial improvement' in
employment prospects for Catholics over the past 20 years - in spite of
anti-discrimination measures introduced by British governments. Catholics
suffered most from long-term unemployment and were under-represented in many
top-ranking executive posts.
The report, which is due to be considered by MEPs tomorrow, calls on the
European Commission to investigate labour market discrimination in Ulster.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, yesterday called for greater
security to protect Northern Ireland's nationalist community from attacks by
loyalist gunmen.
He said security had to be stepped up in vulnerable areas.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940421

