FT942-15633

FT  14 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Scale of likely economic problems in
Turkey is exaggerated


   From EMRE YIGIT


Sir, I must disagree with certain of the conclusions in the two articles
'Turkish package fails to put doubts to rest' and 'Falling back to earth
with a bump', published on April 7.
My first problem is with the statement that 'recent lira depreciation means
Turkey's foreign currency debt has more than doubled'. Turkey's foreign debt
is, of course, denominated in foreign currency. Indeed, the debt-to-gross
national product ratio has, perhaps, doubled. So what? Foreign debt is
serviced from hard currency earnings. Are you implying that foreign exchange
revenues, in particular net exports, are likely to halve this year? I would
hope not - imports of non-essential goodies and certain investment items
have already been cut dramatically, and exports should surge soon. For that
matter, the 1993 current account deficit, at just above 3 per cent of GNP,
was not a figure to excite gloom.
You say that the economy will contract sharply in 1994. Our calculations
indeed show that domestic demand will fall sharply; but the rise in net
exports should compensate, and lead to a year of overall zero growth. You
exaggerate also the problems to be encountered during the proposed lay-offs;
indeed, where has an austerity package been met with delirious joy?
Finally, concerning the performance of the Welfare party which, in a fair
and free election, gained some support. Among other things, Turkey is the
only Islamic state that has no vestiges of sharia law; where a woman can
rise to be prime minister not on the strength of her surname but on her own
merit; which is a member of the OECD and an associate member of the European
Union; and where the pro-western faction is much more numerous and possibly
even more vocal than the fundamentalist. The Turkish republic is strong
enough in its institutions and sincere enough in its democratic ideals to
greet the result with equanimity.
The ultimate question is two-fold. The first part is sophistry: where do the
Turks want to see themselves? The second, of greater value, is: where do our
long-standing partners and allies wish to see us? The conclusion should
ultimately be: fully integrated into the EU. This would both cement the EU's
claim of global political importance and rejuvenate it. For Turkey, it would
be consummation of a passionate dream and of cool pragmatism.
Emre Yigit,
Global Securities Inc,
Halaskargazi Cad. 368/11,
Ciftkurt Apt 80220,
Sisli - Istanbul,
Turkey

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940414

