FT941-3998

FT  14 MAR 94 / US and Europe reach rare consensus: All agree on need for
greater labour flexibility


   By DAVID GOODHART


An unusual consensus has emerged - at least between the US and Europe - from
the dozens of papers produced by governments and think-tanks for the Group
of Seven jobs summit, which is to begin in Detroit today, even if there has
been no new big idea for solving the developed world's unemployment problem.
The three main voices in the debate - the US, the UK and the continental
European - backed by economists at the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, are all emphasising a combination of greater
labour market flexibility, easier enterprise formation, more effective
active labour market measures and improvements in education and training.
There is even a broad consensus around one of the central causes of
unemployment in the developed world: that a combination of trade with
developing countries and technological change has permanently reduced demand
for less-skilled labour. Benefit systems and minimum wages put a floor under
unskilled wages in Europe, so the fall in demand has shown in rising
unemployment. In the US, on the other hand, the problem is expressed in
falling wages or resort to crime.
The policy challenge is to move as many people as possible into high-skill
jobs, while ensuring that labour markets are flexible enough to soak up the
rest without forcing down incomes too far. By their attendance at the
summit, all G7 countries implicitly accept that social engineering to deal
with this collapse in demand for unskilled labour, and to cut the time lag
between the destruction of old jobs and the creation of new ones, is
justified.
In political terms, both free-market liberals, represented most strongly by
the UK government, and social/Christian democrats, represented by
continental Europe and the European Commission, can sign to such a
combination of ideas. A Democratic administration in the US, interested in
European welfare and training systems but still wedded to many aspects of
its own flexible labour market, hovers between the two.
But the idea of mid-Atlantic convergence can also be misleading, because the
meeting point is far closer to the US than to the European coast. Indeed,
the starting point of the most influential analysis is considerably more
liberal and competitiveness-conscious than a decade ago.
The emphasis in Europe is on repairing the poor capacity of its economies to
create new jobs. In the US, which has produced 2m new jobs in the past 18
months, the emphasis is on producing higher-skilled, higher-paid jobs.
All the main parties to the debate, including the traditionally orthodox
OECD, are also careful to avoid advocating US-style wage differentials, and
real wage cuts (in 1972-1992 US average real wages fell by about 10 per
cent). Even the UK government, the strongest admirer of the US model, talks
about the balance to be struck between market forces and regulation.
The main clusters of ideas on the Detroit agenda are:
Wage and regulatory flexibility. The OECD has long advocated that Europe
increase its labour cost flexibility and reform its job security provisions.
The most surprising recent convert to this orthodoxy has been the European
Commission. The European Commission's White Paper on Growth, Competitiveness
and Employment, published at the end of last year, talks about a new
solidarity between the employed and the unemployed, and about 'remodelled'
regulation rather than de-regulation. But it pulls few punches on the
problems of European rigidity. It says that many social protection schemes
and wage bargaining systems have had a negative impact on employment,
protecting those in work at the expense of job-seekers, and says that there
is broad consensus from member states on the need for greater flexibility
and lower labour costs.
The most concrete policy proposal to create more jobs for the less skilled
and increase the 'employment-intensity' of the services sector is to
increase the burden of non-wage labour costs as incomes rise. At present,
the proportion falls as incomes rise in most European countries.
The US paper circulated to governments before the summit also stresses that
the main policy requirement for Europe - and Japan - is to reduce
restrictions on wage setting and employment adjustment which reduce the
incentives of the unemployed to find jobs and the incentives of employers to
create them.
Training, education and good jobs. The US paper says that, in the right
climate of innovation and entrepreneurship, new technology creates as many
jobs as it destroys. But, if all citizens are to qualify for these jobs, the
standards of basic education and training must be improved, especially in
the US, and the school-to-work transition must be better handled.
Active labour markets and more flexible welfare. The annual cost of
unemployment in the EU - including foregone income - is more than Ecu200bn
(Pounds 151bn) each year, greater than the GDP of Belgium. In recent years,
there has been a small shift towards active labour market measures -
training, job placement, and so on - but more than two-thirds of direct
spending on unemployment still goes on passive measures.
The challenge is to find ways of boosting the incomes of the unskilled in a
more economically efficient manner than just leaving them on benefits. The
problem is that Europe's social security systems were designed on the
assumption of full-time employment and have failed to adapt to the growth of
part-time and 'atypical' employment. Individuals find it difficult to move
from unemployment into anything other than full-time work because of the
steep claw-back of benefits.
Disagreements and other views. There are, of course, differences of emphasis
between the main participants, with most European countries playing down
cyclical factors and playing up structural factors, while the US still
believes that a good part of the unemployment problem is linked to low
growth.
'Countries which pursue structural improvements, without taking steps to
increase aggregate demand, will see little or no return for their efforts,'
warns the US paper. Japan, with the best record of any G7 country on jobs in
recent years, also warns in its otherwise orthodox paper against too much
emphasis on labour flexibility. 'Excessive mobility of workers discourages
incentives to enhance human resource development by enterprises,' it warns.
One idea - not on the Detroit agenda - which runs strongly counter to
economic orthodoxy is work-sharing. The EU White Paper was ambivalent about
it, rejecting 'a generalised reduction in working hours and job-sharing at
national level'.
Even so, as a preferable alternative to widespread redundancies for
companies in short-term trouble, reduced working time will remain on the
broader agenda.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940314

