FT943-12661

FT  23 JUL 94 / London Stock Exchange: Dollar firmness pushes Footsie above
3,100 - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The UK stock market was never in any doubt where it was going yesterday as
continued strength in the US dollar provided the upward impetus for markets
across Europe. The 3,100 mark on the FT-SE Index was brushed aside as soon
as trading commenced and only a weak opening to the new session on Wall
Street caused London to close below the best of the day.
At the close, the FT-SE Index was 19.6 up at 3,114.7. Comments from Mr Alan
Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, reaching London just at the
close, buttressed optimistic views of the outlook for the US dollar stocks.
There was no great response, however, to the estimates for second quarter
gross domestic product figures.
The FT-SE 250 Index gained a further 30 points to a closing level of
3,630.9, indicating that overseas demand for UK equities is spreading across
the full range of the market. Trading volume was high although slightly
below that of the previous session. Business in non-Footsie stocks increased
to around 57 per cent of the market total as investors looked for stocks
likely to benefit from a continued recovery in the UK economy.
The stock market was helped throughout by firmness in stock index futures,
where the September contract on the FT-SE 100 Index was still showing a
comfortable premium against the cash market at the close.
Over the week, the Footsie has gained around 1.3 per cent, with most of the
gain coming in the past two trading sessions as the US dollar has risen
vigorously in response to favourable comments from Mr Lawrence Summers, US
Treasury Under Secretary, and from Mr Alan Greenspan.
Most UK market analysts are now optimistic on the London stock market on the
basis of predicted growth in corporate earnings and dividends. A veiled
warning on interest rates, incorporated in the minutes of the June meeting
between the Governor of the Bank of England and the chancellor of the
exchequer, has done little to check near term optimism.
Seaq volume of 612.4m shares yesterday compared with 607.6m on Thursday when
retail, or customer, business of Pounds 1.26bn confirmed that business in
equities remains healthily profitable from the point of view of the
London-based securities industry.
The overall advance by dollar-orientated stocks was boosted by recovery in
several issues hardly handled in the previous session. Wellcome rebounded
smartly from the weakness which at first greeted the results on Thursday.
With analysts taking a generally positive view on prospects for sale of
Wellcome's anti-shingles and herpes treatment, the shares regained all and
more of the setback.
Stocks with home improvement interests recovered as fears of US competition
faded. Boots, Kingfisher and Ladbroke among the Footsie stocks all made firm
progress.
There was also a good showing among building materials groups on broker
recommendations and also among banks stocks ahead of the results season next
week. ICI was another to benefit from expectation of healthy results. With
the dollar's firmness rebuilding confidence on the near term outlook for
interest rates, stores and retail issues were also in better form.
Market strategists doubted whether longer term considerations on UK interest
rates would hold the sector back if investors perceived that economic
recovery in the UK would remain strong.
A powerful boost to the stock market and to the Footsie Index came from
strong demand for the oil shares, and in particular for Shell Transport
which continued to anticipate news on the planned sale of its South African
metals businesses.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940723

