FT941-12882

FT  28 JAN 94 / Berlusconi the politician makes a poor debut


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and REUTER


   ROME, MILAN


The decision of Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate, to enter politics
has provoked a stream of hostile comments and received scant support.
The negative reaction came yesterday both from politicians and the media.
The only positive comments came from within Mr Berlusconi's own media empire
whose leadership he formally renounced on Wednesday when he threw his hat
into the political ring.
The only political grouping to welcome Mr Berlusconi's move was the National
Alliance, the recently re-baptised MSI neo-fascist movement headed by Mr
Gianfranco Fini. The Alliance looks the most likely ally for Mr Berlusconi.
In contrast, Mr Umberto Bossi, the leader of the populist Northern League,
and another potential ally, reacted coolly. He dismissed Mr Berlusconi's
movement, Forza Italia, as 'not a real party'.
The most consistent criticism directed against Mr Berlusconi was on the
grounds that he would split the Liberal-Democrat vote rather than bring it
together as he promised. This fear was repeated both by newspaper
commentators and by Mr Mario Segni, the leader of the Referendum movement.
Mr Eugenio Scalfari, editor of La Repubblica and long-standing critic of Mr
Berlusconi, said Mr Berlusconi's claim to represent a new force in Italian
politics was spurious. His business fortune had been based on a virtual
monopoly in commercial television permitted because of his close links with
discredited politicians such as Mr Bettino Craxi, former Socialist leader.
Mr Berlusconi has has declined to relinquish ownership of his empire, merely
daily management.
Meanwhile Mr Luciano Benetton, head of the clothing business, said he would
not stand again as a senator. He stood for the Republican Party in the April
1992 elections, but said his obligations were to running his business.
A Milan judge ruled yesterday that ex-prime minister Bettino Craxi must
stand trial for corruption, Reuter reports from Milan. The former Socialist
leader will go on trial on March 29, with Mr Severino Citaristi,
ex-treasurer of the disbanded Christian Democrats, and eight others accused
of taking kickbacks for a contract with Eni, the state energy group.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940128

