FT943-1033

FT  27 SEP 94 / Blair to unveil radical shift in Labour's economic policy


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Mr Tony Blair will today ceremoniously ditch Labour's traditional approach
to economic management by insisting that the party's social ambitions can be
met only in a dynamic and open market economy.
His commitment to wealth-creation and adequate rewards for individual effort
will be accompanied by a pledge from Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor,
that a future Labour government would retain a formal target to contain
inflation.
But in a carefully co-ordinated effort by the two men to manage an
irreversible shift in the party's approach to economic management, Mr Brown
will announce that Labour would introduce a separate target for economic
growth.
The change in emphasis will provide the backdrop for next week's annual
party conference in Blackpool, by underlining Mr Blair's commitment to
accelerate the process of modernisation begun by his predecessors.
But it is likely further to anger leftwing activists and leftwing trades
union leaders, who have been alarmed at the pace with which Mr Blair has
challenged traditional policies.
The Labour leader will face increasing pressure from the government to spell
out in detail how a Labour government would finance its plans to promote
investment, expand educational opportunities and improve health and other
public services.
Mr Blair, who will set out his message at the opening of a Labour-sponsored
conference on international economic change, will seek to reassure
middle-class voters that Labour has abandoned its traditional tax and
spending instincts.
He is expected to eschew devaluation and other 'short-term fixes' to improve
the economy. Instead he will stress that a long-term strategy to manage the
rapid pace of economic change will be at the centre of Labour's approach.
That message will be reinforced in a separate speech by Mr Brown, who will
call for a revolution in educational provision, new mechanisms to encourage
long-term industrial investment, and a more dynamic public/private sector
partnership.
The joint message will follow a renewed Labour onslaught on the government's
record on taxation and spending.
Pointing out that, at 44 per cent of national income, public spending was
still as high as 15 years ago, Ms Harriet Harman, shadow chief Treasury
secretary, said that the money allocated to 'renewal' areas such as
education and transport had fallen as a share of national income, while
'rescue' spending on the unemployed had risen sharply.
Blow for Labour in economy poll, Page 11
Joe Rogaly, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940927

