FT944-14626

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (1): Investors are
the victims of a market tug of war - Keynote


   By BARRY RILEY


It has, at least, been a better three months for people with savings
deposits. After the half-point rise in bank base rates on September 12,
savings rates have been edging higher, and some of the medium-term
fixed-rate contracts offer upwards of 8 per cent gross. That is a useful
premium compared with the beginning of the year when you were lucky to get 7
per cent.
The stock and bond markets, however, have been unsettled by the upturn in
short-term interest rates. Earlier, during July and August, the FT-SE 100
Index had managed a decent rally from below the 3000 level, for a total gain
of some 12 per cent by August bank holiday weekend.
But then came that rise in UK base rates to 5 3/4 per cent, which closely
followed interest-rate increases in the US, Italy and Sweden. The
longer-term interest rates on Government bonds edged up all around the
world. So the Footsie index suffered a very bad September, dropping some 7
1/2 per cent. By early October it was back below 3000 again, but only
briefly, as the better value triggered new buying.
This choppy, unsettled pattern could be with us for some time. It reflects
the strong two-way pull on the world's securities market, with equities
encouraged by generally buoyant economies but bonds worried by excessive new
issues and by fears of resurgent prices - although there are precious few
signs of serious inflation so far outside certain of the commodities
markets.
The lack of any reliable trend has been upsetting to private investors, as
shown by the losses reported by ShareLink, the private client stockbrokers
who trade over the telephone. When small investors are nervous they don't
panic but they do nothing, which for their brokers is worse. Unit trust
sales have also begun to taper off a little, with August's net sales less
than a year earlier.
Professional investors have also often had a bad time. Some of the biggest
international securities firms, such as Goldman Sachs, Salomon Brothers and
SG Warburg, have been caught by the adverse conditions. New York firms, in
particular, have been severely hit by this year's heavy losses in bonds,
where the key interest rate on 30-year US Treasury bonds edged up from 7.6
to 7.8 per cent during the third quarter.
Fixed-income bonds are supposed to be safer than equities, but in 1994 they
have been much more dangerous. Those US long bonds, for instance, have
fallen in value by about 30 per cent since they peaked in price a year ago.
In 1993 there was colossal speculation in bonds. This year's crash has to a
large extent represented the unwinding of last year's bubble. The process
has continued during the past few months. We can expect further shocks as
financial institutions clear out their books and write off their losses.
In the meantime, though, the world's equity markets, taken as a whole, have
been remarkably stable. During the third quarter, for instance, the
FT-Actuaries World Index (expressed in sterling) declined by under 1 per
cent. On the end-September calculation it was down no more than 1 1/2 per
cent during the first nine months of the year.
Of course, there have been fluctuations in various countries. Japan's equity
market was quite strong during the early months of the year, but the Nikkei
average eased about 5 per cent during the summer quarter.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones Average rose by 6 per cent over the same
three-month period, and got back to within a whisker of its all-time peak.
Those fashionable emerging markets picked themselves off the floor after the
shakeout of the first half, and managed a strong summer rally. The IFC Index
of emerging equity markets rallied by 24 per cent during the July-September
quarter.
This is precisely the time of the economic cycle when you would expect
equities to outperform bonds. Around the world, except maybe in Japan, the
economic news is good. The latest official statistics show year-on-year
economic growth of 3.8 per cent in the UK and 4.1 per cent in the US. The
global economy as a whole, boosted by rapid growth in Asia and the Pacific
region, is expanding faster than at any time since 1988.
For investors in UK equities this good news boils down to earnings per share
growing at anything up to 15 per cent and dividends at 8 per cent. British
companies are now very liquid, so that the debt problems of a few years ago
are well behind them.
The British economy is now looking better-balanced than for a very long
time. A potential balance-of-payments problem is being dissipated by the
excellent performance of exporters. Personal incomes are hardly rising net
of tax increases, and spending is increasing only slowly, with no sign of
the kind of consumer boom that has destabilised the economy in the past.
Of course, the downside of this is that the housing market is flat, the
'feelgood' factor is missing and the government is deeply unpopular. These
problems will not worry chancellor Kenneth Clarke overmuch as he prepares
for his Budget in a month's time, because he has two more years to turn
things round. But the big issue is whether financial pressures on a global
scale will now disrupt the Tory government's plans to stage another dramatic
electoral revival.
So far, western governments have been fighting a threatened resurgence of
inflation. But although commodity prices have been climbing, a general
inflationary threat has yet to become apparent.
Instead, the free-spending western governments that are proposing to borrow
more than Dollars 400bn for the second year in a row are facing a relentless
rise in the interest rates on bonds. Those rising rates are in turn
threatening to squeeze equity markets in a vice-like grip.
Thus, government issues are clashing with private-sector money-raising.
Numerous equity new issues in the UK have been withdrawn, or have struggled
to hold their flotation prices. Too many have in any case been of poor
quality, with prominent recent newcomers such as McDonnell Douglas
Information Systems and Aerostructures Hamble being forced to issue profit
warnings.
Big institutional investors are running out of money to buy shares. Life
assurance new business has slumped in volume, and pension funds are trying
to switch part of their portfolios from equities towards government
gilt-edged.
Now that UK equities are yielding around 4 per cent they are better value
than at the start of the year. But investors looking for a steady trend may
be disappointed.
We are going through an unstable period when there may be forced sellers of
securities around. If you have strong enough nerves and cool enough
judgment, however, you will see it as a time of increasing opportunity.

The Financial Times


London Page III

941021

