FT942-12849

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (10): Cost the deciding
factor - Custody of stock and bond certificates


   By NORMA COHEN


The finance director of a small textiles firm based in the north of England
recently surprised an independent consultant appointed to advise his pension
scheme. Asked about the scheme's arrangements for the custody of its stocks
and bonds, the finance director opened the door to the safe in his office.
There, on a shelf, were the share certificates belonging, ostensibly, to
scheme members.
'I suggested to him that this was not considered best practice in the
industry and he said 'Are you questioning my integrity?',' the consultant
recalled, no doubt mindful of the more conventional approach under which
securities are sent for safe-keeping to banks.
At the other end of the spectrum, lies a group of banks which has built
significant businesses acting as master 'global custodians' for the assets
of some of the UK's biggest pension funds. In the aftermath of the Maxwell
affair, in which Pounds 440m disappeared from pension schemes controlled by
Robert Maxwell, the group has sought rules requiring appointment of a
custodian separate from the fund manager.
It is alleged that hundreds of millions of pounds were spirited out of the
pension schemes because the fund managers also acted as custodians to the
scheme and handed over stock and bond certificates on the instructions of Mr
Maxwell.
The Goode Committee was asked to consider at some length whether pension
schemes should in fact be required to appoint a custodian independent of the
fund manager. Lobbying hard on the other side of the issue was a
well-organised group of leading fund managers all of which provide custody
services for their clients.
In the end, the Goode Committee stopped well short of recommending the
appointment of an independent custodian. The report goes to great lengths to
explain the group's thinking. 'The question we have to consider is whether
the additional protection which would be given by the appointment of an
independent custodian so outweighs the expense and possible administrative
problems that it should be made compulsory,' the report said. In a footnote,
the report referred to recent studies by the National Association of Pension
Funds and management consultants Booz Allen and Hamilton showing that
because of the charging structure of custodians, clients may be unaware of
exactly how much they are paying for the service.
'We are not satisfied that use of a custodian would necessarily prove a
significant obstacle to a determined wrongdoer unless custodians were to be
required to assume a considerably more active monitoring role than they now
perform,' the report said.
Instead, 'trustees should periodically review their custody arrangements and
satisfy themselves that these are satisfactory,' the report said.
Meanwhile, regulators have rejected the idea of tighter oversight of
custodians generally. The Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief
regulatory watchdog, has considered whether it ought to regulate custodians
directly and concluded that, for now, it should not.
In the US, however, the 1974 Erisa legislation, setting out the rules under
which pension schemes are to be administered, specifically requires
independent custodians. Moreover, custodians are required to refuse to
honour any instructions which they have reason to believe are not in the
best interests of members.
Supporters of similar rules in the UK note that a theft on the scale of Mr
Maxwell's did not occur on the other side of the Atlantic.
However, there may be more to the Erisa legislation than simple recognition
that independent custodians offer greater safety. Unlike the UK, fund
managers operating around the time of the Erisa legislation typically were
unable to offer custody services. That had been left up to the largest US
commercial banks which had once been the chief providers of pension fund
management services but were no longer.
In effect, the Erisa legislation simply codified what was effectively best
practice already in the US, just as the Goode Committee suggests codifying
what is best practice in Britain. However, it may be market forces rather
than the effect of any legislation which forces changes in UK pension funds'
choice of custodian.
Mr Bruce Pullman, a director at Quantec, a consulting firm specialising in
advice on quantitative fund management, notes that the increased use of
'specialist' fund managers will force pension funds to seek independent
custodians. 'In the US, General Motors has about 40 fund managers for its
pension scheme. The thought of having 40 different custodians is absurd.'
Moreover, there is evidence that pension fund trustees, partly with the
guidance of their consultants, are taking a much harder look at costs.
Officially, most of the UK's larger fund managers say they do not charge
separately for custody services and a client who places the custody of his
funds with an independent firm will receive no reduction in charges.
Mr Gordon Lindsey, head of custody services at SG Warburg which owns 75 per
cent of Mercury Asset Management, said that the company uses a single data
base for its fund management operations and custodial activities. If it were
required to send instructions to an independent custodian, MAM would
actually incur greater costs and it would have to charge the client
accordingly.
However, many clients now realise that in addition to the headline fee
charged, custodians are often earning a turn off their portfolio in foreign
exchange, treasury management and stock lending. Increasingly, they are
calculating the all-in cost of their custody service and seeking to
'unbundle'.
'Unbundling is a trend driven by best practice,' said Mr Robert Binney,
business executive at Chase Manhattan's global securities services division.
Larger clients, he said, are now seeking competitive pricing from custodians
for all of these services, something that pension schemes relying on their
fund manager's custodian simply cannot do.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940427

