FT941-17133

FT  06 JAN 94 / Institutions grow cooler towards Independent


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


The main institutional share-holders in Newspaper Publishing, the holding
company for The Independent and the Independent on Sunday, have made it
clear that they do not want to put more money into the group.
Institutional shareholders, which include Standard Life, Scottish Amicable
and the Prudential, hold 52 per cent of the lossmaking business.
Most favour cashing in their chips during the planned re-financing, although
some may want to retain an interest in potential future profits of the
company.
Their unwillingness to invest further narrows the options for Newspaper
Publishing and concentrates the search on potential trade investors.
The search comes at the same time as approval of a business plan that
envisages a return to profit in the 1994-95 financial year and more
substantial profits the year after. The company lost Pounds 486,000 pre-tax
in the year to September, most of it because of the abortive attempt to buy
The Observer.
The business plan promises editorial improvements, a sustained marketing
campaign, improving the money raised by advertising and stringent cost
controls which will include 'modest' staff cuts.
Mr Andreas Whittam Smith, the main founder of The Independent, and two
newspaper investors - El Pas of Spain and La Repubblica of Italy - favour
bringing on board one of four national newspaper groups: Mr Conrad Black's
Telegraph Group, Mirror Group Newspapers; Lord Rothermere's Associated
Newspapers; or United Newspapers, publishers of the Daily Express.
No deal has been concluded yet and no talks have been held with United. Mr
Black is a clear option but MGN, now emerging from the financial
difficulties caused by the late Robert Maxwell, is increasingly seen as a
serious runner.
Journalists on the papers yesterday demanded immediate disclosure of the
company's business plan and immediate representation on the board.
Meanwhile the non-executive directors under chairman Mr Ian Hay Davison are
pursuing alternatives.
Mr Hay Davison has made it clear that the non-executive directors intend to
fulfil their legal obligation to get the best deal possible for
shareholders, staff and readers.
This group is also pursuing potential trade investors.
Mr Michael Green's Carlton Communications is now seen as unlikely to invest
although another group with television interests, Lord Hollick's MAI, is
still a possibility.
Competing proposals for future investors could go before a board meeting at
the end of this month.
Forty-four jobs are to be lost out of an editorial total of 220 on the
Scottish Daily Record and Sunday Mail, the company told journalists'
representatives yesterday.
A journalists' spokesman said: 'The management told us they are wanting
talks to restructure the company which would lead to a reduction of some 44
editorial people.'
Production of the two mass-circulation tabloids is to move from central
Glasgow later this year to a new plant. Senior executives at Mirror Group
Newspapers, which owns the two Scots titles, said last night that the job
losses were part of an 'upgrading' of staff in which new journalists would
be appointed.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940106

