FT943-854

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Company News: IMF wants tougher hedge fund
rules


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


Stronger requirements for hedge funds and other investors to disclose large
trades in government bonds could help prevent manipulation of smaller
markets, according to a study by the International Monetary Fund.
The study of trends in international capital markets argues the lack of
regular information on position-taking in bond markets makes it hard to
determine the impact of hedge funds, or detect manipulation.
Although it says there is no evidence that hedge funds, which may have
capital of up to Dollars 100bn, collude to move prices, it points out that
they 'often seem to react similarly to a given set of market opportunities'.
The study says that information could be 'particularly useful in the smaller
government securities markets, where the action of a set of placers is
likely to have a larger potential impact on prices'.
Hedge funds have attracted controversy since their role in the 1992 European
exchange rate crisis, and the study analyses a number of regulatory concerns
over their activities.
It finds no clear evidence that the 800 to 900 hedge funds, which aim for
high returns by leveraging capital and making bets on foreign exchange and
bond markets, have increased volatility in bond markets.
Instead, it says that hedge funds add to liquidity in bond markets. It says
governments and central banks have found cases where only hedge funds have
been willing to buy bonds as prices have fallen so stabilising markets.
The study, released to coincide with the IMF/World Bank annual meetings in
Madrid next week, reports the view of one country's supervisory authority
that 'hedge funds have become the 'buyer of last resort' in some of these
markets'.
However, it says that the sums which funds have to deposit with banks in
order to borrow cash to trade on bond markets - typically 2 per cent to 4
per cent of the facility - may be too small to prevent markets becoming
excessively leveraged.
It points out that hedge funds are calculated to wield up to four times the
equity capital of large US securities firms.
More than half the capital is thought to be in 'macro' funds that make bets
on changes in interest and exchange rates.
International Capital Markets: Developments, Prospects and Policy Issues;
IMF Publication Services, 700 19th Street NW, Washington, DC 20431; Dollars
20.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940927

