FT944-5890

FT  01 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Corporate investment in Lloyd's to jump
Pounds 300m


   By RALPH ATKINS, Insurance Correspondent


Corporate investment in Lloyd's of London is to increase by more than Pounds
300m next year following a last-minute announcement of the launch of a new
company, backed by two US institutional funds, which plans to invest Pounds
88m.
Hours before the deadline for corporate investors to lodge funds at the
insurance market in time for the 1995 underwriting year, Insurance Partners
and Harvard Private Capital announced they would provide most of the capital
for a venture launched by Charman, a Lloyd's agency.
The new company, which will invest in one insurance syndicate, is the
largest of Lloyd's 'dedicated' vehicles - in effect embryonic insurance
companies.
Its launch is a fillip for the insurance market's attempts to raise extra
corporate capital to augment the Pounds 900m invested in 1994. Fund raising
has been hit by the lacklustre share performance of quoted Lloyd's vehicles
and the bad publicity surrounding Lloyd's.
Mr Peter Middleton, Lloyd's chief executive, forecast an extra Pounds 250m
would be invested in 1995. But so far 13 groups, including Charman, have
announced plans to invest a total of Pounds 280m and Brockbank, one of
Lloyd's largest agencies, is expected to unveil plans to raise about Pounds
50m.
Charman's plans provoked controversy in the Lloyd's market when first mooted
earlier this year because they entail splitting its syndicate 488 into two.
The first syndicate, to keep the number 488, will be supported by existing
Names - individuals whose assets have traditionally supported Lloyd's - but
its premium writing capacity is expected to fall from Pounds 264m this year
to about Pounds 140m in 1995. The second syndicate, numbered 2488, will use
the Pounds 88m new money - sufficient to underwrite premiums worth Pounds
160m.
Some Names had expressed concern that their interests would not be protected
on the old syndicate. But Mr John Charman, the Charman group's managing
director, said that 'anyone who wanted capacity on 488 was offered it'.
Charman shareholders - including Mr Charman, other staff and directors  -
have also invested in the new company, making Mr Charman among the largest
individual investors in the insurance market, albeit with limited liability
rather than unlimited liability like most Names.
The two US funds have also purchased 25 per cent in the Charman holding
company, the maximum allowed under Lloyd's rules.
Insurance Partners is a Dollars 540m equity investment fund specialising in
acquisitions, recapitalisations and other investments in the insurance
industry. Its investors include Centre Re, a subsidiary of Zurich Insurance,
and Chase Manhattan Bank.
Harvard Private Capital Group manages about Dollars 1.4bn of private
investments and is a wholly owned subsidiary of Harvard Management.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941201

