FT942-15350

FT  15 APR 94 / UK Company News: Minimum reasons maximise puzzle - Peggy
Hollinger considers the surprising departure of Jim Maxmin


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


The puzzle about the departure of Mr Jim Maxmin from his post as chief
executive of Laura Ashley was summed up by one bewildered analyst: 'It is
bizarre that he has chosen investment as the issue on which to go when
capital expenditure in general was above expectations. If you believe the
story, then that would imply there was a quantum leap planned for next
year.'
Such questions dogged the announcement of Laura Ashley's results. Just what
had Mr Maxmin been planning and what exactly was the board intending for the
future?
The issue was further clouded by the decision to not to give the traditional
break down of profits at this stage. The company claimed it was offering
enhanced disclosure and, indeed, it did in some respects such as on turnover
and operating expenses.
Yet many analysts trying to devise forecasts were left without
straightforward facts over such issues as the US losses. It is estimated
that the US business, hit by heavy overstocking in 1992, had incurred losses
of between Pounds 9m and Pounds 10m.
Nevertheless, the business appears to be making substantial inroads in
recovering those losses. Almost all of the old stock has been sold, leaving
prospects for margins looking better than for some time.
Mr Maxmin has been criticised for being late to realise the extent of the
difficulties in the US. Yet many of his achievements are praised even by
those who find his effusive style difficult to accept.
When he arrived in July 1991, the heavily indebted Laura Ashley had been
without a chief executive for 13 months. The programme to tackle the Pounds
100m debt, involving disposals and factory closures, had begun, but survival
left little time for strategic planning.
Mr Maxmin, straight from Thorn EMI, began to preach the 'lifestyle brand'
gospel, replanting Laura Ashley's image firmly in the English countryside.
The chic niche would protect all-important margins which had melted in the
volume-driven 1980s.
The chief executive also sought to empower staff with a series of
catchily-titled campaigns, such as 'Love the Customer', aimed at improving
productivity and profitability.
In addition he spent Pounds 11m on state of the art computerised point of
sales equipment and concluded an innovative distribution deal with National
Express which cut down on stock and improved the company's response to
demand.
So it is surprising that just as the company begins to reap the benefits of
his efforts, Mr Maxmin is leaving. 'He has pointed things in the right
direction, yet the achievement has yet to be triumphantly realised,' said Mr
Robert Snaith, analyst with Strauss Turnbull.
Even Laura Ashley executives admit there is much work left to do,
particularly given the continuing losses in the US and the maturity of the
UK business. Yet there is little option other than to follow the tracks Mr
Maxmin has laid.
The main difference, according to analysts, is likely to be a greater
emphasis on the operational controls which were certainly lacking in the US.
While the company does not intend to replace Mr Maxmin immediately, the
board has been substantially strengthened by the addition of Mr Steven
Cotter, the retail executive who is known by some in the City of London as
'Mr Detail'.
The City is also relieved that there were no nasties in the results
following Mr Maxmin's departure, implying steady progress this year towards
pre-tax forecasts of Pounds 10m.
Nevertheless, there is a degree of uneasiness over the party line that the
split was 'a mature separation over a disagreement on investment levels' -
whatever that means.
'When someone says there was a mature disagreement you know there has been
blood on the floor,' said one analyst.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940415

