FT942-15613

FT  14 APR 94 / DSS resists identity card scheme for benefit claims


   By ROBERT PESTON, ROLAND RUDD and STEWART DALBY


The Department of Social Security is fiercely resisting a recommendation
from the government's efficiency unit for the introduction of an identity
card system which it is claimed could prevent fraud costing the department
hundreds of millions of pounds a year.
Senior government officials said yesterday that the unit, under Sir Peter
Levene, the prime minister's adviser on efficiency, is urging that a pilot
scheme be launched involving claimants in one small town being issued with
plastic identity cards.
The recommendation is based on a report, Security, Fraud and Benefit
Expenditure, recently completed by a DSS team.
However, the government is unlikely to approve the pilot scheme, officials
said yesterday. 'They are afraid of being embarrassed if anything goes wrong
with the scheme,' one official said.
An identity card system would probably involve benefit claimants being
issued with cards which store encoded data on the shape of their hands. The
cards would be 'read' by electronic scans each time they collected benefit.
Although the error rate on such scans is small, ministers fear that a huge
political row would be caused if anyone was wrongly denied benefit.
The efficiency unit had expected its recommendation would be supported by Mr
Peter Lilley, the social security secretary, and by Mr Michael Portillo,
chief secretary to the Treasury, because of the potentially significant
savings.
'A system of identity cards could save the government hundreds of millions
each year lost in fraud on the Pounds 80bn social security budget,' one
official said.
However, the official complained that both ministers were 'dragging their
feet'. Some senior DSS officials are also hostile to the identity card
scheme.
While both the DSS and the Treasury are publicly committed to what another
official called 'a wait and see approach' to identity cards, ministers say
privately that the difficulties associated with introducing them are likely
to prove intractable.
One senior DSS official said: 'Ministers will obviously read the report from
the efficiency unit with interest, but anyone who thinks it is a panacea to
their problems is misguided.'
The efficiency unit is particularly disappointed with the government
response because it believed it had persuaded Mr John Major, the prime
minister, that the civil liberties arguments against carrying identity cards
were unconvincing.
Benefit cuts urged, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940414

