FT944-14441

FT  22 OCT 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Out to prove that Esops are no
fable


   By CLIVE FEWINS


The meeting was protracted, tense and in need of light relief. It eventually
arrived. A noisy, difficult shop steward suddenly got up and walked out
saying he wanted no more plans to introduce an employee ownership scheme
into the bus company.
'Unfortunately in the heat of the moment he took the wrong door and ended up
in the broom cupboard,' said Nigel Mason, a director with Capital
Strategies.
'The incident broke the ice perfectly. There was instant hilarity and the
atmosphere changed completely. A few minutes later the man emerged from the
cupboard in a different frame of mind and negotiations were resumed. He
eventually put far more than the minimum investment into the scheme.'
Mason, 35, and his team of eight at Capital Strategies specialise in
employee buy-outs and introducing employee share ownership plans (Esops)
into existing organisations. In spite of being small they claim to be
leaders in the field.
Since the company started in January 1992, Mason and his team have arranged
Esops for organisations ranging from a Scottish paper-making company with
1,400 employees to a 10-man Midlands retailing operation in which the
husband and wife owners wished to relinquish control gradually.
They have advised 10 bus companies on Esop schemes and completed schemes
with six of them. Since the beginning of this year the company, which has
offices in a former print and board warehouse in Shoreditch, London, has
followed a slightly different tack.
'We realised we had pretty well exhausted the bus company market. Our
experience of the private sector showed it to be more diffuse and difficult
to find the right sort of companies to target than public sector
organisations that were making the transition into the private sector, so we
have been looking hard at the latter,' said Leon Boros, finance director.
Boros, 32, and his co-director Ann Tyler, 36, a lawyer, decided to direct
the fourth member of the fee-earning team, Simon Smith, towards a six-month
marketing exercise developing business in the public sector. The company
could afford this. It had a capital base of Pounds 71,000, no borrowings and
a profit at the last year end of almost Pounds 100,000 on a turnover of
Pounds 400,000.
The company believes the exercise has paid off. Smith has been looking hard
at local government services such as waste disposal, accountancy and
financial services, ground maintenance and architectural and planning
services, all of which are now exposed to competitive tender. A solution for
many is to arrange employee buy-outs or joint ventures with employees.
Smith is about to conclude a contract for Capital Strategies to advise one
of the 25 franchisees that will eventually manage segments of the railway
system and, recently, he and Tyler spent two days at Hem Hill colliery,
Stoke-on-Trent, conducting interviews with 150 miners and surface workers
for Coal Investments, which leases four mines from British Coal.
Capital Strategies is about to recruit two new fee-earning staff because of
Smith's work. His efforts, which were non-fee-earning, mean that profits are
likely to dip below the Pounds 100,000 level this year.
'This was to be expected. We now have more support staff and a higher cost
base from which to calculate. From our experiences in this field before we
came together we all know that the likely trading pattern means there will
be one good year and one bad year,' said Mason.
The company's policy is to plough back profits at the end of the year. Its
main obligation is to pay a dividend on the Pounds 35,000 working capital
put up initially by Scott Bader, a long- established employee-owned business
based in Northamptonshire that manufactures synthetic resins.
Scott Bader is chaired by a former joint managing director of British Rail,
Jim O'Brien, who is the non-executive chairman of, and an occasional
part-time consultant for, Capital Strategies.
The four believe employee ownership will grow. 'In the US there are 10,000
Esops representing 12 per cent of the private sector workforce. In this
country, with an economy that works in a broadly comparable way in the
mid-sized sector, there are about 150 companies with more than 50 employees
that are more than 30 per cent owned by employees,' said Mason.
Mason said that in the US figures showed the investment performance of
quoted companies, which were more than 10 per cent employee-owned,
outperformed the main Standard & Poor's US index by more than 25 per cent.
Capital Strategies operates like any other consultant, charging negotiated
fees. For some jobs however they have to accept work on a contingency basis,
which means 'no success: no fee'.
'Our appetite for this kind of more risky work is limited, but we have to be
competitive with some of the big city accountancy firms who will sometimes
take on work of this sort on a contingency basis,' Boros said. 'We have come
to live with risk.'
'However, as we grow, while the risks associated with individual big
projects will get greater, the spread of our portfolio will reduce overall
risk.'
Capital Strategies has recently attracted an investment of Pounds 150,000 in
the company from the Baxi Partnership, the UK's biggest employee-owned
manufacturing company.
Between them Baxi and Scott Bader jointly own 32 per cent of the equity. In
addition Baxi has advanced the money to set up a Pounds 150,000 revolving
loan fund to assist managers and employees to investigate the possibility of
employee buy-outs using the services of Capital Strategies.
The other important activity is the establishment of a Pounds 20m venture
capital fund by means of which institutions would be able to invest in
employee-owned companies.
'We have found part of the finance and we are looking for a professional
fund manager to administer it,' Mason said.
'This will be the first fund in the UK dedicated to employee buy-outs, and
of course the plan is that we shall be able to refer Capital Strategies'
clients to it. It's all part of our plan to convince people that in the UK
Esops are no fable.'
Capital Strategies, 59 Charlotte Road, London EC2A 3QT. Tel: 071-613 3745.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

941022

