FT943-729

FT  28 SEP 94 / Evidence of skills shortages hardens


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff and RICHARD DONKIN


The first authoritative evidence that serious skills shortages are
appearing, particularly in the Midlands and south-east, was published
yesterday in a survey funded by the Department of Employment.
The survey, carried out in the spring, found 11 per cent of employers saying
that they had vacancies they described as 'hard-to-fill' compared with 6 per
cent last year and 5 per cent in 1992.
The figures reinforce growing evidence that the labour market is tightening.
The hard-to-fill vacancies were in sectors such as nursing and teaching, as
well as some blue-collar jobs, particularly in textile manufacturing.
The Confederation of British Industry's last quarterly report in July found
9 per cent of its members believing that shortages of skilled labour would
be a constraint on output - up from 5 per cent in January.
Mr Tony Lloyd, a senior Labour employment spokesman, said yesterday's survey
was alarming. He said: 'It is a disgrace that millions of people remain
unemployed at the same time as employers are unable to fill thousands of
skilled job vacancies.'
In the survey 96 per cent of employers said they would be willing in
principle to employ long-term unemployed people. But the long-term jobless
are generally the least skilled, and in 82 per cent of the cases reporting
hard-to-fill vacancies employers said they were looking for people with
qualifications or experience.
Employers, particularly in manufacturing, distribution and consumer
services, described a skills gap in relation to their business objectives
and their employees - 17 per cent said such a gap existed, the same as last
year.
Employers most frequently felt that computer literacy, personal skills,
general communication, and practical and management skills were the most
needed.
Yet 37 per cent of employers surveyed did not have a training plan for
employees and just under half had no training budget. There was a slight
fall in the number of employers funding or arranging off-the-job training
for at least some employees.
The survey suggests growing penetration of initiatives such as Investors in
People, which seeks to match employees' skills to companies' business plans,
and the new national vocational qualifications.
Two-thirds of those questioned in a survey published yesterday said they
would take a pay cut if the right job came along, Richard Donkin writes.
The survey of 184 female and 75 male job applicants by Select Appointments,
a recruitment agency, found 71 per cent were willing to take a cut in salary
to work in their favourite industry. A slightly higher proportion of men
than women said they would work for less.
Two in five men said that they were willing to take a pay cut of up to 20
per cent and almost one in 10 of them said they would accept a reduction of
up to 30 per cent.
Asked to pick who they would prefer to have as an employer from a list of
eight well-known names, 61 per cent chose Mr Richard Branson, Virgin group
chairman. The least popular choice was Mr Alan Sugar - chosen by 7 per cent
of the respondents.
Skill Needs in Britain. IFF Research, 26 Whiskin Street, London, EC1R 0BP.
Pounds 40.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940928

