FT942-14657

FT  19 APR 94 / International Bonds: US rate rise unsettles potential
Eurobond issuers


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


An unexpected rise in US short-term interest rates yesterday afternoon upset
a promising start to the week in the Eurobond market. Syndicate managers
said several borrowers had been close to launching mothballed Eurobond
issues but were unsettled by the market volatility which was triggered by
the Federal Reserve's action.
'The US rate rise has closed the sterling fixed-rate market for the week,
and probably the other currencies too,' said one syndicate manager.
L-Bank, the recently re-named state development agency of Baden-Wurttemberg,
was putting the final touches to its long-awaited D-Mark global bond
offering yesterday but today's planned launch was in doubt after the US
news. Prior to the rise, market talk on the five-year issue, which could
raise between DM2bn and DM3bn, was 35 to 37 basis points over the five-year
Treuhand bonds due October 1999.
L-Bank and the lead managers, Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan and Salomon Brothers,
are expected to take a final decision this morning on whether the deal
should go ahead.
Syndicate managers said L-Bank's dithering was creating a backlog of D-Mark
Eurobond issues. For example, KfW, the German government agency for
redevelopment, is thought to be keen to raise DM1.5bn though an offering of
10-year Eurobonds but is waiting for L-Bank's larger offering to be out of
the way. Greece is also looking to tap the D-Mark floating-rate market next
week.
By contrast, Sweden is expected to take advantage of the rise in Canadian
government bond yields to attract investors to its CDollars 200m issue of
five-year Eurobonds which is due to be launched today via Daiwa. The bonds
are likely to be priced to yield between 20 and 30 basis points over the
five-year area of the Canadian government bond yield curve.
Spain is reported to be seeking advice from four or five firms on an Ecu1bn
issue of 10-year Eurobonds. Price talk on this issue is around 15 basis
points over the yield on the French government's Ecu OAT.
Among yesterday's issues, 3i, the UK venture capital company which is
earmarked for a partial flotation later this year, took advantage of steady
market conditions in the morning to raise Pounds 150m through an issue of
five-year floating-rate notes (FRNs).
The discounted margin at re-offer on the notes of 25 basis points over Libor
was described as reasonable and syndicate managers said the notes sold
quickly with around two thirds going to UK investors. When the notes were
freed to trade, they rose from their re-offer price of 99.725 to 99.75. The
offering replaced an Pounds 125m FRN issue which 3i called earlier this
year.
Standard & Poor's affirmed its double-A rating on the long term debt of
Daimler-Benz, the German luxury car, aerospace and defence group, but
changed its outlook to negative from stable to reflect difficult operating
conditions facing the company's key areas.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940419

