FT944-6070

FT  30 NOV 94 / EU close to deal on energy markets


   By EMMA TUCKER


   BRUSSELS


European Union energy ministers yesterday edged closer to breaking a
two-year deadlock on opening Europe's energy networks to competition, but
there will be no final decision on how to proceed until at least the middle
of next year.
At a meeting in Brussels, energy ministers agreed to investigate whether a
French proposal for liberalising energy markets would bring the same
benefits to consumers and industry as the Commission's plans for allowing
power companies access to other countries' transmission systems, so-called
negotiated third party access.
Although the idea of a study looks like yet another stalling tactic, it at
least breaks the deadlock that has prevailed on energy liberalisation for
two years. Mr Tim Eggar, the UK energy minister, said he detected a strong
shift in sentiment towards the idea of liberalised energy markets.
'There has been a very major change in the attitude taken by the Council,'
said Mr Eggar. 'It was only about a year ago that it was only the UK and
Portugal arguing for liberalisation and the other countries either being
very strongly opposed or not taking a firm stand.'
Under the French proposal for liberalisation - known as the 'single buyer'
proposal - power companies would negotiate access to transmission systems in
other member states via an operator in the buyer's country. The operator
would be responsible for running the system and meeting new demand for
electricity.
The idea was criticised earlier this week by Mr Karel Van Miert, the
commissioner responsible for competition policy, who argued that it would
allow power companies in certain member states to preserve a monopoly on
imports and exports.
However, the French argue that it is important to look at alternatives to
liberalisation, and that there is no reason why its system should not
coexist with third party access.
'The conclusions of the council show that there is a real desire on behalf
of member states to move ahead so there is no need for the commission to
take matters into its own hands,' said Mr Pierre Mandil, a senior French
diplomat.
The ministers also agreed that energy companies should be required to
'unbundle' themselves by separating the financial accounts of their
production, transport and distribution arms. This will make it harder for
companies to subsidise loss-making parts of their businesses out of the
profits from their monopoly over distribution of energy.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

941130

