FT944-11050

FT  08 NOV 94 / Brussels drops plans to lessen tax burden on multinationals


   By EMMA TUCKER


   BRUSSELS


The European Commission yesterday dropped proposals designed to reduce the
tax burden on European companies with subsidiaries in more than one EU
country.
The draft directive, aimed at ending double taxation on cross-border
operations between parent companies and subsidiaries in other EU nations,
was abandoned after a four-year deadlock.
Mrs Christian Scrivener, commissioner responsible for taxation, told a
meeting of EU finance ministers in Brussels that she was withdrawing the
proposals because of the staunch opposition of certain countries, notably
Portugal but also Belgium and Greece, which feared a significant loss of
revenue.
Furthermore, some EU states believe there is no need for common legislation
on the issue because of an existing network of bilateral agreements.
The failure of member states to agree on the issue represents a blow to the
single European market and will irritate European multinationals.
Mr Zygmunt Tyszkiewicz, secretary-general of Unice, the European business
federation, said the proposal would have allowed companies to reorganise
themselves and operate on a 'truly pan-European basis' by avoiding double
taxation on interest and royalties payments between companies that were part
of the same group.
Trans-European enterprises currently pay tax at source for payments between
parent companies and subsidiaries.
Fears of a cut in revenue are especially evident in member states that are
net importers of technology and capital, such as Portugal and Greece.
The lack of progress also represents a setback for German ambitions to make
tax a priority of its six-month presidency of the European Union.
In less than two months, Germany will hand over the chair to the French, and
in that time it is unlikely that significant advances will be made on two
other key taxation matters: an EU-wide system for taxing savings -
withholding tax - and the introduction of a definitive system of VAT.
Yesterday, EU ministers discussed the continuing difficulties associated
with EU-wide withholding tax, which has been consistently opposed by the UK
and Luxembourg.
Germany, which suffers considerably from capital flight, wants EU countries
to agree on a minimum withholding tax to prevent people moving their savings
to other countries and thus avoid paying tax.
Levels of tax currently vary between the member states. Luxembourg, for
example, does not levy taxes on savings held by non-residents in the
country. It fears that an EU-wide tax would benefit other tax havens of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development such as Switzerland
and Monaco.
Brussels balks at German TV venture, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 18

941108

