FT942-12846

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (14): Helping to oil the
market's wheels - Stock lending


   By JOHN THORNHILL


Stock lending has seemingly become inextricably linked with the antics of Mr
Robert Maxwell. The press magnate's infamous habit of borrowing stock from
one part of his empire to prop up loans in another has brought the concept
into disrepute in many minds.
But as respectable fund mangers never tire of pointing out, Mr Maxwell was
not involved in stock lending or borrowing so much as stock stealing.
There is general agreement that the legitimate practice of stock lending -
whereby big fund managers lend bonds or equities to brokers for a few days
or weeks to cover short positions - is highly desirable. It helps oil the
market's wheels by making it easier for brokers to buy and sell stocks. 'It
is ultimately in our interests and those of our clients to have a liquid
market. That is why we lend our stocks,' says Mr Michael Robarts, director
of Fleming Investment Management.
London has become the centre of lending for many European and far east
stocks while New York controls the US market. The UK market is regulated by
the Bank of England, which has drawn up a code of guidance for those wanting
to borrow and lend, and the Inland Revenue, which must give prior approval
to all participants. It also keeps a close eye on who lends what to whom to
ensure it takes its slice of the profits in tax.
Mr Richard Weir, director-general of the Institutional Fund Managers'
Association, says: 'The Bank of England, together with the Inland Revenue,
has done a fantastic job in establishing a regulatory scheme for stock
lending. And if that scheme is applied as it must be then the procedures are
wholly safe.'
The big institutional owners of stocks are normally quite willing for their
fund managers to lend stock so long as the trustees are kept informed and
are assured of the quality of the collateral against which it is lent.
Investment trusts, for example, are often knowledgeable and happy
participants. Unit trusts are normally less so because of potential problems
of redemption. In many cases, the commission earned for lending the stock
helps offset the administration fees of running the fund.
But there is a developing trend among big institutional funds to lend their
stocks directly to brokers themselves rather than conducting it through
their custodians. CIN Management, the British Gas pension fund and PosTel
are all active in lending stocks direct.
Mr Peter Harris, of the marketable securities division of CIN, which owns
more than Pounds 8bn of UK securities and Pounds 4bn of international
assets, says: 'We started lending UK securities in the 1970s and when we
started to build up our international portfolio it seemed natural to lend
that too. We had been approached by our custodian to lend our stock but they
were offering to take 50 per cent of our revenue. We knew the people we were
lending to and thought there was no reason why we should not do it
ourselves.
'We work on a percentage fee basis but it can be highly variable. In the UK
it is anything from  1/4 per cent to up to 1 per cent of the value of the
stock lent. But on the international side it can be as low as  1/4 per cent
up to a maximum of 2 1/2 per cent,' he says.
Others attest that the UK stock lending market has become highly competitive
deterring many fund managers. Mr Robarts, of Fleming, says: 'Because
institutional investors in the UK are so dominant there is an excess supply
of UK equities so rates of lending are very low. It is a borrowers' market
and they can be choosy about what they offer as collateral. There are more
lucrative opportunities to make a turn in lending out the stock of rarer
European companies.' More than 90 per cent of the stocks that FIM lends are
overseas securities.
But the balance of power may swing back towards the lender in the UK because
of the proposed changes to the settlement systems. The reduction in the
settlement period from 10 days to five and the eventual introduction of the
Crest trading system should ensure stock lending becomes ever more important
to ensure adequate liquidity. There are fears that otherwise stock will be
immobilised with the registrars and there could be some panic in the market.
Some fund managers, however, do not participate in the UK market because of
the nature of the collateral offered. Receiving cash as collateral can
create problems because lenders are taxed on the interest earned. Bank
guarantees or highly rated bonds provide a more acceptable alternative. But
it is becoming more common in the UK to offer equities in the form of
short-term Talisman certificates (STCs). Some fund managers worry that such
collateral is inherently risky. Any lurch in the stock market could
seriously undermine the security of that collateral resulting in equities
being sold at uncertain prices to replace existing stock.
For that reason, Mr John Lambert, operations director at Schroders
Investment Management, advises his clients not to lend stock in the UK.
'Stock lending with bad collateral is not worth the hassle for people like
me. I would rather refuse a deal based on the wrong collateral than create
extra risks for my clients.
'I have always had problems with short-term Talisman certificates as
collateral because of their poor visibility. You cannot see the value of the
stock behind them,' he says. The broader worry is that if many others think
the same then liquidity will suffer.
Some large fund institutional investors, notably the insurance companies
such as Norwich Union and the Prudential, are happy to accept STCs. But
other institutional investors argue it is easier for insurance companies to
justify risk to distant policy-holders than it is for fund managers to do so
to immediate clients. Some insurance companies privately share the concerns
over the quality of collateral and suggest the Bank of England should
tighten up their guidelines.
But other insurance companies defend their actions by suggesting the risk is
only theoretical. 'I am not aware there has ever been a default in the stock
lending market,' says one manager. But, the doubters argue, that does not
mean there will never be one.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940427

