FT943-855

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Company News: BgB's sale raises mortgage
stakes - The bank aims to pool resources with Nord LB


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


The recent decision by Bankgesellschaft Berlin (BgB) to sell a 10 per cent
stake to Norddeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale (Nord LB) for DM1bn (Dollars
600m) could mark a turning point in BgB's strategy to capture a niche in the
rapidly expanding mortgage sector in north and eastern Germany.
Nord LB's access to BgB should allow the Hanover-based bank, the largest
public savings bank in the region, to start denting the monopoly held in the
eastern state of Brandenburg by Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale, Lower
Saxony's largest bank.
BgB, which was founded last January, is one of the first German institutions
to bring the public and private banking sectors under one holding company.
BgB includes the state-owned Landesbank Berlin, the private Berliner Bank,
and the private Berliner Hypotheken-und Pfandbriefbank mortgage bank.
Through its monopoly stake in Landesbank Berlin, the region's public savings
bank, the state of Berlin holds a 67.7 per cent stake in BgB, with the
Gothaer Insurance group holding 10 per cent, and minority shareholders
holding the remaining 22.3 per cent. By last June, BgB's consolidated
business volume was DM222bn.
However, the ability of the state of Berlin to retain its high stake has
been undermined by the city's parlous finances. It is strapped for cash,
running a budget deficit of nearly DM9bn, and embarking on more public
spending cut-backs. As a means of reducing the deficit, the state of Berlin
is free to decrease its stake in BgB to 50 per cent plus one share, the
minimum required to legally guarantee the deposits of Landesbank Berlin. The
question was how it would find the right partner for the initial sale of a
10 per cent stake in the Landesbank Berlin.
'We had been seeking Nord LB as a partner for some time,' said Mr Dietrich
Beier, BgB's chief economist. 'Of course, the DM1bn which the state of
Berlin will obtain from selling a stake of the Landesbank is very important
for the city's finances. But for BgB, we saw Nord LB's presence in BgB as a
crucial development of our strategy,' he added.
Part of BgB's strategy with Nord LB is targeted on the mortgage sector,
reckoned to be one of the fastest growing sectors in eastern Germany.
Private residential demand - and demand for housing loans in the five
eastern states - is expected to grow between 12 per cent and 15 per cent
this year, and continue to grow by double digits over the next few years.
But the question is how Nord LB and BgB can together tap into the market.
At the moment, there are two mortgage banks in the BgB holding company:
Berliner Hypotheken-und Pfandbriefbank, and Braunschweig-Hanoversche
Hypothekenbank in which Nord LB holds a 30 per cent stake and BgB 60 per
cent.
'What we want to do is to merge these two mortgage banks and pool our
resources because we can then tap a huge market in this part of Germany,'
explained Mr Beier. Such a merger would either require the agreement of Nord
LB, or else BgB would need to hold 75 per cent of Braunschweig-Hanoversche
Hypothekenbank to push through the merger. That would mean buying 15 per
cent of Nord LB's stake in the mortgage bank.
BgB believes it can avoid this costly step and still merge the two mortgage
banks largely because of the new relationship formed with Nord LB following
its 10 per cent stake in BgB.
'We would hope to pool our resources in the two mortgage banks,' said Mr
Ralf Sernau, head of investor relations in BgB. Such a merger would lead to
the creation of Germany's fourth largest mortgage bank, but the largest one
in terms of assets.
For Nord LB's part, the merger, the access by Nord LB and BgB to each
other's customers and markets, and Nord LB's 10 per cent stake in BgB would
allow the Hanover bank to gain a foothold in the state of Brandenburg.
More crucially from Nord LB's point of view, it would be in a much stronger
position to challenge West LB, Nord LB's great competitor which is making
rapid inroads into eastern Germany.
For BgB, Nord LB's stake in BgB would allow this Berlin financial
institution to take over the Nord LB's EDP computer processing system. At
the moment, all three banking institutions under BgB have different computer
systems. And since BgB has identified Nord LB as the most effective network
 -Landesbank Berlin is operating under its system - all the softwear of the
BgB will be lined up with Nord LB. 'We will all have immediate access to
customers, accounts, and information,' said Mr Beier.
Once the mortgage banks are merged and Nord LB's 10 per cent in BgB is
signed and sealed, BgB will tackle its next project. With the state of
Berlin's stake in Landesbank set to decrease by 10 per cent to 57.7 per cent
following its sale to Nord LB, there is speculation that Berlin is seeking
to reduce its stake to just above 50 per cent.
'In which case, we would consider a foreign partner,' said Mr Beier.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940927

