FT943-914

FT  27 SEP 94 / Gateway to China: Investment banks moving into Hong Kong


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


Investment bankers are moving into Hong Kong.
It is not that they have decided that the colony's transition to Chinese
rule, in 1997, is likely to be trouble-free. Nor are they overlooking the
chances of financial turmoil, as the Hong Kong dollar's link to the US
dollar is tested in the run-up to, and during, the changeover.
But they have decided that Hong Kong is just too good an opportunity to
miss, as both the gateway to China and as a regional hub for the booming
economies of south-east Asia.
The number of employees and offices in the colony have risen sharply this
year. Swiss Bank Corp now employs 400 people, against 340 a year ago.
Goldman Sachs has grown more rapidly, now employing more than 400 people in
Hong Kong, compared with around 200 a year ago. Morgan Stanley currently
employs 450 people in Asia (excluding Japan) and expects that figure to rise
to 530 by the end of this year, from 320 last year.
'If you look at the growth rates in the region then basic maths tells you
that there are going to be enormous opportunities in the issuance and
trading of securities,' says Mark Evans, managing director of Goldman Sachs
(Asia).
Hong Kong is close to the customer, he says, and investment banking is a
client business: 'To work for the best issuing and investing clients in the
region, you have to be local and in the local information flows.' It is on
this basis that investment banks are reorganising their global operations.
Jobs that were once done in New York, London, Tokyo or Zurich are being
transferred to Hong Kong as the volume of business grows.
Swiss Bank Corporation has relocated its global head of equity trading to
Hong Kong from Zurich; it also plans to station its deputy chief executive
in Singapore. Warburg has transferred a four-person capital markets team
from London to Hong Kong to provide on the ground expertise for capital
hungry Asian companies. Salomon Brothers has created a 'syndicate desk' in
Hong Kong responsible for Asian equity transactions - formerly handled from
London.
But many of the regional jobs are coming to Hong Kong from Tokyo, with banks
concentrating on Japanese business alone from Tokyo.
Salomon Brothers upgraded Hong Kong to take charge of its Asian business,
excluding Japan, earlier this year. Staff expect that within a year the Hong
Kong office will also boast a main board director. This will be in addition
to a board director in Tokyo.
Japan still possesses the largest and most liquid financial markets in Asia
 -markets where investors can execute large transactions involving
derivatives, such as futures, options and swaps. But 'the Chinese and Asian
client likes to be serviced out of Asia and although Japan is in Asia it's
not quite the same,' says one US investment banker. 'Tokyo is a long way
away.'
Hong Kong's market, the largest in Asia after Tokyo, is relatively small.
Stock index options were only introduced last year, while the biggest
derivative instruments are warrants and index futures. But Hong Kong, not
Tokyo, is the place to tap into the powerful networks of overseas Chinese.
Overseas Chinese, numbering 20m-30m people, make up the merchant class in
much of Asia, dominating economic life in Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and
Indochina. However, although large in number and in wealth, they keep a low
profile. There are large anti-Chinese lobbies in many of the countries in
which they do business. There were anti-Chinese riots in Indonesia earlier
this year and the Malays have been pushing for years for a fairer
distribution in economic power.
For this reason, they prefer to hold their public assets in Hong Kong. The
colony is a Chinese city and a free market. Unlike Singapore it is also an
easy place to do business.
The banks, themselves, are wary of Singapore. They see it as a market where
information flows are restricted by government sensitivities - with limits
on how frank they can be and even greater limits on how provocative they can
be.
Banks are, nonetheless, expanding their operations in Singapore, and other
Asian emerging markets.
Typical is Warburg, which currently employs about 250 in Hong Kong. Mr
Rodney Ward arrived in Hong Kong this summer with the aim of 'building an
integrated investment banking business that has a base in Hong Kong and is
spread throughout Asia'. He says that most of the bank's expansion in
staffing will be in Korea and Taiwan - which Warburg will soon upgrade to
full branch status - and possibly in Singapore.
But by far the the bulk of banks' expansion plans are for their Hong Kong
operations. Many of Asia's other markets are monitored by regulators, who
are wary of foreign securities companies and worried that they may lose
control of their exchange rates and markets to foreigners.
Hong Kong also has the advantage of its proximity to China. Many overseas
Chinese are using their operations in Hong Kong as a springboard into China,
raising capital in the colony for operations on the mainland.
Typical is the Lippo group, an Indonesian Chinese group, which holds most of
its public assets in Hong Kong, but is directing its operations at business
opportunities in finance, hotels, electrical power and ports on the
mainland, especially in Fujian, the group's ancestral home.
Banks also see the colony as a gateway to China. Many have stationed their
'China teams' in Hong Kong, until they can be transplanted to Shanghai or
Beijing - using the colony as a staging post to marshal their resources.
These operations are necessarily more short-term.
But most of these investments are being made on the basis that the
investment banks intend to stay in Hong Kong. They are not expanding with
the intention of getting out tomorrow. Banks are betting on the colony as a
future financial centre.
Should times become too troubled, the banks would be able to move out of
Hong Kong just as quickly as they are moving in. Investment banking is a
relatively mobile industry.
And they see their other Asian offices as a way of spreading their risk:
'You could do it all from Hong Kong but you don't put everything here;
political risk militates against that so you build up the regional offices,'
says one banker.
But what they are really betting on is China. Says Mr Ward of Warburg:
'While there will be undoubtedly political uncertainty, Hong Kong's
importance as a financial centre will continue. You either believe in China
or you don't. We do.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940927

