FT942-16393

FT  11 APR 94 / More arrests expected in mortgage fraud probe


   By ANDREW JACK


Police are expected to arrest several individuals early this week at the end
of an investigation into one of the UK's largest mortgage frauds.
The action would follow arrests and charges brought last Thursday and Friday
against more than a dozen people linked to an alleged fraud connected to the
collapsed Harrovian Group, the development company based in Harrow, north
London.
A total of up to 18 people are expected to be charged after a three-year
investigation by the Metropolitan Police fraud squad since Harrovian's
failure in 1991.
The total sums involved in the fraud could be as large as Pounds 100m, and
have triggered payments from the Solicitors' Compensation Fund believed to
be between Pounds 30m and Pounds 40m.
At the end of last week police brought a total of 101 charges against 13
people from the home counties, mostly on grounds of conspiracy to defraud
various banks and building societies. Barclays Bank is believed to have lost
about Pounds 10m.
Of those arrested late last week, Mr William Johnston, 36, described as a
consultant, of Kenton, north-west London, was charged on 22 counts of
conspiracy to defraud banks and financial institutions.
Mr Guy Lucas, 38, was also charged with 22 offences.
Mr Andrew Trowbridge, 50, a surveyor from Bushey, Hertfordshire, faces 17
related charges, and Mr David James, 40, from St Albans, Hertfordshire, who
is unemployed, faces 11 charges. A second surveyor, Mr Colin Pryke, 39, has
been charged with three fraud-related offences.
Mr Frank Bradbury, 57, from Beaconsfield, who is unemployed, faces eight
charges. Mr Gerald Dunleavy, 40, unemployed, of Ipswich, and Mr Paul Keeler,
40, a financial consultant, of Bexhill, face six charges. Harrow residents
Mr John Campbell, 58, a consultant, Mrs Beryl O'Shea, 37, a housewife, and
her husband Mr Lee O'Shea, 34, a taxi driver, each face one charge.
Mrs Valerie Milsom, 29, of Kenton, faces two charges of securing the
execution of a valuable security, and her husband Mr Martin Milsom, 32,
faces one similar charge.
Those charged will appear at Bow Street magistrates' court for a further
hearing on July 5.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940411

