FT941-12922

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (17): Vienna is still the crossroads - In an
echo of its past, Vienna is still the cradle of numerous bizarre barter
arrangements between eastern and western Europe, and far beyond /
Countertrade focus / Austria's pivotal role


   By MICHAEL LINDEMANN


When Gerhard Vogt heard that Indonesia was planning to use countertrade to
boost its exports, he got on the first flight to Jakarta.
He arranged a meeting with the trade minister, presented his credentials,
retired to the Austrian embassy and two days later drew up a countertrade
proposal which was very quickly transformed almost word for word into
Indonesia's counter trade legislation.
That happened in the early 1980s and since then Centrobank, where Vogt heads
the board of directors, has cornered most of the booming countertrade
business in Indonesia and nearby Malaysia.
Mr Vogt followed a long line of Viennese bankers who for decades have been
among the acknowledged masters of countertrade in all its many variations.
Vienna's countertraders learnt their skills in the years after World War Two
when product clearing became the standard form of business between east and
west at a time when cash remained in short supply and Communist economies
needed plant and know-how to rebuild their industries.
Straddling the divide between western clients and Comecon producers
desperate to improve their export statistics, Viennese trade-oriented banks
worked as go-betweens constructing deals so fanciful that, in one case, rock
breaking machinery was sold to the former Soviet Union and oranges were
taken in payment.
Although Indonesia hardly fits neatly into eastern Europe, Mr Vogt's
experience in prising open eastern countertrade markets made him a natural
choice to assist Indonesia's trade minister. Other Viennese trading houses,
such as Bank Austria's Handelsbank, do business in Indonesia and other areas
of the Pacific, but Centrobank leads the way with up to Dollars 500m worth
of business per year, almost five times more than it used to do within the
former Comecon trading bloc.
While countertrading in Indonesia still involves straightforward barter
deals - an exporter may, for example, ship industrial plant and receive
payment in plywood - the trade with parts of Comecon have become more
complex on account of the higher risk.
While some business in eastern Europe and many parts of the Middle East is
still done through state-owned foreign trade associations, most of the
countertrade is driven by regions of the former Soviet Union. Alternatively,
they are single companies trying to break into western export markets or
trade within what used to be Comecon, but lacking marketing or financing
skills.
According to Helmuth Bohunovsky, a member of the managing board, Austria
Handelsbank, many deals are now pre-purchases where the trade bank deposits
the revenues from the imports in an escrow account before the western
trading partner releases his goods to the exporter. More complicated
countertrade deals are done through so-called blocked evidence accounts and
involve vast amounts of field work to check the eastern partner's
credentials, Mr Bohunovsky says.
Many of Vienna's smaller countertraders have gone under since the business
became more complex and ceased to be the mainstay of east-west trade. Among
bigger banks, Vienna Commerz, a wholly-owned subsidiary of GiroCredit,
closed down its trading branch which handled standard barter deals in 1992,
and now makes its money buying state and enterprise debts, providing
pre-export financing and other devices necessary to bridge the gap between
the mismatched markets.
'All of this is still countertrade,' says Alexander Waldstein, the managing
director of AWT International Trade and Finance AG, one of the oldest and
best-known countertraders, which belongs to the Creditanstalt group. 'In
this case export finance is just an instrument to make it happen.'
While some Viennese banks argue that business in the former Comecon area is
now less lucrative because more currencies are convertible in countries such
as Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, Mr Waldstein says that eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union nevertheless represent up to 80 per cent
of AWT's business.
He admits that deals are now more complicated since the demise of the
foreign trade organisations, where one visit was enough to clinch a massive
trade. Now, he says, it is more a question of helping a Ukrainian company
sell its products in Greece where it has never done business before.
Vienna's countertraders also argue that some business in the former Soviet
Union reflects the fact that the senior positions in what used to be
state-owned enterprises are still staffed by people who know nothing but
countertrade. Growing economic problems in some areas of the former Soviet
Union provide a further incentive for countertrade.
'Take the Ukrainians,' says Konrad Reich, special projects manager at Vienna
Commerz. 'Now that they have run out of coupons (designed to replace the
rouble) they have reverted to the only currency - goods,' he says. Other
bankers point to areas outside the former Soviet Union, including China
where several Viennese banks are involved in countertrade transactions.
But after decades as the turntable between the two mismatched economic
blocs, will Vienna remain the world's countertrade capital? Centrobank's Mr
Vogt says that the old-school Viennese countertraders have died and that the
necessary expertise can now be deployed anywhere in the world, rendering a
particular geographical location like Vienna's redundant.
Others point to Dutch banks as notable countertraders, adding also that
Berlin has taken advantage of its geography and is increasingly becoming a
competitor to Vienna. Some also see London as another rival, partly due to
its traditional role as a major commodity trading centre.
However, attempts by banks and others to set up specialist countertrade
departments in the 1980s were not followed through as demand dissipated.
Most Viennese bankers, however, are convinced that, as a launch-pad for
emerging markets in the former Soviet Union, Vienna enjoys an advantage
which it will maintain for several years to come, not least because of its
excellent airline connections to the region.
They also agree that Viennese have contacts built up over decades and that
the city's history at the crossroads of Europe has taught them to scheme and
be flexible, making them ideal go-betweens in difficult markets worldwide.
'The Viennese are very complicated creatures,' says Vienna Commerz's Mr
Reich, telling the story of a German client who turned to the bank for help
with a countertrade in Egypt.
'All they saw was a straight line,' he said of the Germans. 'We Viennese can
see the line differently,' he added, laughing. 'It need not be straight at
all - it could be baroque.'

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940127

