FT944-2256

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (9): Competition hurts - Miners hit rock
bottom


   By Anthony Robinson


In communist times more than 8,000 workers were employed in the geologically
complex polymetallic ore mines around Roznava, a small town some 50km. west
of Kosice and close to the border with Hungary.
But the abolition of producer subsidies and the shift to world pricing
revealed the hopelessly uneconomic nature of most of the mines.
In a saga repeated in dozens of small towns throughout central and eastern
Slovakia thousands of miners have lost their jobs in an area of little
alternative employment as mines have been closed over the last four years or
production curtailed.
A similar fate still hangs over the Roznana mine near the town of Roznava
where the former siderite iron ore workings have already been closed and
uncertainty hangs over the potentially profitable polymetalic ore mine.
Production has already been suspended and its future will remain in doubt
until ways can be found of profitably treating a 50,000 tonne concentrated
ore stockpile and the rich ore body which still lies underground.
Two years ago Samax, the London-based parent of CMX Resources, established a
joint venture with Zelezorudne Bane, the state-owned company which runs the
Roznana mine. CMX, which was introduced to the mine while working with
Czechoslovak mining engineers in Tanzania four years ago, agreed to evaluate
the ores and seeks ways of eliminating the ecological hazards caused by the
stockpiles from which mercury had already been extracted.
But initial hopes that an Australian roasting process would solve the
problems of profitably separating the copper, silver, mercury, antimony,
arsenic and other metals proved vain.
Now CMX is experimenting with a hydro-metallic leaching process invented by
Sunshine Corporation of the US which 'could turn the mine into one of the
world's biggest producers of antimony along with 2m ounces of silver, and
smaller amounts of copper and other metals a year,' according to Mr Michael
Martineau, technical adviser to CMX on the project.
'We are fairly confident that the project will go ahead with an investment
of Dollars 10-Dollars 12m into what would be a long-life mine and treatment
facilities,' he adds. But such a decision hinges on the successful
completion of the leaching trials, and the price of antimony which is
currently at record levels.
Mr Vojtech Kral, managing director of Zelezorudne Bane, says 'we hoped that
events would move much faster, but our ores are very complex. Despite the
problems we have good co-operation with our UK partner,' he adds.
Mr Kral has successfully resisted former government plans to include the
mine in the voucher privatisation programme, arguing that it needs a real
owner who understands mining and is able to put in the capital required. He
and his management team would consider a management buy-out 'but only if the
price is one crown so that we could put new resources into developing the
mine', he says.
With bank interest rates between 18 and 22 per cent it would simply not be
possible to make the mine profitable if money had to be raised to buy
existing assets, he adds.
The only large scale mining still taking place in the Roznava area is at the
nearby Nizna Slana iron ore mine. Here 1,200 miners excavate 1m tonnes of
iron ore annually which is converted into around 450,000 tonnes of pellets
and shipped to the VSZ steel plant 40km. away.
Reserves are adequate for the next 10 to 15 years with sizeable further
deposits still to be confirmed.
The iron content of around 54 per cent is well below the 60-65 per cent
contained in the pellets which VSZ receives from Krivoi Rog in Ukraine and
costs are high because the mines are underground rather than opencast.
What keeps the mine in business is the cost difference between shipping ore
nearly 1,100km. by rail from Krivoi Rog and hauling it less than 50km. to
the steel plant which guarantees the livelihood of thousands of families
throughout eastern Slovakia and the survival of small towns such as Roznava.

The Financial Times


London Page III

941216

