FT944-14430

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: False prophets confounded


   By PETER ASPDEN


THE ETHICAL PRIMATE: HUMANS, FREEDOM AND MORALITY by Mary Midgley Routledge
Pounds 17.99, 193 pages
Intellectual history is full of attempts to reduce the complexities of human
behaviour to a single set of motives and characteristics. The latest
academic fundamentalists are those scientists who seek to debunk
philosophy's most profound dilemmas by claiming that our increased
biological knowledge of the human mind will provide the answers.
Mary Midgley, one of Britain's most engaged moral philosophers, will not
hear of such arguments. In this dense, but clearly-written counter-attack,
she stands up for the inherent knots and ambiguities which afflict so much
of our ethical discussion and seeks to find a more sophisticated framework
for future debate.
Her problem is, to philosophers at least, a familiar one: how to evade
crude, mechanistic accounts of human motivation without collapsing into a
kind of despairing relativism which has become a mocking key-note of today's
post-modern intellectual culture.
She begins her thesis by attacking some of the embedded positions which have
led us to this unseemly impasse: the false dualisms created by philosophers
between mind and matter, and between reason and feeling; the 'machine hype'
which champions those views of the human world which most closely correspond
to the physical world (she shrewdly includes both Marxism and free market
capitalism); and the over-simplistic notions of social Darwinism which have
also been plundered to serve economic ends.
All these positions, she explains, fail to take account of our 'slight and
misty nature'; they ignore the striking contradiction that we are frequently
divided but constantly seek to act as a unity, a predicament she describes
as 'a constantly ongoing project, a difficult, essentially incomplete
integration which can occupy our whole lives.'
Midgley is surely correct in identifying the modern attitude to religion as
part of the problem: she claims that secular philosophy has always found the
idea of 'deep, difficult inner conflict' unpalatable, as it was closely
linked with religious thinking.
'Enlightenment intellectuals, associating religion with folly, obscurantism,
asceticism and political oppression, deeply distrusted the very idea of
irremovable inner conflict. They also needed a fairly optimistic view about
human motivation in order to make the various revolutions they were
proposing look possible,' she says.
That we are still slaves to the Enlightenment project, despite the violent
denunciations of a Nietzsche or a Sartre, is central to Midgley's argument.
But the problems of the 20th century are not those of the 18th century; the
zeal of the atheist, such a dynamic intellectual force in a social context
of religious conformity, today is matched against a much-enfeebled enemy,
and has, in Midgley's view, over-stretched itself.
She seeks a way forward by turning to Darwin's own work on morality, and to
the significance of the 'quieter motives', those persistent undertones of
social awareness which we all possess, and which frequently over-ride our
urgent desire to be passionate, greedy, angry or resentful at any one
moment.
She also focuses on the binding power of 'sympathy', a value which has been
unjustly neglected due to its refusal to fall neatly into either side of the
thought/feeling divide, but which characterises so many human responses.
This is common-sense philosophy of the highest order; one can only hope that
more professional philosophers embrace the campaign against the slick
certainties and theoretical glibness of today's false prophets.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941022

