FT944-2801

FT  16 DEC 94 / Swiss Re and CS Holding strengthen business links


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


Swiss Reinsurance, the world's second largest reinsurance group, is to take
a 20 per cent stake in the derivatives arm of CS Holding, the financial
services group built around Credit Suisse.
Swiss Re will buy the holding in Credit Suisse Financial Products, the CS
subsidiary that is a world leader in financial derivative products, in a
cash and shares deal.
The companies did not disclose details of the CSFP transaction, but as part
of the consideration, CS Holding will raise its stake in Swiss Re from 5 per
cent to 9 per cent.
At yesterday's SFr794 closing price of a Swiss Re registered share, a 4 per
cent stake was worth SFr1.3bn (Pounds 630m).
Credit Suisse and CS First Boston, which each own 50 per cent of CSFP, will
see their capital stakes reduced to 40 per cent each.
Credit Suisse, however, will retain a 56 per cent voting stake, thereby
ensuring that its balance sheet backs up CSFP activities.
CSFP has capital and retained earnings of slightly less than Dollars 1bn.
Last year, its net income totalled SFr444m, and CS has said it has continued
to perform very strongly this year.
Swiss Re and CS also announced a strategic alliance in financial and
reinsurance products.
The two are launching a Dollars 200m (Pounds 122m) insurance investment fund
aimed at fledgling reinsurance companies, mainly in Asia and eastern Europe,
and two other joint ventures.
A second joint venture will be formed between Swiss Re and Credit Suisse, to
develop products for their common clients.
A third, between Swiss Re and CSFP, would develop and market derivatives on
reinsurance products.
This is the second major strategic move at Swiss Re in the past few months.
In September, it sold off its direct insurance interests for some SFr5.3bn.
Mr Lukas Muhlemann, a management consultant who joined the group as chief
executive in August, said the group had decided to concentrate on its core
reinsurance business.
Swiss Re said it felt that the application of financial derivatives to risk
management in reinsurance was a strategic area of the future.
'We feel we have to be in it,' the company said.
CS said it was finding that reinsurance was becoming an element in more and
more of its business deals and saw the alliance with Swiss Re as an
opportunity to develop new products.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941216

