FT942-15966

FT  13 APR 94 / LDP on offensive in Japan's PM contest


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


The quest for a new Japanese prime minister took a fresh turn yesterday when
Mr Yohei Kono, president of the opposition Liberal Democratic party,
yesterday put himself up for the job.
His move was intended to prevent a split in the LDP, still the largest party
in the Japanese parliament, by calling the bluff of Mr Michio Watanabe, a
powerful LDP faction leader, who had been threatening to form his own party
and join the right wing of the ruling coalition.
Such a defection by Mr Watanabe would have reduced the LDP's strength in the
parliament, and Mr Kono's move put pressure on him to show his loyalty to
the party or declare his hand. Later, an aide of Mr Watanabe was quoted on
television as saying that he had decided not to press his challenge.
The LDP jockeying developed as members of Japan's chaotic seven-party
coalition tried to heal their own divisions following the power struggle
unleashed by last week's resignation of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime
minister.
Leaders of the three right-wing coalition parties, representing a majority
of the alliance, again boycotted talks to discuss the leadership called by
the left wing, leaving them no closer to agreeing a candidate to replace Mr
Hosokawa.
But both sides made conciliatory statements afterwards, indicating that they
still want to try for an accord, rather than risk an early general election.
Japanese political analysts speculated that the coalition now had no option
but to try to work together again. The past few days have shown that neither
the left nor right wing can woo enough LDP defectors to achieve a majority.
Mr Tsutomu Hata, foreign minister, deputy prime minister and front-runner
for the succession, said he thought the alliance partners could overcome
their differences. Mr Hata is backed by the coalition's right wing.
There was an 'emotional wrangle' but the coalition framework had not yet
fallen apart, he claimed. Mr Hata was planning to depart today for the
ministerial meeting in Morocco of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, a possible sign that the coalition is closer to agreement.
Now was the time to 'cool off', said Mr Yuichi Ichikawa, head of Komeito,
the right-wing clean government party.
Mr Masayoshi Takemura, leader of the New Harbinger party, which tends to the
left, said coalition members should 'try to overcome their differences and
make a new start'.
No members of the left wing, including the Social Democratic party, the
largest coalition member, have tried to veto Mr Hata as a candidate.
The row is over how to contain, to the left wing's satisfaction, the
influence of Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the government's backroom strategist and joint
leader of Mr Hata's Japan Renewal party, who dominated the Hosokawa
administration.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940413

