FT943-12745

FT  23 JUL 94 / US and Russia disagree on Serbs


   By REUTER


   ZAGREB


Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, yesterday disputed Russia's view
that the Bosnian Serbs had responded positively to the international peace
plan for Bosnia, Reuter reports from Zagreb.
Russia indicated it believed the Serbs had not rejected the proposals for
the division of Bosnia. However, Mr Perry said yesterday: 'It was not an
acceptance of the plan and that is what the contact group had asked for.'
Russian officials said the Serbs' demand for more talks was 'rather
positive' and 'not devoid of logic'.
'We considered it not a positive answer but a disappointing answer and it is
going to greatly complicate the path ahead,' Mr Perry said yesterday after
talks with Nato and UN peacekeeping commanders on military steps to impose
the plan.
A 'contact group' comprising the US, France, Britain, Germany and Russia has
drafted a plan to split Bosnia almost evenly between the Serbs and a
Moslem-Croat alliance.
'We would hope, sincerely hope, that between now and the July 30 meeting (of
contact group foreign ministers) that the Bosnian Serbs will reconsider
their answer and give them something more positive to work on at that
meeting.'
Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Siulajzdic said the time for talks was over now
that the Serbs had rejected the plan. Asked if there was any way his side
would negotiate with the Serbs over borders, Mr Silajdzic said: 'The answer
is no.'
Mr Perry was completing a week-long trip through southeastern Europe to
assess military options in Bosnia after the Serb response.
'It was very important for me to get an assessment from them on the
alternatives available at this stage. . . And it's important to understand
the implications of going down one road or going down the other,' Mr Perry
said.
The group evaluated steps both in case of 'the optimistic outcome' in which
the Bosnian Serbs embraced the plan as is, and the alternative of a
'negative reaction - the peace plan not being implemented' by Serbs, he
said.
The Serbs did not reject the peace plan outright but attached conditions
which would require substantial renegotiations. The Moslems and Croats have
accepted but refuse any further bargaining.
Mr Perry's talks centred on a possible increase in international military
pressure on Serbs to accept the peace plan - and how to implement any final
peace.
The contact group has warned Serbs that international sanctions could be
tightened against Serbia and the use of allied air power increased.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940723

