FT942-16256

FT  12 APR 94 / Nato raids strain ties with Moscow: Yeltsin bitter at
exclusion from UN policy - Clinton defends strikes against Serbs in Bosnia


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


Relations between Russia and the west came under fresh strain yesterday
after a second Nato air strike against Serb forces bombarding the Bosnian
enclave of Gorazde.
United Nations officials said the Serb shelling continued sporadically for
about two hours after US aircraft bombed their positions for the second
successive day.
One shell fell yards from the local headquarters of the United Nations High
Commission for Refugees. The situation was reported to be calm at nightfall.
President Bill Clinton called the latest air strikes - which destroyed three
armoured personnel carriers and a truck - 'entirely appropriate'. He urged
the Serbs to resume talks and insisted that the raids had been in keeping
with Security Council decisions.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, warned that Nato was prepared
to attack again if shelling went on. He said the UN wanted the Serbs to pull
back to their positions of March 30 before they began their attack on
Gorazde, which is held by Bosnian Moslems.
Mr Clinton pledged to keep in touch with Russia's government, which has
complained bitterly about being excluded from UN policy in Bosnia. He said:
'They have a critical role to play if we are going to get those peace talks
going again.' President Boris Yeltsin, setting off for a visit to Spain,
told reporters he had complained to President Clinton that America had not
consulted Moscow before Sunday's attack.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, said in Madrid it had been
a 'big mistake' to launch air attacks without consulting Moscow. He called
the decision a hasty one that had failed to take account of all the
consequences. Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, refused to meet
Mr Charles Redman, the US negotiator, in Sarajevo and accused the UN of
siding with the Bosnian Moslems.
The Serbs blocked traffic in and out of the city and virtually broke off
relations with the UN. They said that from now on Serbs would deal with the
UN only through Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian special envoy, who travelled
to Pale, the Bosnian Serb stronghold above Sarajevo, for talks to ease the
crisis.
In yesterday's action, two US F-18s attacked Serbian T55 tanks and personnel
carriers with 20mm cannon and Mk 82 bombs after a tank had fired directly at
the town, ignoring the aircraft's warning passes and dropped flares. Three
personnel carriers were destroyed and a truck hit, said the US defence
department.
Hinting at direct Serbian intervention in the war in Bosnia, a senior
Yugoslav army officer said the 'act of aggression would lead to
unpredictable consequences' and that the army had taken steps 'for its own
defence'.
Mr Kozyrev said he had conveyed his concerns to Mr Christopher. 'I do not
want to aggravate the situation, which is bad as it is, but would like my
words to be taken very seriously,' he added.
General Pavel Grachev, the Russian defence minister, also voiced Moscow's
unhappiness in a conversation with Mr William Perry, his US counterpart.
Officials in Washington insisted the US had initiated the telephone
conversations of Mr Perry and Mr Christopher with their Russian
counterparts, and Mr Clinton's tense exchange with Mr Yeltsin on Sunday
night.
Shortly before yesterday's air raid the UN reported heavy shelling of the
centre of Gorazde. One shell injured many refugees sheltering in a school.
A UN estimate said 60 people died on Sunday night. Around 100 people had
already died in the two-week offensive.
Page 3
Zhirinovsky fans the flames
Bosnian Serbs choose the hard option
Rift grows over UN action
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940412

