FT943-718

FT  28 SEP 94 / MEPs back more funds for Ulster


   By DAVID GARDNER


The European parliament yesterday voted for increased aid to help cement the
peace process in Northern Ireland while giving a rare standing ovation to Mr
John Hume, leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and Labour
party.
The move came as unionists - responding to a warning by Mr Gerry Adams, the
Sinn Fein president, that the IRA might in time return to violence under a
new leadership - urged the government to make the IRA hand in its guns.
Mr Adams, visiting the US, tried to qualify his remarks, made in an
interview with the Boston Herald newspaper. He said he had been speaking
hypothetically and did not believe that the peace process would fail.
Mr Hume said last night that he was 'absolutely certain that the Provisional
IRA has totally ended its campaign. I have no doubt that the campaign has
totally finished'.
His reception was for his part in bringing about the IRA ceasefire. It also
emerged that the dominant socialist group at the Strasbourg assembly intends
to get the parliament to nominate the SDLP's lone MEP for the Nobel Peace
Prize.
The parliament voted overwhelmingly for more aid and a cessation of violence
by all paramilitaries in the province in order to reach a settlement which
'must earn the allegiance and agreement of all traditions' in Ulster.
The Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the hardline Democratic Unionist party and
also an MEP, was the sole dissenting voice in the debate.
He reminded the parliament that the IRA had still not agreed to a
'permanent' ceasefire, and that Mr Adams had warned of a return to violence
in three years if the IRA 'does not obtain satisfaction'.
The vote was carried by 380 votes to five but Mr Paisley's four apparent
supporters later contacted the parliament authorities to say that they had
inadvertently pressed the wrong voting button.
Mr Peter Schmidhuber, European Union commissioner in charge of the budget,
welcomed the parliament's backing for increased funding. He said the
commission proposed raising the EU's contribution to the International Fund
for Ireland from the Ecu15m (Pounds 11.8m) a year it has contributed since
1989 to Ecu20m.
The EU has already allocated Ecu1.23bn in structural aid to Northern Ireland
for 1994-99 - up from Ecu1.07bn in 1989-93 - to develop infrastructure,
research and development, training and small businesses.
The emphasis of yesterday's debate was less on numbers than on
reconciliation.
Mrs Glenys Kinnock, the prominent Labour Euro-MP, was behind the effort to
nominate Mr Hume for a Nobel Prize, never previous-ly attempted by the
parliament.
She was firmly against any attempt to include Mr Adams in the nomination and
said it 'would not be appropriate now' for the Sinn Fein leader to address
the parliament.
Meanwhile, Mr David Trimble, Ulster Unionist MP for Upper Bann, urged the
government to insist on the dismantling of the IRA's military machine and
the surrendering of its weapons before Sinn Fein was allowed into the peace
process.
Mr James Molyneaux, the UUP leader, said Mr Adams' comments were entirely
predictable. 'It was always envisaged that they would eventually . . . drop
dark hints on resuming violence,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940928

