FT944-10942

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (4): Changing 'mind-sets' / Interview with
Manmohan Singh, finance minister


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


How do you assess the current state of the Indian economy?
MANMOHAN SINGH: The short-term indicators all point to an economy in good
shape. The economic growth rate for the year to next March should be 5 to
5.5 per cent. Inflation should be no more than about 7-8 per cent, probably
less. The balance of payments is on the whole well managed. We will end the
year I think with the current account nearly in balance and with foreign
exchange reserves as high as the equivalent of seven to eight months of
imports.
The fact that we have comfortable levels of reserves gives us added degrees
of manoeuvrability in managing our economy. Industrial production, which was
stag- nant, is rising by 7-8 per cent. A fiscal situation which had gone out
of hand last year is at long last coming under control with revenues roughly
on target. So on the whole the overall economic situation looks reasonably
good.
Is the current high level of the rupee harming export growth?
In the short-run at least, we can live with a stable exchange rate without
hurting the country's export efforts, particularly as in the last four years
the rupee has undergone a very sizeable (downward) adjustment. This year, we
expect a growth rate of about 12-15 per cent in dollar terms. That's not an
unreasonable or unsatisfactory target.
Do you agree with the view that the pace of reform has slowed?
No, I do not. We have a set agenda . . . we have a medium- term plan for
deregulation . . . I think in most areas what we announced as our medium-
term intentions we have fulfilled, perhaps not by 100 per cent but certainly
by 70-75 per cent.
What is the position with the reform of insurance?
We have a paper ready and it has gone to the cabinet .. Ultimately it will
require legislation which will have to be passed by parliament. I have
always said I am in favour of opening up the insurance industry of making
our industry more compet- itive. We need, I think, an industry which is
capable of mobilising long-term capital on a much larger scale and of
financing the investment needs of our economy, partic- ularly
infrastructure.
India is selling stakes of up to 49 per cent in state-owned enterprises.
Would it not be better to engage in full-scale privatisation?
Theoretically, that's certainly a possibility. But we are in politics. And,
as I've often said, we don't have a con-sensus in our government to go
beyond the 49 per cent level. Cert-ainly, if we were willing to offer an
enterprise wholesale to private inves-tors, probably we would get a better
deal. But since we don't have a consensus in favour of that sort of thing,
we have to live with what we have.
Even so, the fact that up to 49 per cent of their equity will be available
to the public means that enterprises will be under pressure to earn a
reasonable rate of return. They will be questioned by their shareholders.
All this will introduce market pressure into the thinking and the
functioning of public enterprises even though 51 per cent of equity will
remain with the government. Also, we have opened up all sectors of the
economy to the private sector and therefore over a period of time the mix of
the private and the public sector would tilt in favour of the private
sector.
Investors in power generation are being offered government
counter-guarantees to guarantee that State Electricity Boards will pay their
bills? Is this a satisfactory arrangement?
I have not been very happy about the counter-guarantees but I do recognise
that in a situation in which foreign investors are not familiar with the
working of our power system the fear of the unknown is something to be
reckoned with. Therefore I have gone along with my colleagues that at least
in the first few projects these
counter-guarantees may enable a lot more interest to be created in the power
sector. But all of us in the government are agreed that counter- guarantees
cannot become a permanent feature. We must explore other ways in which we
can attract private investment.
Doesn't that come down to a genuine reform of the loss-making State
Electricity Boards?
Yes, I think we must do a genuine reform of the SEBs. We cannot run our
state electricity boards as organisations which do not earn a reasonable
rate of return. Most states do recognise this. I hope that after the
forthcoming elections in the states there will be positive movement towards
structural reforms.
What is the position with reform in the financial sector, including banking?
We are trying to create a more competitive environment for banks. We have
deregulated. We have abolished the minimum lending rate. We have only a
maximum deposit rate. We have laid down prudential norms. Institutional
change is not a one-year or two-year process. In many ways, people tend to
forget that changing the function of the economy is not merely introducing
legislative changes. What we are talking about is a change of the mind-set.
Today the mind-sets are changing in banking ...The public sector banks will
have to compete with new private banks and will have to survive by earning
their bread by the sweat of their brow.
Will there be an acceleration of reforms after the next general election,
especially in politically-controversial areas such as the public sector and
labour?
I am not laying down a timetable but that we urgently need reform in the
public sector is beyond doubt. Similarly, we need to reform the labour
market to reduce rigidities which in my view militate against the growth of
employment.
What is the likely state of the Indian economy in five years' time?
I think the Indian economy should be much more dynamic, much more open, much
more efficient, much more productive, and much more socially just. An
economy in which employment levels will expand faster than ever before. An
economy in which we will pay a lot more attention to meeting the basic needs
of our people particularly in areas such as health, education and
environmental protection. An economy in which the manoeuvrability which we
would get out of accelerated growth would be utilised to create credible
social safety nets to protect the more vulnerable sections of our society.
Can India by then reach the rates of growth achieved by successful east
Asian economies?
I really don't know. But it's my hope and it is my firm conviction that
India needs a growth rate of 7-8 per cent to solve the problems of poverty.
It is a challenge for our country's economic and political management to get
there. It is feasible. In the past two important constraints on India's
development have been the limited food supply and limited foreign exchange.
I think neither of these constraints applies any more and therefore I feel
that even without raising the investment rate we should be able to up the
economic growth rate by at least 1 per cent over the level of the 1980s.
In the past, because of all the controls, a large part of capital was locked
up in inventories. Now people don't need to lock up capital. With some
improvement in efficiency we should be able to raise the growth rate by a
further 2 percentage points. In the 1980s, the growth rate was 5.5 per cent.
Raising it to 7-7.5 per cent is certainly a feasible proposition in the more
liberal environment in which India is now operating.
But won't India need more reforms?
Of course. I'm not saying that we have reached the end of reforms. What we
need is a flexible mechanism for responding with speed and agility to
changing economic conditions.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941108

