FT941-5690

FT  04 MAR 94 / Survey of World Tyre Industry (6): Tradition takes a back
seat - The US industry has had to respond to new demands by shoppers


   By FRANK MCGURTY


For years, a simple philosophy guided the big US tyre makers: if your
product sells in Detroit, it will surely sell on Main Street. When the time
came to replace worn-out tyres, the reasoning went, car owners were most
likely to buy the brand chosen by the factory as original equipment.
Over the past few years, however, confidence in this passive approach to the
Dollars 18bn US replacement market has slipped. Shopping habits in the US
have changed, and the emphasis on value is stronger. 'For a lot of people, a
tyre is a tyre is a tyre,' says Mr David Garrity, an analyst with McDonald &
Company Investments in New York.
The trend has forced some of the big tyre groups to sell their wares in
chain stores and warehouse clubs. It has changed distribution patterns in
other ways, too. Larger tyre outlets, which can offer lower prices, have
flourished, while mom-and-pop operations have consolidated or languished.
Paradoxically, consumers have shown a willingness to pay extra for air bags
and other optional equipment to enhance safety. That demand has encouraged
tyre groups to strengthen their brand images and intensify their research
and development programmes.
Goodyear, last of the big US-owned tyre groups and the north American leader
with Dollars 5.4bn in sales, has shown the most imagination in responding to
changes, analysts say.
The company broke with tradition in two crucial ways. It decided to offer
its products at Sears, Wal-Mart and other big chains, putting them in direct
competition with its network of 3,500 company-owned stores and independent
dealerships.
Second, Goodyear decided to forgo tradition and introduce its new Aquatred
tyre directly in the retail market. Its bet that consumers would be willing
to pay a premium price for Aquatred's safety features paid off handsomely
last year.
US operating income, excluding special items, climbed by more than 10 per
cent to Dollars 590.5m, while operating margins jumped to 10 per cent of
sales, from 6 per cent in 1991. The improvement comes at a time when
foreign-owned rivals are under pressure to boost market share by cutting
prices to the bone.
With prices down, Goodyear has succeeded in lowering its costs through
'controlled downsizing', says Mr Garrity. By reducing manpower and its debt
burden, the company has had the wherewithal to invest in the marketing and
research aspects of the business.
The other big tyre groups - Uniroyal Goodrich (owned by Michelin),
Bridgestone/Firestone and Continental/General - have been at a financial and
competitive disadvantage because they have been struggling to integrate
their operations since the big consolidation a few years ago.
Those difficulties are apparent at Michelin. The French parent, hit by its
exposure to the depressed European market, has accelerated its effort to
wrest concessions from unionised workers at its Uniroyal plants.
Despite its advantages, Goodyear was not the only group to show improvement
in the replacement market. Mr Saul Ludwig, an analyst at Roulston Research
in Cleveland, reckons that Bridgestone/Firestone finished the year with the
best gain, followed by Goodyear. He credits a long-overdue decision by the
Japanese-owned group to promote the Firestone brand name, one of the
country's oldest, after vacillating over the issue since acquiring the US
operation in the late 1980s.
Nevertheless, competitive shifts in the tyre business are neither sweeping
nor easy to quantify. 'It is very difficult to get cold, accurate data on
the foreign-owned companies,' says Mr Gary McManus, of Kemper Securities in
Chicago. He estimates that Goodyear, Michelin (including Uniroyal) and
Bridgestone each commands 20 to 25 per cent of the replacement market.
Part of the reason competition is so keen is that the replacement side is 'a
zero-growth game', as Mr Ludwig describes it. Sales to customers replacing
worn-out treads showed almost no growth last year. The stagnation reflected
comparisons with a usually robust 1992, when the market expanded by about 3
per cent. High inventories carried over by retailers further restrained
growth. With the excess drying up, Mr Ludwig predicts a sharp 4 per cent
gain in 1994 on the replacement side.
Although a bit less glamorous, the Detroit trade remains the tyre industry's
bread and butter business, and 1993 was a year of feasting. After a long
slump, the Big Three US car makers have enjoyed a remarkable upturn, and the
companies supplying them have tagged along for the ride.
In 1993, US sales of so-called original equipment tyres - fitted on cars and
trucks during their assembly - surged 14.7 per cent, according to Mr
Garrity. In parallel with the cyclical trend in motor vehicle production,
the jump in original equipment (OE) sales represents an acceleration of a
tentative recovery which began the previous year, following a three-year
downturn which hit bottom in 1991.
In the OE market, a tyre maker's fortunes rise and fall with the performance
of the particular carmakers it supplies. With automakers ordering parts from
fewer sources, a few big tyre groups have tightened their grip on a segment
in which prices have stabilised. Goodyear was a winner on this side of the
business, largely because it supplies Chrysler - star of the car industry -
with 84 per cent of its tyres, according to Modern Tire Dealer.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940304

