FT944-5849

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Company News: Slow winds of change blow among
China's banks - Banks are trying to free themselves from state control but
barriers remain and progress has been varied


   By TONY WALKER


Mr Wang Qiren, chairman of the Bank of China, uses a colourful metaphor to
describe the predicament of Chinese specialised banks in their efforts to
commercialise their activities and free themselves from pervasive state
control.
'We can't continue to behave like the People's Bank (China's central bank),
throwing meat to dogs which can't be retrieved,' he says of persistent
demands for loans from state enterprises struggling to stay alive.
Twelve months after the Communist party's central committee approved
sweeping reforms of the financial sector, including measures to facilitate
the transformation of debt-burdened specialised banks into commercial
entities, debate among Chinese bankers and their foreign advisers is
focusing more sharply on both barriers to reform and opportunities for
change.
Mr Gordon Barrass, international adviser with Coopers & Lybrand, the
accounting firm, believes real change is stirring among hitherto moribund
state financial institutions.
'I have been impressed with the change in culture at some of the specialised
banks, but they have got a monumental task,' said Mr Barrass, who recently
completed a study of Chinese banking.
China's 'Big Four' specialised banks account for about 80 per cent of the
country's banking business, but because they have been obliged to continue
funding ailing state enterprises they have accumulated a huge burden of what
the Chinese call 'problem' loans. These 'non-performing' loans, by western
measures, may account for up to 30 per cent of loan portfolios.
An indication of the size of the problem is that of total state bank loans
outstanding at the end of 1993 of Yn2,600 trillion, more than 70 per cent
was for working capital. The banks are therefore acting as welfare agencies
to keep enterprises afloat.
Chinese banks' burden of bad loans renders three of the four specialised
banks technically insolvent - the Bank of China being the exception. As Mr
Wang puts it: 'We really have to pull out the firewood from under the pot,
we just can't keep burning any more.'
State enterprise reform, including the merger or closure of factories beyond
salvaging, is critical to the banks' commercial transformation, but this
requires political will. In the present climate of inflation, uncertainty
over the transition to a new generation of leaders and incipient worker
unrest, the authorities are approaching change with great caution.
The state enterprises' burden - some 45 per cent of China's 11,000
medium-to-large state companies are in the red this year - also makes its
virtually impossible to liberalise interest rates.
Chinese officials say any substantial increase would be extremely harmful
for state enterprises. Interest on bank deposits is about half the inflation
rate.
In spite of the barriers, however, the face of Chinese banking is changing
slowly.
A new commercial bank law will, in theory, provide legal protection against
banks being obliged to make 'policy' loans to failing enterprises; new
policy-lending banks will shoulder the burden of funding to state projects;
new commercial banks are being licensed and some urban and rural
co-operatives are being transformed into banks; and moves are under way to
allow foreign banks to engage in local currency business.
Attempts are also being made to strengthen the People's Bank's supervisory
role over the banking sector under a new central bank law.
Among its main tasks will be to try to ensure provincial-level bank branches
adhere to credit ceilings and abide by regulations laid down by the central
authorities. Local branches of the specialised banks have tended to bend to
the will of provincial officials rather than follow directives from Beijing.
In tandem with requirements aimed at bringing order to a chaotic system the
four specialised banks will have to begin putting their own houses in order.
While a start has been made, progress varies markedly from one to another:
The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China - the country's largest, with
500,000 employees and 50,000 branches - almost certainly faces the most
difficult task in 'commercialising' its activities. Officials note the bank
numbers China's top 500 state-owned-enterprises among its clients, but given
the parlous condition of many of these enterprises this is hardly a bonus.
The ICBC is said to be facing a 'generational split' between younger
officials who favour quicker steps towards commercialisation and an older
generation who believe the bank should remain close to the ministry of
finance and state planning commission.
The Agricultural Bank of China (500,000 employees and 50,000 branches) is in
better shape than the ICBC, partly because of the success of township and
village enterprises (TVEs). These are providing a huge volume of deposits.
The ABC has also divested responsibilities for policy lending in agriculture
to the newly-established Agricultural Development Bank. As an inducement it
transferred one-fifth of its assets to the new policy bank. The ABC has also
reportedly embarked on a tougher approach by refusing new lending to the
more recalcitrant creditors among state enterprises.
The People's Construction Bank of China (250,000 employees and 25,000
branches) is regarded as being in the best position among the three
'domestic' specialised banks to commercialise. The recent establishment of
the State Development Bank to handle infrastructure lending for big projects
such as the Three Gorges Dam has left the PCB looking for a new role. The
bank's recent announcement that it was joining Morgan Stanley to form
China's first investment bank is an indication of this. The new institution,
to be known as the China International Capital Corporation Limited, will
focus on capital raising abroad to satisfy China's huge appetite for
infrastructure funds.
The Bank of China (170,000 employees, 8,000 branches and outlets in China
and 474 offices abroad) says it aims to expand its overseas activities. In
Hong Kong the Bank of China and its subsidiaries have 24 per cent of the
market and it has begun issuing banknotes in preparation for a post-1997
role. The Bank of China is also developing its merchant banking arm.
Mr Wang says the removal of the contraints of a centrally-planned economy is
allowing the Bank of China to explore expansion at home and abroad.
'The direction we want to go is to commercialise,' he says. 'We will enjoy
greater independence (under the new commercial bank law) but we will remain
a state-owned commercial bank and that means we will have to support state
lending priorities in such areas as transportation and energy.'
While attention has focused on the difficulties of reforming China's vast,
unwieldy specialised banks, progress is being made in other areas. The
Shanghai-based Bank of Communications (BOC), for example, has been preparing
to expand its activities, and possibly sell some its stock to private
shareholders.
The BOC, re-constituted in 1986 as a joint stock company with the People's
Bank and Shanghai Municipality as its main shareholders (it was merged with
the People's Bank in 1949), recently created a unified shareholding
structure to facilitate the stock sale. Previously its ownership had rested
on a web of joint stock companies.
With its stronghold in the fast growing Shanghai and Yangtze Delta area, the
BOC's prospects are good. It also has powerful friends at court. Mr Dai
Xianglong, a deputy-governor of the People's Bank, is a former head of the
BOC.
Other small to medium-sized commercial banks are also beginning to make
their presence felt. The China International Trust and Investment
Corporation bank (Citic Industrial) ranks sixth among banks in China, and is
regarded as having significant growth potential. Everbright Bank, owned by
the Everbright Group, one of China's new industrial and trading
conglomerates, is in the same category.
Mr Tang Gong Yao, chairman of Everbright Bank, said the bank was keen to
expand and had established branches in six cities and representative offices
in others. It was involved in loan syndications, leasing deals, securities
underwriting and foreign exchange trading. These activities were expanding
rapidly.
China has also announced the establishment of the first private bank to be
permitted since the 1949 revolution. This will be known as the 'People's
Livelihood Bank' and will cater for private business whose access to credit
from state-owned banks is limited.
As for foreign bankers, they are waiting for the moment when foreign
branches are authorised to begin dealing in the local currency. This is the
'holy grail' for foreign banks which have established more than 100
branches, most of them in Shanghai, since China sanctioned the first foreign
branches in 1986.
Mr Fiepko Klug, chief representative in China of Banque Indosuez, believes
permission will be granted in the next year or so on an 'experimental
basis', with yuan loans tied to the ratio of a bank's yuan deposits.
But Mr Klug fears the authorities may allow just a few selected banks into
the market first. 'It would be very unfair if it was done selectively,' he
says. 'It would create a distortion among foreign banks. It would give rise
to unfair competition.'
But if China follows its normal pattern of initial gradualism in reforms it
may well restrict to a handful the numbers of foreign banks allowed to deal
in local currency. Banking reform linked inextricably with state enterprise
reform is proving to be a slow and painful process.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

941201

