FT941-16879

FT  07 JAN 94 / Arts: Syncopated Weir - Recital


   By DAVID MURRAY


The special attraction in Susan Tomes's recital, at the Wigmore on
Wednesday, was a piece newly written for her by Judith Weir. Miss Weir is of
course the teasing composer of A Night at the Chinese Opera and many other
quirky things - among them, no doubt, her forthcoming Blond Eckbert for the
English National Opera. Miss Tomes is the pianist of the excellent Domus
trio, which boasts two Weir pieces in its repertoire.
In the new piano piece, called The King of France, Weir seems to have
remembered the Tomes penchant for Billy Mayerl: there were strong hints of
that toward the end of it. But her guiding inspiration was an ancient
Sephardic Jewish song, 'El Rey de Francia'; in fact The King is a set of 10
variations on it. The tune has a plangent ring and intriguing curves,
variously exploited and developed in the variations.
Often there are rude, syncopated basses; oddly fractured Weir(d)
piano-textures, too, and one big variation - grave and searching, with
sharply struck chords that linger on - with a kind of post-Romantic
eloquence. Some brusque transitions puzzled. I imagine that Miss Tomes will
be delivering The King of France with more persuasive confidence in a month
or two.
She was not really at her best on Wednesday. Her Mozart, the late, lovely
B-flat Sonata K. 570, was clean and alert, and the ornaments glittered, but
the whole seemed a touch self-effacing. There were excellent things in her
three Faure nocturnes, not least the unshakeable Tomes pulse, and yet the
tunes often sang too shyly to emerge from the figuration. She took the Third
Nocturne well below Faure's tempo, at some cost to its dance-spring and its
winsomeness, and in the little Eighth Nocturne the soft scales that wind
around the melody were not soft, but distractingly bright.
In spite of the evident affection and care that she lavished on Schubert's
great A major sonata, D959, it was not a very happy performance. The
sparkling Scherzo, at least, is right up the Tomes alley; but the Andantino
was wan, and the Finale sadly tame, without the energy to make the closing
teases even begin to work. The strenuous passages in the first two movements
sounded like hard, anxious work. A devoted audience applauded her anyway.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940107

