FT941-12807

FT  28 JAN 94 / Development agency to change project funding


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent


English Partnerships, the Treasury's new regeneration agency, is to take
advantage of a relaxation of constraints to change the way future projects
are funded.
Sir Idris Pearce, deputy chairman of English Partnerships, told executives
from the private and public sectors, meeting in Birmingham, that the agency
is thinking in terms of investment in projects fostering economic revival,
not of disbursing grants.
The Treasury has in the past funded regeneration either through grants or
through programmes with an annual spending limit. It has been been reluctant
to allow unspent grants from one year to be carried over into the next. It
has also previously refused to permit the use of financial instruments and
the flexibility common in the private sector.
'I see no bar whatsoever in our holding equity in particular projects,' said
Sir Idris, who believes that English Partnerships will be a catalyst in
encouraging the Treasury to accept a more flexible use of government funds.
'We want to develop the concept that we can use assets as a guarantee for
other forms of development,' he added. He said the agency might use
financial devices such as sale and lease-back arrangements on property. It
would also explore means of using funds from foreign banks.
The agency is taking over the administration of City Grant and Derelict Land
Grant, two subsidies to encourage development, as well as English Estates,
the government's factory building agency. It is in the process of recruiting
staff, so its economic impact is unlikely to be felt for two or three years.
With Lord Walker, the former cabinet minister, as chairman, the agency has a
wide brief aimed at wealth and job creation in rundown areas. Funds will be
used to help finance projects conceived locally.
Behind English Partnerships' concern with financial ingenuity is its limited
budget. It will receive between Pounds 250m and Pounds 300m a year, meaning,
said Sir Idris, that 'our monetary headroom is very restricted'.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940128

