FT943-12954

FT  22 JUL 94 / US set to act on Rwanda refugees


   By KEN WARN


President Bill Clinton yesterday ordered US officials to draw up a 'plan of
action' to help Rwanda refugees, now hit by cholera in teeming, squalid
camps just over the border in Zaire.
Under pressure to ease the refugee crisis, Mr Clinton said in Washington the
US aimed to lead a United Nations effort 'responding to the cholera problem
and dealing with the other aspects of this human catastrophe'. He would
announce more details today.
About 1m refugees, mostly Hutus, fled across the border to the Zairean town
of Goma in the past week to escape advancing rebels of the Rwanda Patriotic
Front, dominated by Tutsis. The RPF has taken power in Rwanda after months
of turmoil during which Hutus slaughtered hundreds of thousands of Tutsis.
Mr Clinton acted to speed up US help after being briefed by Mr Brian
Attwood, a top aid official he had sent to Zaire.
After the meeting, Mr Attwood said that Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary general, would today appeal to donor nations to provide about
Dollars 274m worth of aid for the refugees.
The US would provide Dollars 41.4m of aid in addition to the Dollars 35m
announced earlier in the week, he said. The new aid would include 30,000
tonnes of grain and logistical support for relief organisations.
He said the US was ready to set up a base in Entebbe, Uganda, to handle the
food, medicines and equipment needed for the region. The US was also
considering helping French forces to keep the airport at Goma in repair so
aircraft could continue to bring in supplies.
US troops would be required for the stepped up aid effort, but would not go
into Rwanda, Mr Attwood said. However, the role of the US military was being
studied and 'we should have more information on that in a few days'.
Aid workers in Goma, overwhelmed by the influx of refugees, said it was
already too late to prevent many deaths from cholera, which had been
spreading in the last two days.
'You can expect between 10,000 and 50,000 cases,' said a doctor of Medecins
Sans Frontieres in Goma, and up to half would die.
He said his team saw 800 bodies before they stopped counting yesterday on a
five-mile stretch of road near Goma. 'They're dying from dysentery,
dehydration, exhaustion, and now cholera.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940722

