FT944-6031

FT  01 DEC 94 / Top court acts in Indian bribes scandal


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   NEW DELHI


India's Supreme Court yesterday ordered the government to explain delays in
the investigation of a Rs520m (Pounds 10.6m) scandal involving illegal
foreign exchange deals and payments to top politicians and bureaucrats.
The court called for an explanation why the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI), the main criminal investigation agency, and the income tax and
foreign exchange authorities had not dealt 'appropriately' with a case
dating back to May 1991.
The court order comes amid mounting public concern about corruption,
especially bribes paid by businesses, including foreign companies, to secure
public contracts. Allegations of corruption have figured prominently in four
states which are currently holding local assembly elections.
The court case stemmed from a public interest petition filed last year by Mr
Vineet Narain, a leading journalist, asking the court to examine the CBI
investigation into the affairs of Mr Surendra Jain, a New Delhi businessman
with extensive political contacts who specialised in arranging power station
contracts.
The investigation began in early 1991 with a probe into black market foreign
exchange transactions involving armed militant groups in the troubled
northern state of Jammu and Kashmir. Investigators tracing a trail of
suspicious-looking deals came across Mr Jain's name. In May 1991, the CBI
raided premises belonging to Mr Jain's family and seized cash, and receipts
for undeclared foreign exchange transactions totalling Rs520m.
To their surprise, the investigators also found diaries detailing alleged
payments to leading politicians and bureaucrats totalling just under Rs500m.
According to the petition presented to the Supreme Court, the alleged
recipients included Mr Rajiv Gandhi, the late prime minister, and other
leading figures of the ruling Congress (I) party, among them Mr Bhajan Lal,
the former agriculture minister, and Mr Kalpanath Rai, who was Mr Gandhi's
energy minister and is now food minister.
Two other alleged recipients were Mr Mohammed Arif Khan, another former
power minister, and Mr LK Advani, leader of the opposition Bharatiya Janata
party.
Payments were also allegedly made to bureaucrats dealing with the
electricity industry and to others, including the Delhi police chief. While
some alleged recipients are named in full in the diaries, others are
referred to by their initials.
Virtually all those allegedly identified have denied to Indian journalists
that they received any money from Mr Jain.
Mr Narain, the petitioner, told the court that the CBI did nothing to
investigate the case between May 1991 and July 1993, when he started his own
inquiries. In an extraordinary admission, the solicitor general told the
court the delay was caused partly by the fact that the CBI officer
supervising the case was caught demanding bribes from Mr Jain to halt the
investigation.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941201

