FT942-14897

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (12): Not all customers
are honest - Rented and leased vehicles are increasingly likely to be stolen


   By TONY BOSWORTH


Such is the growing incidence of theft of cars in the UK that Avis staff are
now taking photographs of people who want to rent their vehicles.
'We're using this system at high risk locations', says Avis Operations
Director, Steve Maltby, 'and we'd rather not rent to those who won't have
their picture taken.'
Maltby is also chairman of the security committee of the British Vehicle
Rental and Leasing Association (BVRLA) and is concerned at the numbers of
vehicles being stolen both in the leasing and daily rental sectors of the
market.
'It's costing our members Pounds 125.5m a year', he says, 'and when you
consider that 60 per cent of the light commercial vehicles which are stolen
are never recovered, and some 17 per cent of the cars are never seen again,
you can see the scale of the problem.'
Of the l2m cars run by BVRLA members, 3 per cent of the leasing cars and 3.5
per cent of the daily rental cars are stolen every year.
Interestingly, Avis carried out a simple test in its Northern Ireland
operation which significantly cut down on theft. Of its 400 fleet cars, some
21 were fitted with an expensive engine immobiliser, while the others were
supplied with a dl6 steering wheel lock. Some of Maltby's colleagues scoffed
at the garishly coloured lock, but his action was soon vindicated.
'Within two weeks, seven of the cars fitted with engine immobilisers had
been broken into, but those cars fitted with the steering wheel lock were
untouched.
'The point is, it's highly visible, so it's a deterrent to the petty thief,
and he's usually the one who breaks into cars. He sees the steering wheel
lock, he goes to the next car which isn't protected.'
And thereby hangs the next problem. Many in the leasing industry believe
that the car manufacturers and the government must do more to protect all
vehicles from the criminal.
The actual theft of vehicles seems to be slightly slowing down, says Howard
Thomas, operations director of Lease Plan, Europe's largest vehicle lease
company, though thefts from vehicles are still very evident. 'What annoys me
is that today the anti-theft technology is proven, and it's relatively
inexpensive, and yet some of the vehicle manufacturers are still not putting
enough standard anti-theft equipment into cars.' As an example, Thomas
points to the number of cars which are fitted with a simple perimetric
alarm.
'Some buyers haven't a clue what this really is', says Thomas, 'and many
come out of the showroom with the idea that it protects the car. But it only
protects the doors, and perhaps the bonnet and boot. It does not stop the
criminal smashing the window and reaching inside and taking whatever is in
the car. With this sort of cheap alarm system such a theft doesn't even
activate the alarm.'
Thomas adds that a car's image also attracts the thief. 'We get far more
break-ins of BMWs than we do of Ford Mondeos or Vauxhall Cavaliers, though
usually the theft is because there's a good in-car entertainment package
there. What we like to see is a sound system which is built into the car,
which forms part of the build of that car, so it cannot be taken out, and if
it is, then it's of no use.'
There had been important strides, for example the Vauxhall Astra where the
radio's display was not part of the unit itself, but some manufacturers were
still doing only half a job.
Take the new Renault Laguna. It had an easily stealable radio, which was not
built into the car. 'To us this is a distinct disadvantage.' Thomas points
to other cars where there are similar problems.
'The Citroen Xantia has engine immobilisation, which we see as a very
important feature, but you cannot get it on the diesel models, the best
sellers in the Xantia range.'
This is a view echoed by others in the industry. As Steve Maltby points out,
'the car manufacturers are generally doing more, responding to pressure from
government as much as anybody else, but one of the sad things is that while
they are increasingly putting security of all types in their most up-market
models, there are generally less anti-theft measures across their ranges.
Whether somebody is paying Pounds 6,000 or Pounds 60,000 for a car he should
be entitled to a decent level of security. Car manufacturers who are not
supplying anti-theft across their ranges are not supplying a proper service
to the customer.'
Ford, now considered by many in the industry to be at the cutting edge of
anti-theft technology, disagrees.
'We have alarms on all of our models as standard, with the exception of the
four-wheel drive Maverick', says Ford's Don Hume, 'and all of our Fiestas
and Escorts now come, as standard, with the transponder key, each of which
has a one in 10 trillion start code programmed into it. Without the right
key it's not possible to start the engine.'
But Ford also still fits perimetric alarms to many cars, rather than a full
ultrasonic system. That said, Ford is testing a tracking device which can
tell a control room where a specific car is at any time.
A similar device is used by Swindon-based Datatrak who can track stolen
vehicles, directing the police to them, wherever they are. This system has
proved especially useful to safeguard valuable freight.
There are other advanced systems being tested by police forces throughout
the country. One of the most interesting is a device which couples a
transmitter in the hire car with a receiver fitted into police cars.
Should the car be stolen, the police could not only track it, but once they
got close enough they could activate the receiver to slow down the stolen
car, stopping it safely, and then presumably arresting the thief. If
on-going tests are successful and the system gets Home Office approval it
could be fitted as standard on some expensive cars next year.
In tandem with their own tracking device, Ford is also continuing to
experiment with satellite tracking. This system would ensure that at any
given time the car could be pinpointed - within seconds - wherever it is in
the world.
Clearly anti-theft technology will continue to improve, but caution is
required with some of these devices. Three years ago a British company
developed a system which locked the thief in the car. That is not always a
good idea.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940418

