FT944-2698

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (5): Minnow bucks trend
 -Profile, ERF


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


The collapse of the UK's truck market in 1990 was the worst since the second
world war. Continental European markets suffered a similar collapse in 1992
and throughout last year. In these conditions, industry minnows such as ERF
are not supposed to be able to survive the savage discounting and other
market pressures exerted by the leading manufacturers.
ERF's production peaked at 4,319 in the 1989 surge and subsequently fell to
only half this level, from which it is still recovering.
Yet once again ERF and its chairman, Peter Foden, have come striding
relatively unscathed through the recessionary rubble, whereas the remains of
much larger DAF have had to be resurrected from receivership and another UK
truck-maker, AWD, has fallen subject to a takeover.
ERF, the UK's last publicly-quoted independent heavy truck maker, made a
profit of Pounds 453,000, after interest payments, in the second half of
last year. This was not sufficient to offset a first-half loss and for the
full year to April 2 there were pre-tax losses of Pounds 26,000. However,
this was still a significant improvement on the Pounds 4.12m loss of 1992.
'Margins are still pretty difficult but volumes are now rising and exports
outside Europe, particularly to south and west Africa, are looking up,'
according to Mr Foden. 'We are now making 15-16 trucks a week, compared with
10-ll at the start of the year.'
The claimed break-even level is 10-11 units a week.
'Five or 10 years ago, everyone was saying that by now ERF would have
disappeared or become just part of a big group. It hasn't happened because I
think we have a loyal UK market; the product has been well accepted after
being standardised around the Cummins (engine), Eaton (transmission) and
Rockwell (axle) drivelines; we have spent money on developing new products
and other improvements throughout the recession, and have a strong balance
sheet.'
There is an element, too, of 'keeping your head down and being a bit
stubborn', adds Mr Foden, a stocky figure with that blunt manner of speech
popularly considered archetypical of a northern entrepreneur. The business
has its headquarters in Sandbach, Cheshire.
The production increase has meant that, after a long period of retrenchment
which saw ERF's work force halved to 750, recruitment has begun again. About
150 jobs have been added this year.
With a slow but steady recovery continuing on the continent, Mr Foden
expects production to rise further, to 20-21 a week, over the next year or
so. However, this would still be well below the 30-a-week single-shift
capacity which has been created through a restructuring of operations for
greater efficiency. Cab production, for example, is now carried out at
separate facilities in nearby Middlewich.
During the past two years ERF has made its first substantive efforts to
establish a continental European sales and servicing network, starting with
France and Spain. It now has 18 French and eight Spanish distributors,
although the truck market recession in both countries has meant that sales
have been slow and ERF has yet even to launch on the Continent
left-hand-drive versions of its EC range, the development of which has
accounted for the largest portion of a Pounds 14m investment programme kept
up throughout the recession and during nearly four years of losses.
The EC trucks, covering the 15 tonnes-plus market sectors in which the
company specialises, will be launched in Europe next year, according to Mr
Foden. He maintains that as ERF's distribution network spreads throughout
the region, 'there is no reason why we should not capture around 2 per cent
of our sectors of the European truck market'. That would require extra
production of around 1,500 trucks a year.
The next countries in line are Portugal and the Benelux states.
ERF exports 15-20 per cent of its production by value. It has an assembly
plant in South Africa where the truck market is already benefiting from the
post-apartheid 'peace dividend'.
Despite an active leisure life which includes competing in his Aston Martin
racing car, Mr Foden says he has no intention of stepping back from the
chairman and chief executive's role in the foreseeable future.
'My excitement and satisfaction comes from being in the office and running
the business - it's much more fun than sitting on a bench in the sun all
day.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

941216

