FT944-14601

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (26): Emerging
opportunities - Investing for growth / A long-term view may justify higher
risk


   By ROGER TAYLOR


The past year has seen the launch of a bewildering range of new and exotic
specialised funds for the growth investor. Most are invested in emerging
markets. As well as 12 worldwide emerging markets trusts, there are now five
Latin American trusts, two South African trusts and four Korean trusts. Some
offer good value. Many are purely attempts to jump on the latest bandwagon.
The Latin American ones have been star performers, producing returns of
around 50 per cent. But, for many investors, these funds are too
specialised.
The key to successful growth investment is to make full use of the freedom
you have to take greater risks and thus reap grater rewards in return. More
volatile high-risk investments, such as emerging markets, are ideal. On a
one-year or two-year view, they would be very risky investments. On a five-
or better still 10-year view, they offer the likelihood of higher returns
than from any emerged market.
The average unit trust investing in the emerging markets of the Far East has
grown 504 per cent over 10 years, compared with 337 per cent for the average
Japan trust, 278 per cent for the average North American trust and 386 per
cent for the average UK growth trust.
Investors must decide to what extent they are going to keep control of their
money, dividing it up among different specialised regional unit trusts; and
to what extent they are going to invest through more broadly-based funds,
and let the fund manager make the investment decisions.
If you invest in an international growth fund, the fund manager will
actively manage your money, switching between markets on your behalf. By
switching out of falling markets and into rising markets the manager should,
in theory, be able to enhance the performance of the fund.
The weakness of international funds is that the managers may not know each
market as well as a specialist. Consequently the specialist regional funds,
such as European or Japanese funds, tend to outperform more broadly based
international funds in their own markets. Hence the average international
fund has underperformed the average fund in most regional sectors over the
past 10 years.
Investors would often have been better off constructing their own
international portfolio from a range of specialist funds.
This gives you greater control over where your money is invested. For
example, a growth investor who feels strongly about the potential for
emerging markets might be happy putting, say, 30 per cent of his portfolio
into these markets, whereas the manager of an international fund might be
more cautious.
Also, using a range of funds allows you to pick the best manager for each
market. For example, you could chose, say, Schroder UK Enterprise or
Perpetual UK Growth in the UK. In the US, you might invest through F&C US
Smaller Companies fund, and for emerging markets use the City of London or
Martin Currie Emerging Markets trust. All of these unit trusts are top
performers in their sectors.
If you decide to use a number of specialist funds, decide on a long-term
strategy and then leave your money where it is. By and large, it is unwise
to try and take short-term positions in markets through specialised unit
trusts. The cost of switching in and out of funds is extremely high at 5 per
cent a shot. The chances are that the cost of moving your money around will
come to more than you make by doing so.
Switching from one fund to another run by the same manager is cheaper,
sometimes costing as little as 1 per cent. So, for example, investors could
switch out of an equity fund into the same management group's cash fund at
relatively little cost, if they found themselves in a falling market. But,
as James Higgins of financial advisers, Chamberlain de Broe, points out,
many of the most successful growth investors among his clients have simply
invested in a quality fund, from a quality manager and stuck with it.
It often used to be said that investment trusts were better for growth
investors than unit trusts, because they offered the possibility of gearing
 -a way of increasing long-term growth potential by borrowing money, or
using derivatives such as warrants. It increases the risk of investing but
if, in the long run, the market rises sufficiently, the geared investor will
come out better off.
The Exeter Capital Growth fund is a unit trust which does make use of
gearing by investing in the capital shares of split-capital investment
trusts - a form of highly geared share which will tend to outperform a
rising market and underperform a falling market. The fund, at only Pounds
7.3m, is small but its record is good, being in the top 10 per cent of funds
over one and three years. This is a risky investment, but in the long term
could perform very well.
Exeter have also now launched a fund that invests in international warrants,
and Hargreaves Lansdowne one which invests in UK warrants. Warrants are a
form of long-term option which can provide a great deal of gearing. Both
these funds are interesting, but they have not yet had time to develop a
performance record.

The Financial Times


London Page XXV

941021

