FT942-16234

FT  12 APR 94 / US plays down Latin American Nafta hopes: Washington
cautious


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


US officials are beginning a campaign to play down Latin American countries'
expectations of quick accession to the North American Free Trade Agreement,
while trying to maintain progress towards more liberal trade in the western
hemisphere.
The officials, conscious that the summit of Latin American leaders set for
Miami in December risks raising expectations of rapid Nafta expansion, say
they are still formulating policy. But discussions at conferences in
Guadalajara around the annual meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank
have provided some indication of the possible direction of US policy.
In the next few months, two reports by the administration will go to
Congress. The first in May will provide a general overview of countries in
Latin America and elsewhere and of how they measure up to standards seen as
vital to either Nafta association or a bilateral free trade accord with the
US, such as the extent to which the economy has been liberal-ised and opened
to free trade.
In July, the administration must notify Congress of the countries with which
it believes it will be able to enter talks. In doing so it will ask for
fast-track authority, under which Congress gives the administration a free
negotiating hand. It will not be able to do this again until July 1997.
According to US officials, the net is likely to be cast as widely as
possible, but being nominated will not imply a rapid movement toward
negotiations. With mid-term congressional elections due in November, the
administration will have other priorities for the second half of this year.
Nafta came into force between the US, Canada and Mexico at the start of the
year, and the Nafta vote in Congress in November was described by one
official as 'one of the most divisive and dramatic in recent US history'.
The administration will not be rushing to repeat the experience.
Negotiations with Chile - the one country with which President Bill Clinton
is so far committed to negotiate - appear unlikely to start in earnest
before 1995, officials confirmed.
But in the interim the administration wants to keep the process on track,
first by ensuring other trade arrangements in the hemisphere do not push
potential partners further away from Nafta, and second by encouraging other
countries to adopt measures that will bring them closer to Nafta
qualification.
Ms Carmen Suro-Bredie, assistant US trade representative responsible for the
region, said this interim strategy would seek to establish bilateral
investment treaties and more satisfactory arrangements to protect
intellectual property in the region.
She said the US would 'look at integration schemes across the border and
links between Asia and Latin America'. Latin America's evolving trade
arrangements should be transparent and should not create barriers to trade
by outside countries. This should help to ensure that new arrangements do
not impede future efforts to accede to Nafta.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940412

