FT941-16949

FT  07 JAN 94 / Japan set to fuel economy again soon


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Japan yesterday politely rebuffed US warnings not to rely on the yen's
weakness to deliver a recovery, but said it would produce another round of
measures to stimulate the economy in the next few weeks.
'We should make efforts to stabilise the yen,' said Mr Masayoshi Takemura,
chief cabinet secretary. But he was not worried about the yen's weakness and
saw the Japanese currency's recent decline as a sign of the dollar's
strength, as shown by the US currency's rise against other leading
currencies such as the D-Mark.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's prime minister, said he would 'draw up
comprehensive economic measures by about the middle of January'. This would
take the form of a combined 1994-1995 budget and supplementary budget for
the current tax year, he told the upper house of parliament's political
reform committee. 'We will do all we can to dispel doubts about the future
as soon as possible.'
The government is unable to take economic initiatives so long as it remains
fully occupied trying to push plans to reform the political and electoral
system through the upper house of parliament. Attempts to launch an economic
package last month had to be shelved.
The opposition Liberal Democratic Party is using procedural blockages to
wring concessions on a new electoral system and over planned curbs on
political funding. These tactics have aroused growing alarm among
businessmen, formerly an important LDP power base. Japan's four leading
business federations warned that the recession will worsen if the wrangle
over political reform brings down the government.
'The government is under worldwide pressure to reflate. They know they
should try to fit in, but political reform has to come first. If we don't
get political reform this month, then we can expect an early general
election, and that will clearly be bad news for economic policy,' said Mr
Tom Hill, strategist at SG Warburg Securities in Tokyo.
Following the renewed US-Japan tension over the exchange rate, the yen
strengthened slightly from Y113 .33 to the dollar to Y112.65 in Tokyo
yesterday. At that level, the yen is still down 11.5 per cent from the
record high of Y101 to the US currency last August.
In private, Tokyo government officials hope for a continued fall in the yen
to about Y115 to the dollar. Businesses want an even steeper decline.
Exporters will only break even at Y120 to the dollar, said Mr Kosaku Inaba,
chairman of the Japan Chamber of Commerce - a level also cited by the
Keidanren business federation.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940107

