FT943-12621

FT  23 JUL 94 / FT Ski Expedition: Where only the rain is free


   By ARNIE WILSON


Arnie Wilson and Lucy Dicker are trying to ski every day of 1994 on a
round-the-world expedition. This week in Argentina they completed 200 days.
It has scarcely stopped raining since we limped into Argentina in our
borrowed Lada vehicle, which seems to be working on one cylinder and half a
gearbox.
Skiing conditions here have been abysmal: like skiing on frozen meringues in
a monsoon. Heini Kempel, director of the Escquela Esqui Catedral, the main
ski school at Gran Catedral, the ski area of Bariloche, was frantic:
'Conditions are terrible,' he said. 'They have had to close most of the top
half of the mountain because of high winds and rain. We are in big trouble.'
But our welcome has been as warm as the weather has been wet. The scenery
too is magnificent: no volcanoes in this part of the Andes, but a
spectacular lake, Nahuel Huapi (Island of the Tiger, in the language of the
Araucano indians).
The only drawback is the cost of everything: Argentina can be almost as
expensive as Japan. Only the rain is free.
The Cerro Bayo resort is the brainchild of Jean-Pierre Raemdonck, a lanky,
bespectacled Belgian who came to Argentina as a student on a motorcycle and
never left. He tried selling waffles in Bariloche but was unable to secure
his own waffle concession.
'So I decided to build my own ski area in order to sell my waffles,' he
said. With no experience (he could not even ski) he hacked his way through
dense forest, using oxen to clear the trails.
'I put the second lift together on my own,' he said. 'Well, I had a helper
but he got drunk all the time. We could only afford the lifts, but not the
lift towers. We made a bull-wheel from an old motorbike and made our own
towers from trees. They lasted for years.'
His resort has developed into a minor gem.
Perhaps he could repair our Lada's tortured gearbox. Even our Hewlett
Packard OmniBook computer has started disrespectfully urging me to 'Get Help
or Start Interactive Lessons'.
Perhaps like Hal, the spaceship's computer in the film 2001, it is trying to
take over our mission.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940723

