FT943-12732

FT  23 JUL 94 / Ruling sets up passive smoking suit: US tobacco groups
cleared to challenge federal government


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


US tobacco manufacturers have won a court case allowing them to challenge a
federal government claim that passive smoking - the inhalation of other
people's cigarette smoke - can kill.
If the manufacturers' lawsuit succeeds, it will remove one of the most
important foundations of the anti-smoking movement in the US. Public and
private sectors alike have used the government's declaration as the basis
for widespread smoking bans in buildings and public places.
The government made its assertion in January last year when the
Environmental Protection Agency issued a report titled Respiratory Health
Effects of Passive Smoking: Lung Cancer and Other Disorders.
The report said passive smoking increased the risk of illnesses such as lung
cancer and it was a contributory cause of asthma, pneumonia and bronchitis
in children. Its most important conclusion was that passive smoking killed
3,000 non-smokers a year, and it classified second-hand smoke as a class A
carcinogen.
However, many smokers say the EPA was determined to show passive smoking
killed and manipulated the evidence to suit conclusions it had already made.
The two biggest US tobacco manufacturers, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds,
have joined with four other tobacco industry plaintiffs in bringing a
lawsuit against the Environmental Protection Agency seeking a declaration
that the agency's risk assessment should be declared null and void.
They say the agency ignored its own scientific guidelines, overstepped its
regulatory authority, used faulty science and improper procedures to arrive
at its conclusion, and 'cherry picked' data by ignoring newer and larger
studies contradicting its conclusion.
The agency sought to have the case dismissed, contending their risk
assessment was not final agency regulation and was not subject to judicial
review. But a US district court in North Carolina this week threw out the
agency's case, paving the way for an examination of its conduct in court.
RJ Reynolds said yesterday it was delighted at the outcome and looked
forward to a full hearing.
'We don't believe that monkeying around with science to achieve a political
end is acceptable.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940723

