FT943-12879

FT  22 JUL 94 / Arts: All change in game of musical chairs - London's
orchestras are having trouble finding new musical directors


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


The Philharmonia confirmed this week that the contract of its music director
Guiseppe Sinopoli has been terminated, making official what had been known
informally for months.
Although Sinopoli was a great showman, and brought the orchestra a valuable
recording contract with DGG, his idiosyncratic interpretations of the great
romantic symphonies had not always charmed the critics.
This means that two of London's four main orchestras are seeking music
directors. Last month the LPO parted company with the equally controversial
Franz Welser-Most, a Young Turk who also failed to win round the critics.
What is going wrong and where are the orchestras to find successors?
If you have any bright ideas they would be delighted to hear. There is a
scarcity of top-flight conductors at the moment, and those with sufficient
musical and commercial weight are reluctant to come to London. It is
becoming apparent that the Art Council's ill-fated attempt last year to kill
off one or two London orchestras in the quest for a super-orchestra has cast
a pall over the city's musical scene.
To outsiders the long-term future of all the orchestras seems uncertain. Who
wants to take on bands of financially stressed and worried musicians in a
city where competition is intense, audiences world-weary and fickle, and
where there is a chance that the orchestra could go belly-up within a year
or two. Best to stay put in a North American or European city where you are
cock of the walk.
Both orchestras, which share residency at London's South Bank Centre
(although the LPO has pole position), urgently need a good music director to
give a shape and authority to their work.
All the great orchestras of recent years - Berlin, Chicago, Cleveland - have
been associated with great conductors such as Karajan, Solti, Dohnanyi. Who
will rescue the LPO and the Philharmonia?
Unfortunately the man they both wanted, the brilliant young Mariss Jansons,
has turned them down: perhaps he has his eyes fixed on St Petersburg. The
alternatives seem lacklustre in comparison.
The Philharmonia has close links with Christoph von Dohnanyi and John Eliot
Gardiner, but the former is too firmly entrenched at Cleveland to want the
hassle of London and Gardiner is best suited for occasional visits than as a
permanent force. The Philharmonia might consider Nikolaus Harnoncourt, but
no quick or obvious answer is on the horizon.
The LPO could well be seeking its future in its past and might get together
again with Bernard Haitink, its former music director who is now styled
president.
His years at Covent Garden are drawing to an end and Haitink would be a safe
pair of hands: but is he the man to excite a new, younger, audience? The LPO
would probably love someone who has demonstrably lifted the reputation of an
orchestra, such as Charles Dutoit at Montreal, but can it afford him, and
would he want to come?
Ironically, while the two London orchestras agonise, a leading regional
orchestra, the Bournemouth Symphony, this week nipped in quickly and secured
one of the brighter young talents, Yakov Kreizberg, as its principal
conductor.
Kreizberg, a 34-year-old Russian, might well have been the man to liven up
London if the orchestras had been faster on their feet.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940722

