FT941-5513

FT  05 MAR 94 / Food & Drink: Good value, fruity reds - Appetisers


   By JANCIS ROBINSON, GILES MACDONOGH and JILL JAMES


In search of good petit chateau red bordeaux? Then look to the Languedoc
where you can find a raft of good-value, hand-crafted red wines, with the
same sort of structure and fruit right through the middle.
The 1991 vintage was, unusually, a real success there.
Domaine Comte de Margon 1991 is a classily labelled Vin de Pays des Cotes de
Thongues: Pounds 4.67 from John Armit Wines of London W11 (071-727 6846).
This firm also has the more serious Clos l'Angely Minervois 1991 (from
Piccinini) at Pounds 5.67. This deep, brambly wine has the structure to
develop over several years but the softness to appeal now.
Other merchants which have cherry-picked the Languedoc include: La
Vigneronne of London SW7; the Wine Society, of Stevenage, Hertfordshire;
Adnams of Southwold, Suffolk; Lay & Wheeler, of Colchester, Essex; and
Tanners, of Shrewsbury, Shropshire. JR
* * *
A book which will be well-received by travellers is Charles MacLean's Pocket
Whisky Book (Mitchell Beazley, Pounds 7.99, 192 pages). With a growing
number of malt whisky distilleries open to the public, this book will fit
into a glove compartment, a handbag or a jacket pocket. It is rare today in
that it gives almost as much space to blended whisky as it does to malts. In
both cases MacLean gives us rather more pithy history than other guides
currently on the market.
The tasting notes appended to the malts are rarely punchy and it is
occasionally hard to say what the author actually thinks of the whisky in
his glass. This is doubtless tactful to the distillers but may prove less
than helpful to the drinker who wants to know what to take home on a Friday
night. GM
* * *
Few exciting Bulgarian wines have come my way in the past year or so -
something to do with over-enthusiastic application of oak chips, in some
cases - but Safeway, as so often in eastern Europe, has something
exceptional. A 1992 Cabernet Sauvignon from the Krazen vineyard, made at the
Russe winery, has outshone Cabernets from some very famous wine-makers at
twice the price. It costs just Pounds 3.29 a bottle and is delightfully
concentrated and well balanced. At least, the bottle I tried was, but
consignments from the east can be inconsistent. JR
* * *
As one might expect from the Good Beer Guide, edited by Jeff Evans (Camra,
Pounds 8.99, 502 pages), there is a good deal of real ale propaganda
squashed into the introduction, but for the most part Camra's obsessions are
wise ones: opening hours, Sunday licensing and children. GM
* * *
There will be a celebration of British cuisine at the May Fair
Inter-Continental hotel, in west London, next month at which Michael Coaker,
the hotel's executive chef, will be cooking.
The event will run from April 11 to 23 and a British menu of four courses
and coffee will be available in the Chateau restaurant for lunch and dinner
at Pounds 30 a head, including a glass of house port. For further details
and reservations ring 071-629-7777. JJ
* * *
Hampshire country house hotel Chewton Glen is staging a series of Sunday
night dinners at which personalities as diverse as the jazz musician Ronnie
Scott and Helen Sharman, Britain's first astronaut, will be talking or
performing. For costs and details ring 0425-275341. There is a special
overnight room rate of Pounds 100 per double room for these events. JJ

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940305

