FT942-14320

FT  21 APR 94 / World Trade News: Volvo seeks factory site in Russia


   By JOHN LLOYD and KEVIN DONE


   MOSCOW, LONDON


Volvo, the Swedish carmaker, is investigating several different sites for
the production of cars in Russia, including the massive Gaz plant which
produces the Volga car at Nizhny Novgorod.
Mr Pekka Pattiniemi, head of Volvo sales in the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Baltic states, is visiting Nizhny Novgorod today to examine
the plant.
Volvo sold 7,100 cars through its official importers and dealers in the
former Soviet Union last year in addition to a couple of thousand cars
imported through other channels.
Gaz is one of three main sites under examination by Volvo - the others
include one near the Finnish border and another near Moscow - but it has
emerged as the favourite because of the company's preference for existing
facilities over a greenfield site.
Several other western carmakers have examined the possibility of
manufacturing in Russia, but no decision has yet been made. Most important,
General Motors, the US carmaker, has signed a memorandum of understanding
with Vaz, the Russian producer of Lada cars to conduct a feasibility study
into the eventual production of the Opel/Vauxhall Corsa small car at the Vaz
assembly plant at Togliatti.
The Russian car industry is in crisis, with sales of all models, especially
the Volga, falling off precipitously as enterprises and individuals lose
purchasing power.
Volvo cars have long been favoured by the foreign diplomatic, business and
media communities in Russia, and the Swedish carmaker has greatly expanded
its toehold in the market in the past three years with sales to the growing
Russian business class.
It is assisted by the relatively high prices charged by the Russian
carmakers for their products, which are less reliable and have fewer
features than their foreign competitors.
The initial plan by Volvo would be to establish small volume assembly of its
940 model from SKD (semi-knocked down) kits with a production of 5-10,000 a
year.
Volvo said that it was being forced to consider local assembly in Russia by
the high level of customs duties. 'We expected to sell 10,000 cars this
year, but customs duties have put a brake on it.'
The Russian government has delayed a decision on a stiff increase in customs
duties, including on cars until June, but it is being pressed very hard by
the industry lobby to make a decision in favour of a high tariff regime to
shield the domestic industries from competition as their costs rise.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940421

