FT942-12593

FT  28 APR 94 / France's Gaullists join UDF in Euro-alliance


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


France's RPR Gaullist party has decided to make an historic switch, a
spokesman confirmed yesterday, by joining its French UDF ally in allying
itself with the christian democrat European Peoples party (EPP) in the
Strasbourg Parliament.
This will have the immediate result, after June's European Parliament
elections, of consolidating the EPP as the main conservative grouping at
Strasbourg. It could also pave the way to a united centre-right party in
France where for decades conservatives have been split between the
essentially nationalist movement created by General Charles de Gaulle and
the more free-market liberals represented by the UDF federation, put
together by ex-President Valery Giscard d'Estaing.
It is this conservative split that helped President Francois Mitterrand win
the past two presidential elections and that is fuelling the rivalry between
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur and Mr Jacques Chirac, the RPR party leader,
for next year's presidential contest. Even though Mr Balladur is a Gaullist,
too, he has proved unusually popular within the UDF whose support has given
the prime minister a counterweight to the hold that Mr Chirac has over the
RPR party machine. When in opposition in the late 1980s, Mr Balladur wrote
several articles urging a formal RPR-UDF merger.
But an RPR spokesman said yesterday it would be 'reading far too much' into
his party's decision to sit alongside the UDF in Strasbourg to believe that
it would have such far-ranging domestic political consequences.
The RPR's decision to join the EPP was at the urging of the UDF which Mr
Giscard d'Estaing led into the christian democrat grouping a couple of years
ago. Mr Alain Lamassoure, the UDF minister responsible for European affairs
and a close associate of Mr Giscard d'Estaing, yesterday vaunted in an
interview with Le Figaro newspaper 'the triple accord' by which the UDF and
RPR are fighting the June election, with a single list of candidates running
on a common policy platform and agreement that their successful candidates
should all wear the EPP label in Strasbourg.
Up to now, the Gaullist Euro-deputies have been part of a ragbag of other
conservative nationalists, mainly Irish Fianna Fail deputies, in the
European Democratic Rally - just as British Tory Euro-MPs sat with some
Danish conservatives in the European Democratic Group until a couple of
years ago when they became associate members of the EPP. Like the Tories,
the Gaullists have now seen the advantage of joining the big battalion of
the christian democrats, despite the EPP's federalist and religious
overtones. But the RPR spokesman yesterday did not rule out the possibility
that his party's Euro-deputies might form a sub-group of the EPP, like the
Tories.
An opinion poll published in Paris yesterday put support for the RPR-UDF
list at 38 per cent, with dissident anti-Maastricht conservatives at 4.5 per
cent and the National Front at 9 per cent. On the left, the poll gave 18.5
per cent to the Socialists, 9 per cent to a radical list led by Mr Bernard
Tapie, the maverick businessman, and 6 per cent to the Communists.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940428

