FT944-6083

FT  30 NOV 94 / Best Travel tour group collapses


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


Best Travel, the UK's seventh largest tour operator, ceased trading
yesterday on the instructions of the Civil Aviation Authority.
The collapse of the group is the biggest to hit the UK travel industry since
the collapse of Mr Harry Goodman's International Leisure Group in 1991.
The CAA said yesterday that it did not yet know how many of Best Travel's
customers were on holiday abroad. The company is fully bonded, however, and
any travellers will be brought home.
The development followed the announcement yesterday morning that Ambassador
Airways, Best's Gatwick-based charter airline, had gone into liquidation
because Best could no longer provide it with financial support.
Airtours, the UK's second largest travel group, is believed to have had
discussions with Best about taking it over, but these talks appear to have
come to nothing. Airtours had no comment yesterday.
Ambassador Airways' four Boeing 757s and two 737s were grounded yesterday.
The airline employs 350 staff, who are likely to lose their jobs
immediately. As the collapse comes after the end of the summer holiday
season, the number of passengers affected is believed to be relatively
small.
The airline specialised in flying holidaymakers to Cyprus and Greece.
Mr Nick Lyle, a partner with Touche Ross, the airline's liquidator, said he
believed 'several hundred passengers' would be affected. Mr Lyle said
passengers on Ambassador flights should contact their travel agents or tour
operators.
Mr Lyle said that all Ambassador Airways' aircraft were leased. 'Ambassador
was dependent on Best Travel for financial support. When it became clear
Best could no longer provide that support, management had no alternative but
to cease flying. Unfortunately, most of the staff will lose their jobs
immediately,' he said.
The airline was formed in 1992 by Mr Takis Shacalis, the owner of Best
Travel. Best Travel carried 353,360 passengers in the 12 months to March
this year, a 21 per cent fall on the previous year, according to CAA
figures.
Mr Shacalis was a non-executive director of Inspirations, the tour operator
which was floated on the Unlisted Securities Market in December 1993, but
resigned last week. Last month Inspirations said it would form its own
airline next spring, to be called International Airways.
International Airways will be capable of carrying all Inspirations summer
and winter customers. Mr Vic Fatah, Inspirations' chief executive, said
yesterday, however, that he did not believe the formation of the new airline
would have had a damaging effect on Ambassador. Mr Fatah stressed that there
was no remaining link between Inspirations and Ambassador or Best Travel.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941130

