FT941-16947

FT  07 JAN 94 / Danger signals flash on Malaysia's road ahead: There has
been a dramatic fall in foreign and domestic investment in the manufacturing
sector


   By KIERAN COOKE


   KUALA LUMPUR


Questioning the sturdiness of Malaysia's economy is rather like asking for a
plate of roast duck in a vegetarian restaurant. It is just not done.
After all, the economy turned in another healthy performance last year,
growing by at least 8 per cent - the sixth successive year of 8 per cent GDP
growth. People talk proudly of Malaysia's economic miracle.
Unemployment is under 3 per cent and the country is industrialising fast,
with manufacturing output up more than 13 per cent in the first nine months
of 1993.
But figures released yesterday showing a dramatic fall in both foreign and
domestic investment in Malaysia's manufacturing sector are likely to
introduce a sombre note amid all the economic euphoria.
Total investments in Malaysia's manufacturing sector in 1992 were MDollars
27.7bn (Pounds 7.1bn). In 1993 total proposed investments fell to MDollars
13.27bn. Within that figure foreign investment fell by 66 per cent to
MDollars 6bn.
Investment from domestic sources also fell sharply in 1993, by 27 per cent.
In 1992 domestic investment had fallen by more than 30 per cent.
Mrs Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's minister for trade and industry, said
government investment targets were being met, despite the decline. Malaysia
had now accumulated nearly 90 per cent of the MDollars 80bn total investment
targeted under the present five year plan (1991-95); there was evidence of
more reinvestment, with existing investors expanding their operations.
The investment slowdown was not unique to Malaysia. 'Foreign direct
investment in other Asean countries also showed a marked decrease last
year,' Mrs Rafidah added. 'For example, Japanese investment in Asean in 1992
amounted to Dollars 3.86bn; in the first six months of 1993, it amounted to
only Dollars 1.33bn'. Investment in Asean by Taiwan and South Korea had
dropped even more sharply.
But the investment drop does present a serious challenge to Malaysia's
onward economic growth and its ambitious plans to become a fully
industrialised country by 2020.
One of the main reasons for the decline in foreign investment is that
Malaysia is no longer an attractive destination for labour-intensive
industries.
Wages in China and Vietnam are well below those in Malaysia. Malaysia is
facing serious labour shortage problems in many areas: again, China, Vietnam
and also Indonesia have a plentiful supply of cheap labour.
Malaysia says it wants to climb the technological ladder. It needs foreign
investment to achieve this goal. But it faces a dilemma. Malaysia has a
chronic lack of technicians and engineers. Malaysia's universities still
produce far more arts than science graduates. Thailand and the Philippines
have higher proportions of students in tertiary education than Malaysia.
Though the government is making a concerted attempt to revamp the education
system, the result will not be seen for some years. Meanwhile,
high-technology industry investors are going elsewhere.
For many years Singapore has been encouraging science and technical
education. Singapore is one of the region's most expensive investment
locations: yet according to official figures, foreign investments went up
again in Singapore last year - from SDollars 3.5bn (Dollars 2.3bn) in 1992
to SDollars 3.9bn.
The Malaysian government says that Malaysia must become less dependent on
outside investment and raise more from domestic sources. Despite the fact
that many Malaysian companies are sitting on considerable hoards of cash,
they are still often reluctant to commit themselves to long-term investments
in the home market.
Some economists blame the stock market for the tardiness of domestic
investment. The Kuala Lumpur index rose 98 per cent last year and the
bourse, in terms of market capitalisation, has become by far the biggest in
south-east Asia.
'Things have reached a dangerous stage,' one Malaysian economist said.
'There is plenty of cash about, but people prefer to make quick money on the
stock market than invest in long-term productive enterprises.
'The fundamentals of the economy have not changed much in the past nine
months, yet the market has roared ahead. People are beginning to think that
a booming stock market is synonymous with a thriving economy.'
A few more dark clouds lie on the economic horizon.
The government is seriously concerned about rising prices and upward
pressures on wages which could harm Malaysia's export competitiveness. The
official inflation rate rose to 3.5 per cent in October from 2.8 per cent in
mid-1993: many feel the actual inflation rate is higher.
Bank Negara, the central bank, has had to mop up large amounts of excess
liquidity in the system, caused by heavy inflows of foreign capital
attracted by comparatively high interest rates, a steady local currency, and
the high-flying stock market.
Earlier this week, Bank Negara announced it was raising the statutory
reserve requirement for banking institutions from 8.5 per cent to 9.5 per
cent, to help mop up excess liquidity and prevent further inflationary
pressures.
Malaysia's economic figures are still impressive, the envy of many
countries. But a few bumps are appearing along the high-speed road to full
industrialisation.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940107

