FT942-14507

FT  20 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: Strapped for cash in Hungary -
Green issues are taking a back seat / World wide waste


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


At Hungary's Dorog Incinerator there is more embarrassment in the air than
fumes from the chimney. 'Actually, the furnace is idle today,' confesses
Gyorgyne Otrok, managing director of the plant. 'We're short on waste.'
Something is awry. While four decades of communist economic management
produced many shortages, industrial rubbish was not one of them. And the
waste incinerator, majority owned by France's Sarp Industries and located in
an industrial town northwest of Budapest, is advanced for Hungary, and for
eastern Europe for that matter.
Hungary produces about 2m-2.6m tonnes a year of hazardous material, the
government estimates, and deals with just 40 per cent of that. 'The
treatment of the rest, more than a half of the total, has remained unsolved
right up to the present day,' a government report admits.
It is not for lack of public and political awareness of environmental
issues. Protests over a barrage on the river Danube helped bring down the
country's former communist regime, and built environmental consciousness
into the post-communist political system.
Nor is it for lack of regulation. Hungary introduced an environmental law as
far back as 1976 and has modelled its policy on Germany. Limits on emissions
from incinerators, for instance, are said to be the third toughest in the
world.
But tough rules have minimal effect. In 1991 the government decreed that
companies could store on the premises up to one year's worth of hazardous
waste. Dorog Incinerator expected a glut of refuse but it did not come. 'The
regulation is a dead letter. It's only if someone has a conscience that they
abide by it,' says Otrok.
One weak link is enforcement. About 1,000 employees at the county and
national supervisory authorities cover a country of 10m inhabitants, a lower
proportion than in western Europe. 'They constantly complain they have too
much work,' says Denes Olessak, the leading official for environmental
protection at the industry ministry.
A vital ingredient is also missing: cash. Investment in environmental
protection has fallen from 1 per cent of GDP in 1987 to about 0.6 per cent
at the latest count and the corporate sector accounts for all of the fall.
Hungary's economy has shrunk by over a fifth since 1990, most state
companies live financially from day to day, and they pay salaries and the
electricity bill before they send toxic waste to be burnt at Dorog. 'Many
companies sign contracts so they have some paper to show the supervisors
when they come round to do a check,' says Otrok. 'But when it comes to
carting over the waste they tell us they have no money.'
Often refuse just piles up on site. And when Hungarian companies face the
problem they often do so on the cheap. They are aided by the market economy,
which has thrown up a variety of environmental entrepreneurs. Some, even
Dorog Incinerator admits, are decent. Others undercut by cutting corners.
One company offered 'biological treatment' which involved no more than
airing the contaminated soil.
Nor are manufacturers the only impoverished, and delinquent, polluters.
Municipalities are often worse offenders. The industry ministry reckons that
a mere 5 per cent of Hungary's 2,700 landfills meet official standards.
Budapest, the capital, will run out of landfill capacity within two years on
current trends.
Central government is in no position to help. Hungary's budget deficit will
rise to an estimated Ft330bn (Pounds 2.2bn) this year, about 8.5 per cent of
GDP. State spending on environmental projects has risen gently in real terms
but Olessak concludes: 'The aim is to do as many projects as possible with
outside help.'
Much western aid has flowed back into the pockets of western consultants.
Olessak opens a cupboard in his office to show a whole library of western
reports. 'They don't tell me anything I didn't know 10 years ago,' he says.
'What we really need is funding for concrete projects.'
That, belatedly, is coming. The Swiss government has given a grant of
SFr4.4m (Pounds 2.1m) to modernise two Hungarian metal galvanisation plants
and expand their waste processing capacity. Japan has provided a Dollars
100m (Pounds 68.4m) official credit to finance the environmental
rehabilitation of Varpalota in western Hungary, which has the misfortune to
host a particularly polluting combination of aluminium, chemical and paper
factories.
Private western investors have also brought resources to bear on pollution.
Electrolux, the Swedish white goods group, bought Hungarian refrigerator
manufacturer Lehel in 1991. About half of the Dollars 50m purchase price has
been ploughed back into cleaning up toxic sludge, oil and heavy metals.
General Electric of the US has begun to recycle fluorescent tubes produced
at Tungsram, the lighting manufacturer which GE acquired in 1990.
More comprehensive environmental rehabilitation depends, as does so much
else in Hungary, on recovery lifting the corporate sector as a whole.
Banking on that prospect, among others, is the western green industry.
EMC-Services of France and a subsidiary of Italy's Ansaldo are planning to
construct two more incinerators. An Austrian company has invested in a
long-term waste storage centre in Aszod. All they need is someone to put out
the rubbish.
Next week: Mexico

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940420

