FT942-14621

FT  19 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Budgens upset


   By PETER JOHN, CHRIS PRICE, CHRISTINE BUCKLEY and STEVE THOMPSON.


A profits warning from Budgens, the discount food retailer, was the signal
for a retreat among other smaller operators. Budgens said that trading
profits were likely to come in at around 15 per cent lower than last year,
blaming the tough trading climate. The group also said that its new trading
format being undertaken with Rewe, the German discount group which owns 29.4
per cent of Budgens, had incurred additional costs. Budgen shares slid 5 to
29p. Kwik Save retreated 15 to 568p, William Low 7 to 138p and Shoprite 9 to
192p.
Pharmaceuticals stocks suffered continued selling with Glaxo worst hit in
the suffering sector as traders picked up on a story in a US newspaper.
The newspaper reported that the family of a woman who died after taking the
company's anti-migraine drug was to sue Glaxo. A Glaxo spokesman confirmed
that legal action was being taken but added: 'Sumatriptan has been subject
to rigorous screening throughout its development and is now licensed in 67
markets worldwide and has been taken by over one million patients.' The
shares fell 17 to 558p with 6.3m traded.
Elsewhere, Wellcome fell 10 to 528p in spite of a report that the companies
AIDS treatment would remain the cornerstone of combination therapies.
SmithKline Beecham slipped 5 to 359p in the 'A's.
A two-way pull in Associated British Foods saw the shares shade 2 down to
596p. The shares came under pressure early on following weekend press
speculation that the sale of the Bakers Oven business could make as little
as Pounds 9m, rather than the Pounds 30m pencilled in by some analysts.
However, more positive talk later in the session revived rumours that AB
Foods was interested in buying some of the food businesses of Allied Lyons.
Last week, Dalgety was said to have been telling analysts of its interest
during a company visit. Dalgety shares were steady at 458p. Allied slipped 3
to 581p.
Royal Bank of Scotland was the only leading bank to escape the Wall
Street-led decline in the market, with Credit Lyonnais Laing said to have
been behind some strong support for the Scottish bank. RBOS shares settled 6
higher at 404p after turnover of 3.9m shares.
Caradon, the building materials company, jumped to 380p early in the
session, on buying stimulated by a Kleinwort Benson buy recommendation
before slipping back to close a net 7 higher at 372p.
Oil shares, which have been driven sharply higher in recent sessions by a
strong oil price and a firm Wall Street, turned easier yesterday as US
investors took fright at the prospect higher domestic interest rates. And
there was talk that some broking houses had adopted a much more cautious
view of the oil stocks after their recent big gains.
The majors bore the brunt of some hefty selling, which mostly emanated from
New York, with BP settling 4 easier at 386p and Shell 3 down at 725p.
Clyde Petroleum, marginally higher at 36p, confirmed market suspicions that
US fund management group Fidelity was the recent big seller of a three and a
half per cent stake in the group.
Dealers became increasingly bullish about the market debut of Ashanti
Goldfields this afternoon and the probable impact the flotation will have on
Lonrho, the UK conglomerate which will retain a 43 per cent stake in
Ashanti.
Talk late yesterday suggested that Ashanti shares will commence trading
around Dollars 20 a share. Lonrho closed 4 1/2 higher at 154p after turnover
of 8.7m.
A recommendation from Hoare Govett helped Wakebourne, the computer support
company, jump 3/4 to 3 1/2 p.
Other statistics, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 42

940419

