FT944-14499

FT  22 OCT 94 / International Company News: Hochtief stalks Holzmann stake


   By MICHAEL LINDEMANN


   BONN


Hochtief, Germany's second largest construction company, may try to get a
controlling stake in Philipp Holzmann, if its larger rival does not
co-operate with efforts to co-ordinate their foreign operations.
Mr Hans-Peter Keitel, Hochtief's chief executive, said his company would
need a shareholding of about 40 per cent to control voting at Holzmann
shareholder meetings where usually a maximum of 80 per cent of the shares
are represented.
However, he said he would not push for a full merger of the two groups which
would remain competitors in the German market.
In mid-September, Hochtief said it would raise its 18.7 per cent in Holzmann
by buying a further 10 per cent from BfG Bank. Mr Keitel said since then
Holzmann had made what he called an 'emotional' rejection of any ideas of
co-operation.
Hochtief's increased stake is being reviewed by the Federal Cartel Office
which is examining a range of different markets, from tunnel boring to
bridge building, to see whether competition would be distorted.
The review is not likely to be completed until mid-January. However, if
Hochtief wins approval to go over the key 25 per cent share threshold which
allows it to block supervisory board decisions there are no reasons why
Hochtief could not raise its stake to 49.9 per cent.
Hochtief is likely to be able to pick up the 5 per cent stake held by
Commerzbank, the group's house bank, but it is unclear where it will find
the outstanding shares.
Deutsche Bank, with 25.9 per cent, is the largest of Holzmann's
shareholders. Yesterday it refused to say whether it would sell any of its
shares.
'We are observing the situation and must wait for signals from the
monopolies authority,' the bank said.
Holzman said institutional investors held about 9 per cent of the company
and that the balance was held by small shareholders, many of whom do not
attend meetings.
Since Hochtief unveiled its strategy, Mr Lothar Mayer, Holzmann's chief
executive, has said he wanted the company to remain independent. It is
likely that he will try to persuade Deutsche Bank not to sell its shares. He
will argue that if Hochtief wins control it would give RWE, which owns
Hochtief and is also the country's largest utility, a too powerful position
in Germany.
Deutsche said earlier this year it would reduce its shareholdings in a
number of German companies and use the money to buy stakes in international
companies. It hinted that it did not regard its Holzmann holding as a
strategic investment by refusing to participate in a rights issue last year.
Hochtief has a turnover of about DM8bn (Dollars 5.1bn), less than Holzmann's
DM12.4bn, but is considerably more profitable, reporting earnings last year
of DM122m compared with Holzmann's DM106m.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941022

