FT944-11042

FT  08 NOV 94 / Gartmore in venture to build US presence


   By NORMA COHEN and RICHARD WATERS


   LONDON, NEW YORK


Gartmore, the UK fund manager, has formed a joint venture with NationsBank,
America's third biggest bank, which will allow it to sell international fund
management expertise to US retail and pension fund investors.
Mr Paul Myners, executive chairman of Gartmore, said the venture will give
Gartmore distribution outlets to build a US presence.
NationsBank is the US's second largest bank distributor of mutual funds and
Gartmore hopes to capture some of the fast growing market for individuals
who choose their own pension fund manager, he said. The venture will also
target the US 'defined benefit' market which pays pensions to individuals
based on their final salary and the US mutual fund market.
'To make any inroads into this market you need strong branding and strong
retail distribution,' Mr Myners said.
Under the agreement, no cash will change hands immediately. However, if the
total assets of the venture top Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3bn) within five years,
NationsBank has an option to acquire 10 per cent of Gartmore, in newly
issued shares, at 200p per share.
Mr Myners said that while the venture will make little contribution to
earnings in the short term, it should provide significant growth in the
long-term.
The venture will control the Dollars 540m managed by NationsBank Panmure
Investment Management, the fund management arm of stockbrokers Panmure
Gordon, also owned by NationsBank. Also, if clients agree, it will capture
the Dollars 230m in assets under management at Gartmore's existing US
operation, which will be absorbed into it.
Analysts said the move is important for NationsBank which has been less
successful than other big US regional banking groups at developing and
selling its investment products.
Another joint venture, with stockbroker Dean Witter, will be unwound next
week after just 16 months. NationsSecurities has been the subject of
lawsuits from customers, who claim that it failed to make clear that its
investment products were not covered by the federal bank insurance fund.
Lex, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941108

