FT942-15401

FT  15 APR 94 / Management: Avoid the BP trap - Forthcoming AGMs are heading
for conflict over executive incentives


   By LUCY KELLAWAY and ROBERT CORZINE


Last week British Petroleum learnt a lesson in how an annual general meeting
can be hijacked over the emotive issue of executive incentives.
Reports of the bad-tempered meeting will have been read with horror by other
publicly-quoted companies which will shortly be asking their shareholders
for permission to renew share option schemes.
On BP's agenda was a resolution extending a scheme for 500-600 managers. A
similar item will be on the agenda of most company AGMs this year, as their
existing 10-year schemes, introduced in 1984 to take advantage of tax
breaks, formally expire. Since share options are the only part of a
remuneration package on which investors have the right to vote, the occasion
is being viewed by shareholders as a golden opportunity to exert an
influence on the fraught question of executive pay.
BP executives say they knew in advance that questions on the issue would be
raised from the floor. But Lord Ashburton, BP chairman, seemed taken aback
by a broadside of complex questions and statements that flowed from a member
of the UK Shareholders Association, which represents smaller investors.
The accusations came fast and furious:
The lack of details on performance criteria meant BP was in violation of the
Cadbury code of corporate governance and guidelines of institutional
shareholders, such as those of the Association of British Insurers and the
National Association of Pension Funds;
The compensation committee of the board of directors was not independent
enough;
References to the scheme in the annual report had been misleading.
Lord Ashburton bravely tried to separate the various strands of questioning,
but the share option scheme became hopelessly entangled with another
incentive plan for BP's top 90 executives that was not on the agenda. His
statement that the ABI had found 'technical shortcomings' in the scheme's
performance criteria signalled the end of the confrontation and a tactical
retreat to the security of an overwhelmingly large block of proxy votes
offered up by institutional shareholders.
As for the small shareholders sitting high above the fray in the lofty
heights of London's Barbican's theatre, they too seemed flummoxed by the
confusion below. But shareholder sentiment, smarting from an extension of
BP's frozen dividend, was not on the side of management.
Many of the allegations may have been misleading, half-truths or downright
wrong, as BP officials later claimed. But they were received with rounds of
applause, and at least a third of those present voted against the resolution
to extend the scheme.
BP's post-mortem of the day no doubt centred on how the executive incentive
issue came to dominate what were otherwise generally positive proceedings on
BP's rehabilitation from the dark days of two years ago, when Robert
Horton's sudden departure from his twin posts of chairman and chief
executive triggered a troubled period for the company.
The BP experience not only indicates that shareholders are baying for blood,
but that there is much confusion on what constitutes an acceptable new
options scheme.
'Companies had better make sure they've got their acts together,' warns Mark
Anderson of New Bridge Street Consultants, specialists on executive pay.
Shareholders have been increasingly vociferous on the issue of options over
the past two years in preparation for the season of mass renewal of the
plans. After considerable disagreement among themselves, the ABI and the
NAPF have decided they will only approve future schemes that contain a
measure of performance.
The joint guidelines the two bodies issued last year stated that companies
and their remuneration committees could choose the performance measure best
suited to them. It was implicit in the recommendation that shareholders, in
order to make an informed vote on the scheme, would need to know precisely
what that measure was.
BP was taken to task last week mainly because it failed to announce what its
criteria are. However, the institutional investors were perfectly happy with
its excuse.
The company argued that it was not yet ready to issue any options under the
new scheme. It pointed out that fluctuations in oil prices and exchange
rates made the two most common performance measures - share price and
earnings - inappropriate. It said it was working on a complex measure of
performance that compared its own return to shareholders against that of the
other oil majors.
BP already uses this measure to reward its most senior people as part of an
annual bonus, but at present the measure is calculated just once a year. If
the measure is to be extended to share options it must be more flexible and
the company is looking at ways of achieving this.
The ABI denies that in approving the options scheme last week, it was
signing a blank cheque. BP has pledged that it will inform shareholders of
the performance measure, which will have been thoroughly analysed by its own
remuneration committee. The ABI reasons that although shareholders will not
get the chance to vote, they could make life very embarrassing for the oil
giant if its performance measure is inadequate.
Other companies, meanwhile, should have learnt the lesson. Most are likely
to announce loud and clear their chosen performance criteria at the outset.
For most the choice of measure will be easier than it was for BP. Few other
companies are in sectors homogenous enough to allow performance to be
compared against their peers, so they are likely to choose more conventional
measures. Moreover, few businesses are so at the mercy of commodity prices.
According to specialist pay consultants who are helping companies to
finalise their new schemes, the most popular measure is likely to be
earnings. Many will plump for a criterion that allows executives to exercise
options if the company's earnings beat inflation by 2 per cent in three
successive years.
Some are still dithering, waiting to see what sort of performance measures
others go for before making a decision.
And a few companies have found the area so perplexing that they have decided
to shelve the whole dreaded question of executive share options until next
year.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940415

