FT944-14617

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (11): US investors
fear aggressive Fed will curtail profits growth


   From PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


In spite of yet more talk of rising inflation, higher global interest rates
and a gloomy outlook for financial asset prices worldwide, the US stock
market put in a surprisingly solid performance during the third quarter.
Buoyed for most of the period by expectations of stable interest rates, and
supported by more good news on company profits and a string of big corporate
mergers in key industries, all the leading stock indices posted gains over
the three months.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 218 points, or 6 per cent, to finish
the quarter at 3,843.19. The Standard & Poor's 500, a broader measure of
market performance, rose 4.1 per cent to 462.69, while the Nasdaq composite
index - which includes many of the country's biggest technology companies -
jumped 8.3 per cent to 764.29. These gains represented an impressive
recovery from the losses of the first two quarters, when rising US interest
rates threw stock and bond markets completely out of kilter.
July opened with investors fearful that the weakness of the dollar would
force the Federal Reserve to put up interest rates to support the US
currency. The Fed, however, initially held its fire, and with the second
quarter reporting season showing further improvement in corporate earnings,
share prices began a steady, if unspectacular, climb from 3,650 to 3,800
during July and early August.
By mid-August, however, the strength of the economy meant that central
bankers could not ignore the bond market's deepening concern about
inflation. On August 16, the Fed tightened monetary policy for the fifth
time in 1994. The 50 basis-point increase in the discount rate to 4 per cent
and the Fed funds rate to 4.75 per cent was well received in the market,
primarily because investors and analysts hoped it would be the last upward
move in rates for several months, if not for the year.
This expectation that rates would remain stable for the foreseeable future
sustained prices throughout late August and early September, with the Dow
rising to a high for the quarter of 3,953.88 on September 15. Stocks were
also aided by a string of high-profile corporate deals in the healthcare,
defence and telecommunications industries. The deals included American Home
Products' takeover of American Cyanamid, and Martin Marrietta's merger with
Lockheed. Rumours of other billion-dollar transactions - most notably
involving television broadcast networks - also kept merger mania alive.
By the last few weeks of the quarter, however, unexpectedly strong economic
and inflation data had undermined hopes for stable interest rates, and the
spectre of another Fed tightening hung over the market. By the start of the
final quarter, the Dow was more than 100 points off its peak of
mid-September, bond yields were at their highest levels since 1992, and
analysts were predicting another interest rate increase within four to six
weeks.
The only bright spot was a forecast of another impressive quarterly
reporting season; but with concern growing that the Fed's aggressive
tightening of monetary policy would eventually lead to not just slower
economic growth, but lower corporate earnings as well, investors feared that
they could not count on strong profits growth for very long.
In Canada, share prices also staged a solid rebound from summer lows,
although the gains on the Toronto Stock Exchange during the quarter were not
quite as great as on Wall Street. During the quarter, the TSE-300 composite
climbed 178.7, or 4.3 per cent, to 4,357.67, with investors shrugging off
the implications of the election in mid-September of a separatist government
in Quebec.
Mexican markets also had key elections to contend with, but the expected
victory in the presidential race of the ruling PRI party's candidate had
little impact upon share prices, which rose steadily throughout the period.
In the last week of September, however, prices dipped sharply following the
assassination of the PRI's secretary general, which forced investors to
focus again on the issue of internal political reforms. The IPC index ended
with a gain of 22 per cent, at 2,746.11.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941021

