FT941-12803

FT  28 JAN 94 / People: Motorway course for BAe technocrat


Lawrence Haynes, right, currently project director at British Aerospace, has
been appointed to the high-profile position of chief executive of the
Highways Agency, which will be established in April, within the department
of transport. The DTI made the appointment known yesterday, adding that
Haynes is due to start work on February 14. He was unavailable for comment.
The Highways Agency is part of the government's Next Steps programme of
setting up agencies, thereby changing the structure of the civil service,
with the aim of increasing efficiency and providing greater value for
taxpayers' money.
The job is bound to be sensitive. According to last November's budget
statement, total spending on trunk roads and motorways in England will
average nearly Pounds 2bn over the next three years, and a number of
controversial decisions - such as widening the M25 motorway circling London
 -are still pending. Moreover, Haynes will also be in charge of bypasses,
which are always politically sensitive, particularly so in marginal
constituencies.
This particular agency will be responsible for a 6,600 mile network of
motorways and other trunk roads, which represents fractionally less than 4
per cent of the UK's total roads but which accounts for one third of all
traffic and more than 50 per cent of heavy goods traffic.
Haynes, 41, served as a technician in the Royal Air Force from 1969 until
1978, when he studied for a Business Law degree at Heriot-Watt University.
He joined British Aerospace in 1983, eventually becoming managing director
of Microtel, a joint venture company put together by BAe in the
telecommunications field. He implemented the disposal of Microtel in 1992
and rejoined BAe, becoming project director dealing with 'special
assignments'.
As chief executive of the agency, with a salary in the region of Pounds
100,000, Haynes will be responsible for ensuring that it achieves financial
and quality of service targets. The stated aim of the agency is to 'promote
an efficient, reliable, safe and environmentally acceptable trunk road
network.'
The government argues that creation of the agency 'should help to speed up
delivery of the current substantial programme of road improvement.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940128

