FT941-12917

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (21): Putting out more flags - The DTI is
coopting 100 businessmen to aid it in boosting exports. If the drive fails
the private sector concedes that it will have to share the blame /
Government promotion / United Kingdom


   By DAVID DODWELL, FT World Trade Editor


The chorus from British exporters has been very much the same for most of
the past decade: Government neither understands their needs, nor listens to
their views on how they might best be helped.
Until about 18 months ago, that is. Since then, the shared aim of Mr Michael
Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, and Mr Richard Needham, his
terrier-like trade minister, has been to get industry working alongside
Whitehall to define the country's export strategies.
Perhaps the most potent and ambitious departure has been the 'export
promoter' initiative. Moving beyond the idea of consulting industry leaders,
export organisations and chambers of commerce, the Department of Trade and
Industry is in the process of recruiting business executives to work inside
government - 100 of them, most on two-year secondment. 'We have virtually
doubled our export promotion capacity overnight. We're thrilled about it,'
said one senior DTI official.
But will industry have reason to be similarly thrilled? What role are these
seconded troubleshooters expected to play? How will their 'successes' be
measured? How well equipped are they to advise small and medium-sized UK
companies when their career experience has been inside large multinationals?
The initiative, launched by Mr Michael Heseltine early last year, is one of
a number of recent government innovations aimed at sharpening Britain's
export effort. At a stroke, it has provided a means for the government to
harness the knowledge and skills of UK industrialists, and silenced industry
complaints that the government never listens to it.
Nine months into the programme, just 60 of the 100 export promoters have
been recruited from the ranks of the UK's top 100 companies: 'Recruitment
has gone slower than we expected, but we have been pleased with the quality
of executives seconded,' says Ms Helen Deas, who is responsible for the
Export Promoter scheme at the DTI: 'I had some doubts about whether industry
would release top people, but I have been pleasantly surprised.'
The task of defining a particular export promoter's role has been difficult.
For large countries such as the US or Japan, a team of export promoters has
been brought together, each specialising in a particular industrial sector.
For smaller markets such as Thailand or Turkey, one export promoter faces
the task of becoming a 'jack of all export trades', regardless of his or her
corporate background.
All promoters are expected to have a deep working knowledge of the market
for which they are responsible, and to have spent a considerable amount of
time working there. Regions hardest to find candidates for have been China,
South America and the former Soviet Union - no doubt because companies are
reluctant to release staff in these key growth areas where rare language
skills are needed.
Beyond that, the problem likely to face export promoters has been one of
having too much freedom to define their role rather than too little: 'It is
clear that they need to be team players, but they have to build on, rather
than compete with, what we have already got either in the DTI, or in
embassies overseas,' one DTI official said. 'There is nothing to stop an
export promoter from completely redefining an area: it is their initiative,
energy and enthusiasm that will drive the programme forward.'
For Peter Jenning, seconded in February from the chemicals group Siebe to
work on boosting exports of environmental products and services to the US
market, this has involved mobilising UK consulates across the US to complete
a study of the Dollars 120bn north American environmental services market.
It has also involved careful thought about the sort of British company that
might look seriously to the US: 'The UK environmental services industry is
still immature by comparison with US industry, which has been structured by
strong environmental legislation,' Mr Jenning said: 'It has been a matter of
finding innovative companies and bringing them forward.' His third
initiative has been to examine export opportunities arising from the North
American Free Trade Agreement, which has committed considerable funds to
cleaning up the environment along the industrially-polluted US-Mexico
border.
'We have to convince industry that this is not just another series of
fruitless exercises,' he said: 'In some areas, the reputation of the DTI is
not that good.'
Peter Bacon, seconded from Philips to concentrate on Japan's electronics
sector, is adopting a different tack: helping UK components manufacturers to
penetrate the UK-based subsidiaries of Japanese companies such as Sony,
Panasonic or Mitsubishi.
'Many Japanese companies may operate in the UK, but are headquartered in
Japan, with most decisions taken there,' he notes: 'When design is done in
Japan, and many components chosen at the design stage, we have to find ways
of influencing thinking in Tokyo before we can succeed in supplying their
UK-based offshoots.'
He plans to use his own market knowledge, and that of UK mission staff in
Japan, to improve access to decision makers in Japan - not to win export
orders (at least initially), but to replace imports: to demonstrate that UK
companies can supply Japanese subsidiaries operating in the UK and Europe
more effectively and reliably than component-makers based in Japan.
By contrast the first priority of Ian Paterson, seconded from Thorn as
export promoter for Singapore and Malaysia, has been to draw up 'sellers'
guides' to key growth sectors in Malaysia. In contrast to DTI efforts, he
sees his role as 'specific action- and deal-oriented  .. we have learned
that the DTI has much more information available than most companies are
aware of. They could often hit the ground running just by using the
information that's available here.'
Starting from sector overviews drawn up by British embassy staff in
Malaysia, Mr Paterson's 'sellers' guides' are intended to be hands-on 'how
to' guides for sectors ranging from transport, power, oil and gas, and
telecommunications to water and health services.
All three promoters dismissed concern that their 'big industry' experience
left them ill-equipped to appreciate the problems of small and medium-sized
exporters: 'Most big companies are aggregations of small operating units,'
said Ian Paterson.
Measuring the success of the export promoter initiative is likely to be a
complex matter. In very few cases will a company clearly attribute a sale,
or establishment of a foothold in a market, to a promoter. Gains may only be
made over a long period. DTI officials acknowledge the speciousness of
measuring success in terms of the number of trade missions arranged, or the
number of executives on a particular mission, but are at a loss to offer
alternatives: 'It is for export promoters - and their energy and enthusiasm
 -to drive the initiative forward,' one noted.
To provide focus, promoters may draw on DTI 'market plans' for the UK's top
80 export markets: 'It is the forecasts of these plans that will drive DTI
desk staff, embassy staff in the field, area advisory groups, and export
promoters,' one explained. Promoters will also answer to 'god-fathers' -
heads of the DTI's various area advisory groups. For the head of the
European group, that will mean integrating 20 export promoters into his
department's operations - a formidable management challenge.
Whether the export promoter initiative generates new exports or not, its
ultimate virtue might lay elsewhere. First it will make companies better
aware of the DTI's services, and the help it can offer exporters. Perhaps
most important, it undermines the basis for industry complaints that
government is to be blamed if exporters fail. One industrialist conceded:
'If in future we fail to win export orders, we will have no-one to blame but
ourselves'.
DTI contacts: Helen Deas or Sylvia Parnell 071 215 8421

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940127

