FT942-15987

FT  13 APR 94 / UN looks to Churkin's skill


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


   SARAJEVO


'Today is a politics day,' said Canadian Major Roy Thomas, the senior UN
military observer in Bosnia, yesterday, revealing the degree to which the UN
is relying on the diplomatic skills of Mr Vitaly Churkin, Russia's special
envoy, to extricate it from the rapidly escalating confrontation with the
Serbs.
When Bosnian Serb leaders broke off relations with the UN on Monday, after
Nato launched air strikes, they named Mr Churkin as the sole channel of
communication.
Mr Churkin, who seems a personification of diplomacy, has now emerged as the
central figure in the bid to stop fighting in Bosnia and bring the
protagonists back to the negotiating table.
Yesterday he was on his usual diplomatic shuttle, the only mediator with
access to both the Bosnian government and the Bosnian Serbs, after Mr
Radovan Karadzic, Bosian Serb leader, on Monday refused to meet Mr Charles
Redman, the US special envoy.
His diplomatic finesse extends beyonds Bosnia. Last month, at the Russian
embassy in Zagreb, he hosted a series of marathon talks between the Croatian
government and the breakaway Serb state of Krajina, which led to a so-far
effective ceasefire and raised hopes for a broader agreement.
Equally at home in Pale, the deserted ski resort which the Bosnian Serbs use
as their mountain capital, or in the swimming pool at Vougliameni, the
exclusive hotel near Athens where talks were held last year on the ill-fated
Vance-Owen plan, Mr Churkin has become increasingly confident in his own
ability to hammer out a settlement where others have failed.
But Mr Churkin is an unusually smart and professional operator, far removed
from the cameo image of a plodding and suspicious Soviet diplomat. A stint
at the Soviet embassy in Washington early in his career has also equipped
him with an impressive command of English, which further aids his assets as
a mediator.
Mr Churkin is now facing the biggest challenge of his career.
On Monday, after Nato had launched air strikes on Serb targets which were
attacking Gorazde, the Moslem enclave in eastern Bosnia, he contacted Mr
Redman to express Russia's dismay at not having been consulted, suggesting
that if it had been 'we might have been able to do something'.
He also conveyed Russian concern that the air strikes should target only
weapons directly firing at UN positions. Moscow sought assurances that Nato
would not hit Bosnian Serb command posts, let alone civilians.
Clearly, before Nato took such drastic action he would have liked to have
had the chance to pull another rabbit out of the hat, as he did in February
with his eleventh- hour announcement that Russian peacekeepers would be
deployed in Sarajevo.
On that occasion, air strikes were averted as Bosnian Serbs were able to
obey Nato's ultimatum without loss of face.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940413

