FT941-3313

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (18):
History often repeats itself - The UK's computing industry / The development
of the UK's computer manufacturing industry ran into problems from the
start.  Genius was let down by poor marketing and lack of government funding


   By JOHN KAVANAGH


Fujitsu's takeover of ICL in 1990 brought an end to a UK-owned computer
manufacturing industry which dated back almost 40 years.
Yet according to some of its early leaders, who met at London's Science
Museum at the end of last month to discuss why the early UK promise was not
fulfilled, the fact that the industry had survived even beyond the 1960s was
quite remarkable.
The packed meeting, organised by the Computer Conservation Society,
highlighted the UK's disadvantages from the very early days.
'The UK's contribution was out of all proportion to its population and
industrial capacity,' said Mr George Davis, who worked at the National
Physical Laboratory on the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine).
'This was true at all stages: the creation of basic concepts, the research
and development leading to the first computers and the emergence of a
computer industry with competing suppliers.'
But Mr Davis argued that the breadth of this contribution meant that the UK
industry was too diverse from the start.
By the mid-1950s there were eight computer manufacturers. They included
Ferranti, English Electric, ICT (International Computers and Tabulators),
Elliott Brothers and Leo Computers - this last was the product of J. Lyons'
extraordinary expansion from tea shops into building computers.
Lyons is credited with being the first organisation to run commercial
applications. Notable among these were bakery production monitoring in 1951
and payroll in 1954. These landmarks inspired The Economist to publish a
feature article in 1954 which asked: 'Is this the first step in an
accounting revolution or merely an interesting and expensive experiment?'
The trouble was that the US, with a similar number of manufacturers, had a
far bigger home market on which to build the foundations for its industry -
and more government support.
'While the US government was supporting research and development in the late
1940s and early 1950s, with guaranteed orders at the end, the computer
industry was not seen as significant in the UK and was not supported,'
George Davis told the Computer Conservation Society.
This was underlined by the practical experiences of Mr Cecil Marks, who
recalled being seconded by Royal Ordnance, where he worked on administration
and accounting, using punched card equipment, to a study carried out by
government departments into the potential uses of computers. Scientists and
users from several departments, including the Treasury, worked for 18
months, culminating in the production of a hefty report and a meeting with
'a very senior civil servant.'
'At the end of the meeting he suggested that this was not the time to be
getting into computers,' Mr Marks said. 'That led to the ordnance factories,
at least, losing ground for more than 10 years.'
Other factors were brought to light by Mr Hugh Ross, who set up Ferranti's
London computer centre in the mid-1950s. He pointed to a dispute between
Ferranti and the National Research Development Corporation, over
manufacturing costs underwritten by the publicly-funded corporation, which
led to a nine-month ban on sales. As Mr Ross said, this had a 'crippling'
impact on UK success in the emerging market, as well as hitting Ferranti's
cash flow.
But Mr Ross also blamed an absence of financial management for Ferranti's
failure to fulfil its early promise. Even when he set up the London computer
centre, he said, he never had to account for any money he spent - indeed, he
had never had a budget in the first place.
Later, when he was responsible for Ferranti's pioneering documentation
service, one of the biggest spending units, Mr Ross again had no budget.
Moreover, he had never had to produce a business plan and was never called
to account. 'There was no financial management at all,' he said.
'I later joined STC and came in contact with management training provided by
its owner, the US ITT group,' Mr Ross added. 'This was terrific - and a
profound shock, after Ferranti. We had to produce business plans, prepare
budgets and report our monthly results against those budgets.'
Such personal reminiscences add flesh to historians' reports on UK genius
being let down by everything from poor marketing to lack of government
funding, compared with the US, France and Germany.
Whatever the combination of factors, George Davis showed how US
manufacturers took firm control within a dozen years of J. Lyons running
that first payroll system.
By 1967, IBM had installed over 21,500 computers of various sizes; UK market
leader ICT (soon to become ICL) had sold 844. These included 399 of the new
1900 range (which was to be the company's mainstay until the middle of the
1970s); meanwhile, IBM's System 360, launched the same year, was already up
to 5,730 installations.
In 1968, ICL was formed as the great white hope: the culmination of merging
the computing activities of all the early manufacturers. Yet it was still
dwarfed by IBM: George Davis showed that in 1969 ICL had a Pounds 115m
turnover and spent Pounds 13m on research and development, while IBM had a
turnover of Pounds 3,000m and a research budget of almost Pounds 170m.
However, a retired ICL executive director, Mr Peter Hall, stoutly defended
ICL's record. ICL and its ICT forerunner had been profitable for 35 years -
apart from in 1965, just after taking over Ferranti's ailing computing
operation; and in 1981, when the visionary Dr Robb Wilmot was transforming
the company for the emerging office computing revolution.
Mr Hall said Fujitsu allowed ICL to run itself, and that the company
generated all its own cash for takeovers and other investment, and did all
its own design work.
Whether that makes ICL any more British than IBM UK (or Rover Group in the
car industry, for that matter) is debatable. But Mr Hall argued that these
points suggest that the early promise of the UK computer manufacturing
industry, which had mostly merged into ICL by 1969, was fulfilled after all.
It is simply that a generation later the industry is all in foreign hands.
As today's tight margins on hardware increasingly cause computer
manufacturers to look to software and services for their profits, it is
equally debatable whether the virtual disappearance of a UK computer
manufacturing industry need be a cause for concern.
That concern is now focused more on the software industry, where some big
names have fallen into foreign ownership. Takeovers of Cap, Hoskyns, Istel,
Scicon and others have given substantial footholds in the UK market to, for
example, the telecoms giant AT&T, General Motors' EDS subsidiary and the
French company CGS, Europe's biggest computing services group.
History, as they say, has a habit of repeating itself.
The Computer Conservation Society has regular meetings and works on
restoring ancient computers. It is also opening Bletchley Park (which
cracked German codes in the Second World War) for public visits. The
secretary is Tony Sale, (0234) 822788.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940316

