FT942-14902

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (11): Need before status
 -Operator profile / ASDA


   By GARY MEAD


All the UK's big food retailers are finding their margins under pressure
these days. This is leading to a renewed determination to keep down costs,
including very often a re-think on company car policies, writes Gary Mead.
One of the more determined approaches has been that of Asda, fourth-biggest
of the supermarket groups, serving about 4m customers weekly. The company's
fleet which in 1992 peaked at 1,250 units, is now down to just below 1,000
units. It leases all its cars because of tax benefits and 'to avoid exposure
to the risk on residual values'.
According to Asda, the company is trying to get away from the notion of a
company car being a status trophy, encouraging instead the view that it is a
tool, to be given to executives according to performance and need. There are
five levels of eligibility for a car within the company.
A car used to be given according to an executive's grade in the company
hierarchy, but since June 1993 a new policy has been introduced which
relates an employee's remuneration to performance and not to managerial
position. Asda says the 'new flexibility has been very popular with car
drivers'. The policy gives those eligible for a company car a wide range of
choice of make and brand, the only restrictions being for insurance reasons
on 'hot hatches', two-seaters or soft tops. Previously only a narrow narrow
range of cars was available.
As part of its efforts to tighten cost controls Asda at the same time
altered its policy on replacements. Where it was three years or 60,000
miles, it is now four years or 80,000 miles. The company says it encourages
the use of diesels because of greater fuel efficiency. Individuals are
offered the choice of a better model than he or she would otherwise be
eligible for, if the choice is a diesel model.
Asda operates a single supplier policy and has used Avis for the past five
years, though it does periodically put the business out for competitive
tendering. It says that economies of scale, plus the ease of dealing with a
single supplier, suits it better than having a range of different suppliers.
Moreover, it has outsourced most of its fleet administration, with
executives dealing directly with Avis on all matters relating to their cars.
The biggest issue concerns the new tax regime, and whether or not it is
beneficial to drive a company car. So far only 20 Asda executives have
decided to take up the cash allowance being offered instead of the company
car.
The company has only been offering the cash offer for a year, and the offer
can be taken up only when a car comes up for replacement, so it remains
early days. The company says it expects the proportion taking up the cash
offer to increase steadily. The allowance reflects the lease price, plus
petrol and insurance costs.
Asda executives who do modest business mileage are becoming very sensitive
to list prices when selecting their new car - a natural response in the
circumstances.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940418

