FT944-14551

FT  22 OCT 94 / Ulster Peace Process: Sinn Fein aims to unite in unarmed
struggle - Hardline elements could still jeopardise the ceasefire


   By JIMMY BURNS


An early public reaction from Sinn Fein vice president Mr Martin McGuinness
yesterday gave a broad welcome to Mr John Major's announcement as a further
step towards peace. 'A move in the right direction. It is quite clear we
must build up on all this,' he said.
However, intentions notwithstanding, there is no certainty yet that the
latest measures will banish for ever the prospect of a resumption of IRA
violence. This was the view yesterday of republican insiders who are
sensitive to the strains within Sinn Fein and the IRA after the IRA
organisation's ceasefire declaration seven weeks ago.
In the coming days, the Sinn Fein leadership will aim to reassure rank and
file republicans that Mr Major's announcements show there is political
advantage to be gained from a cessation of violence.
What Sinn Fein leaders have dubbed the 'unarmed phase of the struggle' has
paved the way for a reopening of border crossings, the prospect of
exploratory talks with the British government by Christmas and the lifting
of exclusion orders on Mr McGuinness and Mr Gerry Adams, the party's
president.
These measures have been high on the list of republican demands since the
ceasefire. But the Sinn Fein leadership realises that it has to continue to
be seen to be gaining political ground in the coming weeks if it is to
contain the restlessness of hardline elements linked to the IRA.
If and when it comes to talks with the government it will aim to secure
further concessions from the British government. At the same time it will
seek to avoid taking any further unilateral moves towards demilitarisation
which may risk a damaging split within the republican movement.
While the IRA refuses to hand its armoury over, British intelligence is
trying to keep a close watch on the movements of suspected terrorists.
And while some IRA 'volunteers' are thought to be enjoying a period of
peace, others remain determined not to allow their military efficiency to be
weakened by the peace process. The IRA may not be bombing, but its capacity
to bomb is firmly intact. Within republican circles, there has been some
optimistic talk - both before and since the IRA ceasefire - of a new,
strengthened nationalist consensus emerging from the current peace process.
At the same time, there is a sceptical view that the British government is
stringing the IRA along, holding out olive branches while aiming to
undermine the republican movement both politically and militarily.
Writing in the latest issue of the influential Irish political magazine
Fortnight, former IRA political prisoner Mr Anthony McIntyre says: 'The
ceasefire has come and gone, and the British have not gone . . . while an
imaginative step by the republican leadership, it will be a major
achievement for them to avoid this ceasefire being more disastrous than the
last. The lesson of history is simple: prolonged ceasefire sounds the death
knell for republican struggle.'
For the moment, there is little indication of the republican leadership
abandoning its public commitment to the peace process. Both Mr Adams and Mr
McGuinness are thought to still be holding the IRA army council to the
belief that any resumption of violence in the immediate future would torpedo
the chances of talks before Christmas.
But it is widely recognised that the next stage of the process will severely
test the limits of republican patience. In his public appearances in recent
weeks, Mr Adams has noticeably been increasing his demands for a withdrawal
of British troops. He has also been uncompromising on the question of
consent, rejecting the unionist position that Northern Ireland's future
should be settled by the people of the province.
After yesterday, the stage may be set for early talks between Sinn Fein and
the government. But republicans are gearing up for some hard bargaining from
which they expect results not defeats.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

941022

