FT942-14742

FT  19 APR 94 / Idealism gives way to disenchantment: Humiliating failures
in Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda have undermined the role of the UN


   By BRUCE CLARK


Rarely can an empire have risen or declined so rapidly. The number of
soldiers wearing the blue helmets of the United Nations has soared over the
past four years from 10,000 to 70,000. The number of man-hours devoted to UN
matters by generals and politicians in the world's leading powers has
ballooned: woe betide the ambitious diplomat who cannot master its baffling
acronyms.
But the fall of Gorazde, the so-called safe haven for Moslems in eastern
Bosnia, should quash any remaining temptation to regard the gaunt skyscraper
on New York's East River as headquarters of a world government in embryo.
It seems a long time since mid-1992 when Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general, sought to raise the body's profile with his ideas for
preventing civil wars, cross-border conflict and humanitarian disasters.
In Bosnia, at least, the UN now faces the worst of all possible worlds. It
has unleashed its most powerful weapon - air strikes - against the Serbs,
and failed to achieve either the protection of its own personnel or the
preservation of the haven. The UN is thus neither an effective belligerent
nor a credible honest broker. Even its role as a distributor of aid has been
compromised. In recent days the UN has experienced another setback, where
the human consequences are worse and the failure more complete: the orgy of
blood-letting in Rwanda, where Belgium, the linchpin of a peacekeeping
effort, is scrambling to pull out.
The organisation's bureaucrats and soldiers may justifiably argue that
neither failure was their fault - they were given inadequate resources and
incoherent mandates. But that will not stop blame accruing to the UN and its
secretary-general. Just as the UN may once have been a convenient vehicle
for the strategic ambitions of member states, it will now serve as a
convenient scapegoat for their failures.
Mr Boutros Ghali, already a bete noire among the Serbs and their traditional
allies in Russia for ordering air strikes, now faces calls for his
resignation from Moslem countries because the strikes patently did not work.
His humiliation in Bosnia is not so much a turning point as a landmark in a
process that began last autumn with a precipitous decline in the UN's
popularity in the US, which remains the principal pay-master and was the
main architect of its rise in status.
Mr Bill Clinton once gushed with enthusiasm for the UN. As a US presidential
candidate, he backed the idea of a standing 'rapid deployment force' whose
brief showed a touching faith in the solubility of conflict. It would guard
borders, prevent atrocities against civilians, distribute aid and deter
terrorism.
The onset of disenchantment is not hard to pinpoint. It began last August,
when the first US soldiers were killed in Somalia, and it became total on
October 3, when 18 Americans died in Mogadishu.
The UN fell even further out of fashion when the US ships dispatched to
Haiti a few days later, with a UN mandate to restore democracy, failed even
to land. Knocking the UN, and pledging that US soldiers should never be
subordinated to the incompetent foreigners, was an irresistible temptation
for US politicians. Squabbling over the US role in the UN has led to long
delays in the publication, now expected this week, of a presidential
directive on the deployment of troops abroad.
The degeneration of the UN's relief effort in Somalia into an ugly shooting
war was not the first disaster. But Mogadishu was the first televised
fiasco. According to Dr Mats Berdal, a Norwegian political scientist and
authority on peace-keeping, the loss of nerve in Somalia shows that 'US
policy is flawed by swings between idealism and overhasty disappointment'.
Europeans have often discerned the same contradiction in US policy towards
Bosnia as they saw in Somalia - the same yearning for solutions that are
both effective and risk-free. Air strikes, when combined with the enticing
word surgical, seemed to offer that combination: they would punish
wrongdoers and bring instant results without risking American lives.
As experience has shown, this was a false hope. Few people understand that
better than General Sir Michael Rose, the UN commander in Bosnia. He is
well-qualified to discern theoretical flaws in the UN operation: a
disastrous muddle over vocabulary. In his previous role as commandant of the
British Army Staff College, he sponsored a revival of research into the
theory of peacekeeping. He insisted on the distinction between
peace-broking, peacekeeping (guarding a peace to which all parties have
agreed) and enforcing peace against the will of some of the parties.
The UN - or its leading members - failed to observe that distinction when
they drew up the mandate for the former Yugoslavia and allocated money and
personnel. To impose peace against the will of any party, the UN would have
needed far more firepower on the ground that members were prepared to
commit. Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the UK defence secretary, openly expressed his
frustration in New York last week. He described as 'difficult to understand'
the US refusal to finance - let alone staff - an increased ground force in
Bosnia. 'We must not put ourselves in the situation where we lack the tools
to carry out the job,' he said.
Ironically, the outbreak of recrimination over UN failure has come as the
much-maligned bureaucracy in New York is finally becoming streamlined. The
Department for Peace-Keeping Operations has, under the galvanising effect of
the Bosnian crisis, started to work more effectively. Gone are the days when
UN commanders in Bosnia would complain that nobody in New York worked
weekends. Insiders say the department has become better at the things it can
realistically do - gathering information, planning for future requirements,
exercising broad control over finance and personnel - and better at
delegating to commanders in the field the operational control that it cannot
realistically exercise.
It would be ironic if these improvements - initiated during Mr Clinton's
early period of US enthusiasm for the UN - were now wasted because of a
politically inspired witch-hunt. The president's love affair with the
organisation began in the immediate aftermath of the cold war, when it was
tempting to believe that all world problems could be jointly managed by the
west and a compliant Russia.
The fact that Russia has now broken ranks with the west over Bosnia - by
denouncing the air strikes against the Serbs - probably sets the seal on
that period of optimism.
Now Russia is trying to do what the US, in a sense, failed to do - turn the
UN into an instrument of its own policies. It is pressing hard for the UN's
blessing, and above all for UN finance, for the maintenance of Russian
forces in the unstable southern republics of the CIS. Here again, it will be
essential to bear in mind the distinctions on which Gen Rose insists if the
UN wants to avoid fresh blows to its credibility.
The Russian word for peacekeeping - mirotvorcheski - means making peace,
establishing peace in a situation where none exists. And Moscow's approaches
to the establishment of peace have not, in practice, been hemmed by any of
the squeamishness about taking sides, or taking casualties, or observing
legal niceties.
Western diplomats at the UN are thinking hard about the terms on which they
could give the organisation's blessing to a mainly Russian peacekeeping
operation in the Black Sea war zone of Abkhazia, where Georgian government
forces were routed last summer.
Having approved a UN resolution that made possible the western air strikes
against the Serbs, Russia will from now on be more careful about how it uses
its vote in the Security Council: it will not permit any more ambiguous
mandates. The US, UK and France will in turn be more careful about giving
carte blanche to Russia.
That could mean a partial return to the cold war days when east and west
continually vetoed one another's resolutions - and place further obstacles
in the path of the blue helmets.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
United Nations: peace in pieces
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1  Haiti
   October 1993: US naval mission turned back
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
2  Bosnia-Hercegovina
   April 1994: air strikes fail to protect safe areas
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
3  Somalia
   Autumn 1993: US troops ordered out after battles with local warlord
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
4  Rwanda
   April 1994: Belgian troops withdraw amid bloodbath
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
5  Angola
   Autumn 1992: civil war follows elections monitored by UN
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940419

