FT941-3486

FT  16 MAR 94 / Best-selling trust to suffer yield cut


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR, Personal Finance Editor


A group offering a 10 per cent return on its best-selling trust has warned
70,000 investors that it will cut the yield to 9 per cent from June 28.
The high-income unit trust offered by fund manager Foreign & Colonial has
pulled in more than Pounds 500m since its launch just over a year ago.
It was particularly attractive to income seekers and heavily promoted by
many financial intermediaries because of the 10 per cent yield.
Such funds, which obtain an unusually high income, have been highly
controversial because they can procure such high returns only at the expense
of the capital growth prospects. Many experts believe savers' capital could
actually be eroded in order to keep the income flowing.
Over the past year, anyone investing in the F&C fund would have lost roughly
10 per cent of their initial investment - neatly cancelling out the benefit
of the 10 per cent income. Most conventional equity income funds have
produced a significantly better return.
Mr Simon James, F&C director, said the decision to cut the target yield on
the fund was mainly because the group expects interest rates to move lower
this year. He added that the group also wants to give investors plenty of
notice of the impending cut in yield.
F&C has also trimmed its management charge from 1.5 per cent to 1.25 per
cent with effect from April 6.
Rival fund manager Morgan Grenfell, whose high income trust closely
resembles the F&C fund, said it had no intention of reducing the 10 per cent
yield on its fund, or of cutting its 1.5 per cent management charge. The
Morgan Grenfell fund, launched last September, has so far attracted around
Pounds 40m. The Morgan Grenfell fund has also lost value since its launch:
investors who bought at 25p a unit would get back Pounds 23.52p at last
night's prices.
Save & Prosper, another leading fund management group, cancelled its plans
for a similar fund last December. It argued then that the chances of capital
erosion were unacceptably high. This week Mr Ken Emery, Save and Prosper
technical director, said: 'It looks as if our concerns are being confirmed,
although it is obviously too early for judgment to be passed.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940316

