FT942-16097

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Plotting a recovery course - Aer
Lingus's transatlantic strategy


   By PAUL BETTS


Aer Lingus is banking on a new fleet of European Airbus A330 twin-engine
widebody airliners to help return its lossmaking transatlantic routes to
profit this year.
Mr Bernie Cahill, the Irish national carrier's chairman, also said the group
would be back in the black in its financial year to April 1995, after
reporting a loss of about IPounds 55m (Pounds 53m) in the year just ended.
The airline's decision to lease three A330s this year to replace older
Boeing 747s is the latest element in its restructuring and recovery
strategy, which has involved the shedding of about 1,000 jobs in the airline
and associated companies during the past six months.
The airline's transatlantic services to New York and Boston have lost some
IPounds 30m during the past three years.
However, the new aircraft, the recent removal of the obligation for Aer
Lingus's transatlantic services from Dublin to stop at Shannon, and new
connections from UK regional airports to link up with the airline's new
non-stop services to the US, are all expected to help return the
transatlantic operation to profit.
Together with the Dublin to London shuttle services, the transatlantic
operations are an important revenue earner for Aer Lingus.
They accounted for about IPounds 120m of the airline's IPounds 500m revenues
for the year just ended, according to Mr Bob Challens, the commercial
director.
Mr Challens also said the airline would use its new Airbus fleet to develop
a fresh corporate image for the carrier, with plans later this year to
introduce a new livery for Aer Lingus.
The A330s will also give Aer Lingus greater operating flexibility and
efficiency than the older Boeing, he added.
Mr Cahill said his airline had been able to negotiate attractive lease terms
for its new A330 fleet from ILFC, the California-based aircraft leasing
group.
'It's a perfect time to do a deal, with low interest rates and a lot of
aircraft available in the market,' he added.
Aer Lingus is also continuing to explore a commercial alliance with Delta
Air Lines to strengthen the reach of its transatlantic services into the
domestic US market.
However, Mr Challens said he did not expect any agreement soon with Delta,
and that the Irish carrier's priority was to make its current operations
profitable.
'Our ultimate target is to have a healthy balance sheet in two years' time.
I think we will achieve this, and we are already ahead of our targets,' Mr
Cahill said.
As a sign of the im-proved confidence in the airline's financial fortunes,
Mr Cahill said two Irish banks - the Bank of Ireland and Allied Irish Banks
 -had restored the credit facilities they had withdrawn at the height of the
airline's financial crisis.
'Our strategy now is to turn our existing operations into a profitable base,
and then we will feel out the next step. We see any future expansion in
co-operation with other carriers,' Mr Cahill added.
Aer Lingus recently secured a IPounds 175m support package from the Irish
government, its shareholder, to back its financial recovery strategy
involving an immediate IPounds 75m injection and two subsequent injections
of IPounds 50m over the next two years.
Although this aid package was cleared by the European Commission, Aer Lingus
has since been attacked by Ryanair, its smaller Irish competitor, for
uncompetitive behaviour.
The Commission is now investigating a complaint by Ryanair against the
national carrier, which claims there are no grounds for the complaint.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940412

