FT942-12329

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (19): Launches
reflect faith in Japan - What's new?


   By BARBARA ELLIS


Geographic fashion is evident in some of the latest investment vehicles to
be launched, with appearances from both of this year's most favoured areas,
Japan and Latin America.
Hypo Foreign & Colonial began a three-week offer period for its Japanese
Growth unit trust on Monday. Charges on the trust are 5 per cent initially
and 1.5 per cent annually, with a bid-offer spread of 5 per cent.
Hypo F&C Japanese Growth will be managed by Mairi Stewart, who says the
group's view is that earnings in Japan are currently extremely depressed
historically - more severely than in previous cyclical downturns - but that
this will change significantly for the better over the next three years.
Stewart said she would be trying to identify areas that will benefit from
the economic improvement expected in the coming 12 months.
She noted that continuing deregulation in Japan would lead to a more
competitive environment, generating winners and losers that the new fund
would seek to identify in advance.
Schroder will launch a Japanese investment trust early in May, and says the
trust will invest in the full range of Japanese equities without any
limitation on the type of company or sector. It will be managed from
Schroder's Tokyo office by Ed Merner, manager of Schroder's Japanese smaller
companies unit trust, ranked top-performing Japanese fund over five and 10
years by Micropal, with gains of 145 per cent and 824 per cent respectively
to April 1 this year, compared with sector averages of 25 per cent over a
total of 62 funds and 261 per cent over a total of 28 funds.
The minimum investment is likely to be Pounds 1,000, and there is to be one
free warrant for every five ordinary shares. The annual management charge is
expected to be 1 per cent, without any additional performance-related fee.
Save & Prosper has scheduled the launch of a Latin America unit trust for
mid-May. The minimum investment is set at either Pounds 1,000 as a lump sum
or Pounds 35 a month for regular savings, with an initial charge of 5.5 per
cent and an annual charge of 1.5 per cent.
S&P's Latin America unit trust will be managed by Susanne Carrington, who
has been with the emerging markets portfolio group at S&P's parent, Robert
Fleming, since 1990, after transferring from institutional marketing. She is
on record as expecting an average 15 to 20 per cent return from Latin
American markets over the next three to five years.
Benoit Buchaud, a member of Carrington's fund management team, explained
that 44 per cent of the portfolio would initially be allocated to Mexico,
reflecting the importance of that market in the Latin American index. The
rest of the breakdown will be: Brazil (29 per cent), Chile (11), Argentina
(8), Colombia (4) and Venezuela and Peru 2 per cent each.
Buchaud said Latin America was beginning to shed its traditional image of
being plagued by political unrest and inflation, despite the peasants'
revolt and recent killing of a presidential candidate in Mexico and
continuing inflation of about 2,500 per cent a year in Brazil.
He noted that inflation in Argentina had come down from about 5,000 per cent
in 1989 to around 7 per cent, while in Peru the level had dropped from 2,700
per cent a year to about 39 per cent.
The M&G Group, which built its reputation on equity investment, has recently
turned more attention to fixed-interest vehicles, with the explicit aim of
attracting disaffected building society depositors.
The latest example of this change of emphasis is the M&G Lifetime
Distribution bond, launched on this month. It is a single-premium policy
involving a minimum investment of Pounds 10,000. Income from the assets is
kept separate from the capital and can be paid out in distributions - hence
the name - or reinvested.
Bill Vasilieff, head of product Bill Vasilieff, head of product marketing at
M&G, said the Lifetime bond was innovative in allowing holders to switch
among five of the group's funds, instead of putting the investor's money
into a set proportion of fixed-interest securities and equities as other
distribution bonds do. The first switch in any year is free, with subsequent
moves from fund to fund charged at about Pounds 20 each (on the Pounds
10,000 minimum investment).
The annual management charge is 1 per cent, and the bid-offer spread is 5
per cent. Early cash-in penalties on the five-year version of the bond rage
from 6 per cent in the first year to 2 per cent in the fifth year. On the
10-year version, the penalties range from 10 per cent in the first year to 1
per cent in the 10th.
With Pounds 200 to Pounds 250m a month going into distribution bonds in the
market as a whole, Vasilieff said M&G hoped to more than double the Pounds
14m a month it currently attracts with an existing bond. Sold purely through
brokers, the Lifetime bond will pay either 5.25 per cent initial commission
or 3.25 per cent plus renewal commission.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940429

