FT941-12918

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (22): Whitehall plays the marriage broker - A
scheme to arrange suitable matches between UK companies and potential
overseas partners / The DTI'S Strategic alliance scheme


   By DAVID DODWELL


'We have made three attempts to get involved in the US market, and none of
them has worked,' says David Lever, managing director of Stampiton, a small
private company in Whaley Bridge in Derbyshire which makes self-adhesive
labels.
For him, the UK government's newly-launched 'strategic alliance' scheme has
been a godsend. As he enters stage four of this five-module programme,
intended to find his company a US partner, he comments: 'Previously, we
didn't feel we quite had the right contacts. Now, we are getting straight to
the people who could really be interested.'
The strategic alliance scheme is one of a number of radical export promotion
initiatives taken by Britain's department of trade and industry early in
1993. The scheme is subsidised by the government, but managed and operated
by Price Waterhouse, the accountancy and management consultancy group. It is
aimed at companies employing fewer than 500 people, with a turnover of
between Pounds 5m-Pounds 50m.
Stampiton is one of 50 UK companies which, the government hopes, will be
targeted each year under the scheme. So far, about half that number have
joined. If the scheme works as an effective matchmaker, it will increase
exports and foreign earnings from a market which many UK companies find
complicated and daunting.
Tony Ellam, who was seconded in June from National Westminster Bank as an
export promoter to oversee the strategic alliance scheme, notes: 'Companies
don't realise the size and complexity of the US market. This scheme is cost
effective both in terms of time and money. To set up in the US oneself will
take a lot of time, and can be hit-or-miss. To employ a consultant from the
outset would be prohibitively expensive for many small and medium-sized
companies.'
Sheila McGregor, director at London's City and Guilds Institute, would
wholly endorse Mr Ellam's views: 'I wish we had had the strategic alliance
programme when we set up in the US,' she mourns.
She admits that the institute (which owns the Pitman Examinations Institute
specialising in teaching shorthand, as well as specialising in educational
assessment and standards) effectively chose a partner because the US company
approached it. She recalls a list of errors which eventually led the
institute to put their own executive in the US to sort matters out: 'Now,
two years after putting in our own executive, we are making great strides,
but it has been an expensive way of finding out.'
Even now she is keen to join the strategic alliance scheme - potentially to
start afresh with a US partner.
After selecting an applicant company as a suitable potential participant,
Price Waterhouse conducts an initial business strategy review with each
selected company. After this second 'module', most companies will move on to
prepare an 'alliance proposal' - a document circulated to potential partners
which describes strategic aims, but not the identity of the UK company.
Stage four involves Price Waterhouse staff across the US, bringing together
details of three or four US companies, and ranking them in terms of
potential suitability as partners.
In the final, fifth, module, Price Waterhouse will introduce the UK company
to up to three potential partners. Here the scheme ends, approximately 44
weeks after initial acceptance.
At Stampiton, Mr Lever has just entered module four. Over the Christmas
break, Price Waterhouse delivered its report identifying potential US
partners: 'We have now reached the exciting stage,' he comments. He is
excited not just because of the speed with which he has reached this stage,
but because Price Waterhouse have been able to trawl a much wider range of
potential partners than Stampiton could have managed alone.
Even more critically, potential US partners have taken the approach
seriously because it has been filtered both through Price Waterhouse and the
UK government: 'Our approach carries much more authority because of going
through the vetting process. Our bona fides have already been established
with the potential US partner,' Mr Lever says.
The scheme has not been free: each company will pay a total of Pounds 14,000
if it goes through each of the five modules. But this is considerably
cheaper than would have been possible without the government scheme.
DTI contacts: Tony Ellam 071 215 2586/David Babb 071 215 4601

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940127

