FT944-5965

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Gilt repo market proposals criticised


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


Few UK government bond market participants were surprised by the Bank of
England's proposals on Tuesday for an open repurchase - or repo - market for
gilts.
Some were disappointed, however, that the plans were less specific than they
had hoped and were not accompanied by a change in gilt dividend taxation.
This, they argue, would facilitate the efficient functioning of a fully
fledged repo market.
Mr Kevin Adams, UK bond strategist at securities house Barclays de Zoete
Wedd, said: 'A lot of people had hoped to see clear outlines of the planned
repo market and a definite starting date.' Instead, a lengthy consultation
process lies ahead, raising concern that implementation could be delayed
beyond July 1995, the earliest possible starting date suggested by the Bank.
A repo is a loan agreement between two parties in which bonds act as
collateral. The institution which owns the bonds sells them to the
counterparty and in return receives cash. At a set date in the future, the
original bond owner agrees to buy back the bonds for a set sum. The buy-back
sum will be higher than the original cash amount, the difference reflecting
the rate of interest on the loan.
Many big bond markets have well-developed repo markets. The UK authorities
are hoping that a gilt repo market will increase the gilt market's liquidity
and efficiency, thus attracting increased investor interest and reducing
yields.
In the next two months, the central bank and gilt market practitioners will
flesh out the Bank's outlines. After spending the last year in close
consultation with gilt-edged marketmakers, Stock Exchange money brokers,
banks and investment institutions, the Bank on Tuesday presented its
long-awaited discussion paper setting out the framework for such a market.
It has asked market participants for comments by January 31.
Since a move to an open gilt repo system may have significant tax
implications, the Inland Revenue is to consult market participants.
Gilt market operators have been calling for the abolition of the 25 per cent
withholding tax on gilt coupons, which would allow interest to be paid gross
rather than net of tax. Although a move to gross coupon payment is not a
prerequisite for establishing a repo system, many say it would make it much
more efficient.
'Most other markets incorporate gross paying coupons,' said Mr Daniel
Corrigan, head of repo trading at NatWest Markets. 'If the authorities move
in this direction, whilst it may be costly in terms of forgone revenue, it
will attract new investors and should support the gilt market.'
However, a move to gross dividend payment could mean further delay, some
warn. 'If the Revenue decides to move to gross payment of gilt coupons, it
can only do the switch at the beginning of a tax year, which would probably
take us to April 1996,' says Mr Adams at BZW. The Bank could, of course,
start a repo market before any tax changes were made, he says. 'They could
take a piecemeal approach, but it would seem a bit silly to do it that way,'
Mr Adams adds.
The Development of an Open Gilt Repo Market - A Consultative paper by the
Bank of England.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941201

