FT942-15743

FT  14 APR 94 / A rich vision of a responsible future: Stephen Fidler, at
the IADB annual meeting, assesses a new view of regional banks


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


The US Treasury's senior international official, Mr Lawrence Summers, mapped
out this week a central role for the regional development banks in a new
world order.
If he has the influence many believe he has in the administration of
President Bill Clinton, the potential consequences for the Inter-American
Development Bank and the other regional banks are significant. For the IADB,
these imply new opportunities and big risks, taking it into areas where it
has never ventured.
'Regional development banks are as important to the new world order as the
regional security organisations were to the old one. For, just as the
regional security organisations were directed to the central challenge of
combating communism, so the regional development banks are directed to the
central challenge of shared prosperity,' he told the IADB's annual meeting
at Guadalajara in Mexico.
The IADB was created in 1959 and, in its early years, was essentially a
provider of project finance to governments. Its deliberations came to be
marked by hostility between the US and Latin American governments. The
resultant mutual mistrust still has echoes in the bank today. During the
1980s, the bank was mobilised to provide more balance of payments support to
the region's debt-distressed governments, and was authorised to provide
supporting finance for debt rescheduling.
The IADB's eighth replenishment of capital was agreed this week. This takes
the bank's overall capital base past Dollars 100bn (Pounds 68.4bn), will let
it lend perhaps Dollars 7bn a year indefinitely and ends the need for the
four-yearly return to government shareholders for money. The co-operative
spirit of the negotiations suggested a contrast to the shareholder hostility
of the past.
But the complex agreement that backed the capital increase testifies that it
gives the bank a far more difficult task than building dams and providing
balance of payments support. The bank is undergoing internal
re-organisation, likely to include a decentralisation and the movement of
perhaps 10 per cent of its operational staff from Washington to Latin
America and the Caribbean. But it remains to be seen whether the IADB can
become an effective force for dealing with these new issues.
The bank's president, Mr Enrique Iglesias, is widely acknowledged as an
accomplished diplomat who has succeeded in shifting the IADB to the centre
of the region's developmental effort. His strength, though, is not in the
internal management of the bank. The responsibility for that will fall on
the shoulders of Ms Nancy Birdsall, his number two. By tradition, this post
is held by a US citizen.
As one European observer suggested, the capital increase agreement bears
more than a slight resemblance to the European social charter. Social
equity, poverty alleviation, improvement of the functioning of governments,
environmental responsibilities are all now part of its remit. 'There can be
no economic growth without a stable society,' the agreement concludes.
However, Mr Wolf Grabendorff, head of the Madrid-based Institute for
European-Latin American Relations, who has been following the meeting,
emphasised the difficulties of tackling these new social responsibilities.
Managing such programmes will be labour-intensive, very country-specific and
involving much work in the field. 'Everybody's talking about social issues
on a grand scale, but nobody's talking about how it's going to be
implemented,' he said.
As described by Mr Summers, the bank should be the means to extend the
Clinton administration's vision for the US to Latin America. Labour and
environmental considerations, the strengthening of democracy and judicial
systems, the tackling of corruption, the encouragement of strong labour
unions and legislation to protect workers' rights effectively all figured in
his wish list.
For the moment, at least, Latin America and the US are singing from the same
song sheet. The approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement and the
promised Summit of the Americas, for Miami in December, have fostered the
impression that the US is seeking to improve relations with the region.
Mr Summers's comments were greeted positively for the most part because
Latin governments also increasingly have similar priorities. Finance
ministers are conscious that their efforts at economic reform have left
important social problems untouched. Minister after minister emphasised at
the meeting the overriding importance of social objectives. As the Chilean
finance minister, Mr Eduardo Aninat, suggested, the region's governments
cannot rely on 'trickle-down' to resolve social tensions.
Yet there is also a recognition of the danger that these US concerns often
touch the sovereignty of Latin American countries, and that the interference
by the US in Latin American affairs, justified by the cold war, may be
followed by a period in which Washington is seen as trying to dictate the
social agenda of the region.
After all, previous attempts by the US to develop a partnership with its
southern neighbours so as to promote democracy - most notably President
Kennedy's Alliance for Progress - failed on the whole to achieve their
objectives.
The Clinton administration's emphasis on encouraging social objectives
abroad are eyed suspiciously. An indication of this was provided by the
Nafta negotiations and the US introduction of side agreements to cover
labour and environmental standards in Mexico. The US characterised these
accords as an important precedent for future trade agreements, but could not
completely dispel the impression that these were driven by its domestic
considerations.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940414

