FT944-6077

FT  30 NOV 94 / International Company News: Credito Italiano will improve
bid proposal for bank


   By ANDREW HILL


   MILAN


Credito Italiano, the Milan-based bank, last night promised to improve the
terms of its proposed bid for Credito Romagnolo, but did not indicate
whether it was prepared to offer more for the Bolognese bank's shares.
Credito Romagnolo (Rolo) said it was happy that its shares, suspended on
Monday, would begin trading again today. A more detailed judgment on the
outline of a new Credito Italiano (Credit) bid is unlikely until after
tomorrow's Rolo board meeting.
Credit first revealed a month ago that it was planning a L2,000bn (Dollars
1.2bn) offer for 48 per cent of Rolo's shares, which would give it control
of the bank's quoted holding company Gruppo Bancario Credito Romagnolo.
However, since then its plans have been overtaken by Rolo's proposal for a
defensive merger with CAER, the parent of another local bank, Cassa di
Risparmio, in Bologna. The merger has won Bank of Italy approval and will be
put to shareholders on December 19.
The Milan bank's original plan to offer L19,000 for each Rolo share,
compared with the suspension price of L17,096, has been rejected.
Credit yesterday dismissed as untrustworthy recent press reports, some of
which have suggested an improved offer could be worth L23,000 a share,
although the bank declined to reveal further details of the offer it is
preparing.
The rest of the statement, issued after two days of intense discussion
between the banks and Italy's stock exchange authorities, is an attempt to
woo Rolo's local shareholders, and convert a hostile offer to a friendly
one.
Credit said it would insert a clause into the Rolo statutes which would
prevent the Bologna bank being absorbed into another company without the
support of 80 per cent of the shares, for four years.
It will guarantee Rolo's management autonomy, and board representation for
minority shareholders. The Milanese bank is planning to recommend a dividend
of at least 55 per cent of Rolo's profit until 1997.

The Financial Times


London Page 55

941130

