FT944-5830

FT  01 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Metdist to build Dollars 500m
copper refinery in India


   By KENNETH GOODING


A USDollars 500m copper smelter and refinery with an associated copper rod
plant is to be built in India by Metdist, the privately-owned, UK-based
group whose chairman, Mr Raj Bagri, is also chairman of the London Metal
Exchange.
Mitsubishi Materials Corporation of Japan is to supply the technology and
will take an 18 per cent interest in the project.
Scheduled to start up in 1998, the new complex will have the capacity to
produce some 150,000 tonnes of refined copper annually using Mitsubishi's
continuous smelting technology, and about 60,000 tonnes of continuous cast
copper rod.
The plants will be located at Pipavav in Gujarat, where the state government
has agreed to allot the land required and the State Pollution Control
Authorities have issued a 'no objection' certificate.
The project will have its own jetty with highly mechanised facilities.
Mr Bagri said a company would be set up to implement the project and 40 per
cent would be floated on a stock exchange when construction was well under
way.
Metdist will manage the plants and Mitsubishi, as well as providing know-how
and technical assistance, will subscribe cash for its 18 per cent of the new
Indian company.
Mr Bagri described the project as a 'very logical extension of Metdist's
presence in the world of physical metals - a logical backward integration'.
His group at present operates two continuous cast copper rod and wire mills
and a thin-wall, inner-grooved, air-conditioning copper tube plant in
Malaysia with a combined fabricating capacity of more than 100,000 tonnes of
copper a year.
Mitsubishi has worked closely with Metdist for some years in Malaysia and
has a 15 per cent stake in the tube manufacturing plant.
Metdist, with a turnover of about USDollars 600m a year, is also involved
the non-ferrous metals trade and one of its subsidiaries is a ring-dealing
LME member. Mr Bagri said his group was therefore well positioned to export
any part of the new Indian production surplus to domestic requirements.
The Indian smelter will produce 450,000 tonnes a year of sulphuric acid as a
by-product. Mr Bagri pointed out that India imported about 1m tonnes a year
of elemental sulphur to produce this acid and said some of the production
would go to replace these imports.
In addition, a plant to use sulphuric acid to produce phosphoric acid - used
in fertiliser production - might be built.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941201

