FT944-2686

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (9): High cost of new
standards - Regulation / Implementation of the new rules


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Little more than a year after the European Commission's Euro I rules curbing
exhaust pollution by heavy goods vehicles, Europe's truck makers are well
down the road to overcoming the greater cost and other problems of a further
phase of legislation - the much stricter standards of Euro II.
The Euro I standards became mandatory on October 1 last year. The Euro II
standards, which require almost a halving of the Euro I emissions, come into
effect on October 1, 1996, for all trucks in production at that time, and a
year earlier for new designs of trucks.
However, already the steady trickle of new truck designs for which
manufacturers have to obtain legislative approval - or homologation - are
virtually all conforming to Euro II. The leading truck engine makers have,
indeed, been increasingly launching Euro II-compliant engines for well over
a year.
The industry has had relatively little technical difficulty meeting the Euro
II standards, although the investment required in manufacturing and design
changes has been substantial.
'The problem has been one not so much of technical difficulty as of time,'
says Ron Armstrong, product marketing manager of Iveco-Ford.
More recent engines have been designed from the start to meet the Euro II
standards, he points out. But other engines, designed earlier but which
require further use to be financially viable, are needing more work to
upgrade them to the standards. Even so, he estimates that his own company's
ranges will be progressively brought up to Euro II levels by next spring.
The cost of compliance for each range can vary considerably, from a few
pounds for modifying injector holes on recent units to up to Pounds 1,000 on
complicated intercooled and turbo-charged engines.
In terms of costs to manufacturers, Mr Armstrong estimates that Iveco-Ford
has spent some Pounds 1bn over its half-a-dozen engine ranges.
The standards, which apply to all engines above 150 kilowatts (brake
horsepower) require a more than halving of carbon monoxide emissions to 4
grammes per kw (from 9 in Euro I), to 1.l grammes/kw of hydrocarbons (from
1.7), 7 grammes of nitrogen oxides (from 11.5) and 0.15 of particulates (the
cause of diesel 'soot'), down from 0.36.
The petroleum industry is also being obliged to play a part in reaching
these levels. Reaching the particulates target requires lower-sulphur fuels.
Thus, under an EU-set timetable, the 0.2-0.3 per cent sulphur content usual
in diesel fuels will have dropped to a maximum of 0.05 per cent by the time
Euro II is fully effective. To cater for the first stage of the Euro II
standards by October 1, 1995, at least 25 per cent of the diesel fuel
available in EU member states must be below the 0.05 per cent ceiling.
Towards the end of the decade, theoretically in 1999, yet another tightening
 -Euro III - will be introduced, although EU member states have not reached
sufficient of a consensus on what they should be for the European Commission
to be able to publish a draft directive.
However, Mr Armstrong says he thinks it likely that they will closely
resemble proposals drawn up by Germany.
These call for carbon monoxide levels to be cut to 2.0-2.8 grammes,
hydrocarbons to 0.6-0.77 grammes, nitrogen oxides to 4.7-5 grammes and
particulates to 0.1 grammes.
If adopted these would represent a much stiffer technological challenge to
the industry, particularly since the test driving cycle - a simulated
'typical' route - is also to be changed to reflect modern traffic
conditions.
The current EU test cycle is a much-criticised slow speed one, still not
reflecting that 80 per cent of the EU's goods are moved by truck across
ever-longer distances along high-speed motorways.
Even so, companies such as Iveco, Volvo and Leyland DAF do not doubt the
industry's ability to meet them - and hope they will be able to do so
without having to resort to some technologies in which they do not wish to
become involved. Notable among these is the particulate trap - to collect
the soot-forming particles in a chamber off a more complex exhaust system,
in order to burn them off when the vehicle is not in use.
They hope, but are by no means certain, that they will be able to meet even
the Euro III standards with further refinement - mainly through increased
electronic control - of high-pressure fuel injection and other engine
management systems. For example, instantaneous adjustments can be made to
fuelling quantity and timing in each injector, under the control of a
central computer taking readings from various sensors around the engine.
Exhaust gas recirculation (EGC), or passing exhaust gas back through the
engine again for more complete combustion, is also likely.
That presumes that the final Euro III standards are not significantly
tighter than the German proposals - 'the German proposals are about the
limit before going down these other routes,' says Mr Armstrong.
Development of Euro III-compliant engines is well under way - not least
because manufacturers think it likely that some countries may bring in
financial incentives for operators to buy these 'cleaner' trucks in 1998 or
earlier.
Thus there is likely to be a repeat of the Euro II scenario, in which
companies such as Iveco-Ford with its Eurostar truck range and Volvo with
its latest FH ranges, launched Euro II-compliant trucks well in advance of
the formal introduction of new emissions standards.
The other main area of legislation, noise, is proving rather more
problematical.
Another EU directive is to go into effect on October 1 next year requiring a
truck to emit a maximum of 80 decibels, measured by roadside microphones,
when travelling at 50 kilometres per hour. The current maximum is 84
decibels, and although the reduction may not appear to be much, this is
around a halving of perceived noise.
To meet the standards manufacturers are seeking a number of remedies, such
as sound-deadening body panels, partial encapsulation of the engine and, as
Mr Armstrong puts it, 'exhaust systems like small dustbins'.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941216

