FT944-14464

FT  22 OCT 94 / Markets: A prescription for success - The Bottom Line


   By PAUL TAYLOR


Roger Hurn, chairman and chief executive of Smiths Industries, has a knack
of producing solid results which slightly exceed market expectations.
Smiths' latest full-year figures, released on Wednesday, were no exception.
Investors, who have grown accustomed to remarkably steady profits in the
early 1990s, will nevertheless have been heartened by the 12 per cent
increase in pre-tax profits to Pounds 117.2m on turnover which grew by 4.6
per cent to Pounds 759.3m.
True, the pre-tax number was flattered by a Pounds 1.4m profit on the sale
of a trade investment, and a Pounds 400,000 profit on property disposal, but
the underlying profit increase was still impressive.
More importantly the results have vindicated Hurn's decision - in the face
of the protracted cyclical downturn in both the civil and military aerospace
markets - to strengthen the group's medical systems business and build a new
'third leg' by expanding its industrial engineering operations. 'The
repositioning of the group's businesses over the past few years has been
dramatic,' says Mustapha Omar, of stockbroker Williams de Broe.
In 1990, 30 per cent of Smiths' US profits came from the medical and
industrial operations; last year, the figure was 60 per cent. For the group
as a whole, operating profits from the medical division exceeded those from
aerospace electronics for the first time in 1993. Last year, they increased
again - by 13 per cent to Pounds 46.6m - while aerospace profits slipped 4
per cent to Pounds 38.9m.
This transformation has been achieved in part through acquisitions. Over the
past two years, the group has spent Pounds 240m on purchases - Pounds 148m
on two large medical equipment companies and Pounds 92m on four smaller
industrial businesses. These have been funded without recourse to
shareholders, thanks mainly to a cash flow of more than Pounds 120m in each
of the past three years. The group ended July with just Pounds 20m net debt.
The acquisitions have, however, had one negative impact on the balance
sheet: goodwill write-offs mean that shareholder funds have fallen from a
1992 peak of Pounds 330m to Pounds 212m. Although this is an accounting
quirk, it could limit the group's room for manoeuvre on future cash
purchases where there is a large goodwill element.
Hurn confirms that Smiths would like to make further acquisitions, and does
not rule out a large deal which might be financed by equity. He also admits
there is little commercial, or even technological, logic linking its
aerospace, medical and industrial operations. If the right offer came along,
he says he would consider selling aerospace.
Cost-cutting ensured that even the aerospace business performed creditably
during the recession. As part of a radical re-structuring, which continues,
its workforce has been reduced by 45 per cent since 1990. As a result,
operating margins have been maintained above the 10 per cent level.
Although the tantalising upturn in the aerospace market seems still to be at
least two years away, Smiths should be positioned well to benefit through
its high level of R&D spending and strong representation on key civil and
military programmes which will come to fruition in the second half of the
1990s.
Before then, some analysts, including Sandy Morris of NatWest Securities,
argue that there are a few more hurdles to jump.
'The most obvious is the need to win the (deal to supply the) flight
management computer systems on the new Boeing 737-700,' says Morris. Smiths
supplies the systems on existing versions of the 737 but faces tough
competition for the new contract.
Nevertheless, from an investor's point of view, most of the potential
appears to be on the upside. Even without an upturn in aerospace, the
group's expanded medical and industrial operations should keep profits
moving ahead.
Analysts expect Smiths to make pre-tax profits of around Pounds 129m this
year, enabling it to continue its progressive dividend policy while
maintaining cover. The shares, which closed the week up 15p at 453p, are
trading on a modest premium to the market.

The Financial Times


London Page II

941022

