FT943-962

FT  27 SEP 94 / Bleak forecast for life insurers


   By ALISON SMITH


About 40 life companies, accounting for almost a quarter of new business
premium income, will be struggling to continue to sell life insurance within
a decade, according to actuary Bacon & Woodrow.
Its analysis suggests that 40 per cent of the 103 UK life companies have
expense ratios which would make them vulnerable if competition in the sector
took the form of a price war. Only 10 per cent are what B&W calls 'cost
competitive'.
The study reveals a gap between the cost of acquiring and maintaining
business and the premium income which it produces.
Mr Carl McNicholas, B&W strategy and marketing specialist, said: 'This
situation is unsustainable right now for many individual companies. The
number of companies open to new business will fall considerably.'
The analysis shows that as a category the 37 subsidiaries of overseas
companies had the highest average expense ratio. The lowest average was
recorded by banks and building societies.
Mr McNicholas said, however, that he expected the expense ratio for banks
and societies to rise with the new disclosure regime next year, when
companies would have to specify the costs associated with selling life
products.
Broken down by main channel of distribution, the analysis indicates that
life companies selling largely through independent financial advisers have
the highest average expense ratio, while those selling mostly via a direct
sales force have the lowest average.
On the basis of the findings almost two-thirds of the sector has worsening
expense ratios. Bancassurers - selling of life products through bank and
building society branch networks - account for many of the minority with
improving expense ratios.
The study is based on information life companies must pass annually to the
Department of Trade and Industry, adjusted to take into account whether the
ratios of expenses to new and continued premium income have improved or
deteriorated.
Mr McNicholas emphasised that an expense rating on the basis of the analysis
did not mean any one life company was doomed, since there could be special
factors which would affect specific results.
The overall picture presented by the analysis supports a commonly held view
in the sector that the number of life companies still selling will fall to
about 60 in a few years.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940927

