FT942-16214

FT  12 APR 94 / Japan moves closer to early election


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Leaders of Japan's divided seven-party coalition plan to meet today in
another attempt to resolve the deadlock over a successor to Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa as prime minister.
The outlook for an accord is poor - the three right-wing parties, grouped
around Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the government's backroom strategist, refused to
attend a summit yesterday, proposed by the Social Democratic party, leader
of the coalition's left wing.
The continued stalemate increases the likelihood of an early general
election, under the existing multi-seat constituency system which has been
blamed for engendering corruption, and deepens the rivalry between the
coalition's left and right wings.
But the outcome is unclear. Some SDP members of parliament favour an
election on the grounds that the party might recover some seats lost in last
summer's poll, so improving its clout in negotiating the new electoral
boundaries required under the recently agreed electoral reform laws.
Mr Ozawa's supporters gave procedural reasons for not attending yesterday's
summit. Political observers believe the coalition's right wing wants more
time to woo potential defectors from the opposition Liberal Democratic
party.
Instead, officials from the seven parties staged just a 40-minute exchange
yesterday, in which they agreed to keep talking in an attempt to choose a
new leader by the mid-week deadline they set themselves on Saturday. Leaders
of the left- and right-wing groups held their own separate planning
sessions.
At least one coalition member, the New Harbinger party, appeared to be
positioning itself for an election, by issuing a manifesto. The NHP called
for continued economic reform and said Japan should not try to become a
leading political or military power. This contradicts the policy of Mr
Ozawa's Japan Renewal party, of seeking a more internationally active Japan.
Separately, an independent panel began work yesterday on redrawing Japan's
electoral map, due for completion in six months.
This is the first stage in the transition from Japan's multi-seat
constituency system for electing the lower house of parliament - said to be
a factor in fostering money politics - to a mix of single seats and
proportional representation.
Editorial comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940412

