FT941-12858

FT  28 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Spares lead the way in India car parts
exports - Components makers take advantage of trade liberalisation reforms


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


Lumax Industries, a Delhi-based company, is one of India's most recent
entrants to export markets, selling spare-part lights for Volkswagen,
Mercedes and Rover cars and for Italian-made Iveco lorries.
'They're half the price of the original manufacturers' equipment,' says Mr
A. K. Sethi, the export manager. 'Our labour is cheap but we have to watch
our other costs.'
Lumax is among scores of Indian vehicle parts makers that are taking
advantage of the government's efforts to open the economy to international
trade and promote exports. From Dollars 60m in 1988-89, parts exports jumped
to Dollars 190m in 1992-93 and are set to rise to nearly Dollars 250m in the
year to March 1994.
'Everybody is talking of the Indian components industry getting more and
more competitive,' said Mr Giancarlo Boschetti, the president of Iveco, the
truck-making arm of the Fiat group of Italy, on a recent visit to India. 'We
see India not only as a source of exports (of vehicles) but also as a source
of supply for components.'
Mr Boschetti was speaking last month during India's first motor show in
seven years at which 600 companies showed their wares, many of them hoping
to attract export orders. The potential foreign buyers included teams from
Britain's Society for Motor Manufacturers and Traders, the Japan Auto Parts
Industries Association, and Ford and General Motors, the US carmakers.
However, large-scale orders from the big western and Japanese vehicle makers
could still be some time away. Only a handful of Indian companies have
struck such deals: among them are Sundram Fasteners, an affiliate of TVS, a
diversified south Indian engineering group, which last summer started
supplying radiator caps to GM.
Sundram makes 5m caps a year for GM - 85 per cent of the US group's needs.
Sundram also has permission to stamp the letters TVS on every cap, which,
Sundram officials say, is the first time an Indian company has established a
global brand-name in motor components.
Sundram Fasteners was helped in establishing its operation by GM which
transferred second-hand machines and other equipment from a British
supplier. Other companies face the choice between waiting for a similar
opportunity or taking a risk by expanding capacity before securing orders.
'We are not yet geared up in this country for volume production,' says an
executive at one electrical parts maker.
India's main advantages in the market are low-cost labour, lax environmental
controls for 'dirty' industries, and a long engineering tradition. Indian
industry executives say India is a cost-effective country for hot and dirty
operations, among them casting and forging of heavy components such as axles
and transmission drives. It could also be a competitive supplier of
electrical components, particularly those that might require manual
assembly.
However, Indian suppliers suffer from serious disadvantages, including
inadequate infrastructure and a reputation for poor quality, which blights
Indian exports generally. For these reasons large western and Japanese
groups have often shied away from buying Indian components. Indian
manufacturers have relied instead on the spares market, where buyers have
been more easily swayed by low prices.
Mr Shiv Nair, an assistant vice-president at Bharat Forge, a diversified
forging company, says the export of low-cost low-quality Indian spare parts
has undermined efforts to supply original equipment.
Bharat Forge, which supplies axle beams and other parts to big lorry
manufacturers, including Mitsubishi Motors in Japan and Rockwell in the US,
has deliberately avoided the spares market for fear of having its reputation
tarnished by the low quality of some other Indian companies. Even so, Bharat
Forge suffers, says Mr Nair.
He estimates it takes four to five years to finalise a large original
equipment supply contract; it would take only two years if Indian companies
enjoyed better reputations. 'The Japanese even question the quality of steel
we use. They want to check it.'
But there are signs that Indian companies' prospects are improving rapidly.
The slow-down in car demand in industrialised countries has forced big
groups to cut costs further than before, so the pressure to find reliable
low-cost sources of parts has increased. At the same time, Indian executives
are steadily learning what they must do to meet foreign buyers'
expectations.
One US car company executive visiting Delhi said India as a whole had no
particular advantage over other countries as a parts supplier. Low-cost
labour was no use if it meant low productivity and poor quality, he said.
What mattered was how a company made use of low-cost labour.
'When we source components we don't think in terms of countries but of
companies. We have seen companies in India we like and we are talking to
them.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940128

