FT944-2581

FT  16 DEC 94 / Republicans damn Clinton tax cut plans: Right wingers defy
him to outbid them as defenders of middle class


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


Republican leaders yesterday took pre-emptive aim at President Bill
Clinton's proposals for a middle class tax cut, dismissing them as
inadequate even before they had been made. Mr Clinton last night sought to
revive his political popularity in a televised speech which included
proposals for tax cuts of about Dollars 60bn (Pounds 38.4bn) over five
years.
Senator Phil Gramm, a Texas Republican who has already announced his
intention to challenge Mr Clinton for the presidency in 1996, said yesterday
that the president was 'more than a day late and more than a dollar short'.
Mr Gramm said that the lower limit for a tax cut was the figure of Dollars
107bn promised in the contract with America manifesto, on which most
Republicans in the House of Representatives campaigned in the November
elections.
'I am not going to support a tax cut for families that short-changes them,
and the president's proposal is going to be a non-starter unless it at least
meets the level that has been set by the House of Representatives,' Mr Gramm
said. Mr Haley Barbour, Republican National Committee chairman, said Mr
Clinton was trying to jump on the tax cut train after it had left the
station.
Mr Clinton's package would allow income tax credits for families with
children, but with a lower income ceiling than the Dollars 200,000 proposed
by some Republicans. One of the tax credits would be to help offset college
tuition fees.
In his search for ways to pay for tax cuts, Mr Clinton has lately examined a
range of options, some as radical as abolishing entire government
departments, such as Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or Transportation.
Republicans warned Mr Clinton, however, that in a poker game over who could
propose the biggest tax cut and the largest reduction in government, they
would outbid him.
'We will see him a tax cut and HUD, and raise him Education and Energy,'
said Mr Edwin Feulner, president of the Heritage Foundation, a right-wing
Washington think-tank.
But fiscal conservatives are alarmed at the tax cut bidding war now in
progress.
'Don't buy this pig in a poke. It may feel good in the short term, but it's
not going to feel good in the long term,' said Senator Bob Kerrey, a
Nebraska Democrat who chaired a bipartisan commission appointed to consider
long-term reforms to bring the government's finances into balance.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941216

