FT944-2653

FT  16 DEC 94 / Scots holiday group to start flights from Liverpool


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


Direct Holidays, the Glasgow-based direct-marketing holiday group backed by
the Royal Bank of Scotland, yesterday announced its first foray into English
markets with a Pounds 1m investment in running cut-price flights and
holidays from Liverpool Airport.
The company is guaranteeing to undercut the brochure prices of any similar
holiday from Manchester Airport by 21 per cent.
It is tilting at big holiday companies such as Airtours and Thomson, which
run their own aircraft fleets from Manchester and have substantial
investment there in dedicated check-in facilities and aircraft maintenance.
Direct Holidays, founded in 1991 by three former directors of Owners Abroad,
operates on the same principle as direct-marketing insurance companies by
cutting out agents, brokers and commission in a mainly telephone sales
operation.
It claims to be Scotland's largest direct-sales holidays business, with a 12
per cent share of the Scottish charter holidays market.
This year it has carried 70,000 passengers using Glasgow and Prestwick
airports, turning over about Pounds 15m.
Mr John Boyle, one of the founders, said current pre-tax profits were about
Pounds 450,000 a year.
The Royal Bank of Scotland recently bought a 22 per cent stake to enable the
latest expansion, which will add flights from Aberdeen and Edinburgh in
1995.
Liverpool Airport's struggle for growth in Manchester's shadow has provided
the company's first opportunity in England. Mr Boyle's research showed other
regional airports, such as Newcastle, well served by local operators, but
Liverpool had less holiday charter traffic than Exeter.
The gap between the two north-western airports was illustrated this week
when Manchester released its November passenger figures - 794,000  -
bringing the total for the first 11 months of the year to more than 14m
people. Liverpool airport handles only 500,000 passengers a year.
Mr Boyle said Direct Holidays was aiming at the 1.4m-population Merseyside
conurbation. It would operate from May until October, offering 35,000 seats
to nine destinations in the Balearics, Canaries, Spanish mainland, Portugal
and Turkey. Aircraft will be chartered from Air Europe, Futura, Caledonian
and Pegasus.
The company is to set up a secure car park for customers, close to the
terminal, charging Pounds 5 a week - half the price of a taxi ride from
Liverpool city centre and less than a fifth of the cost of a week's parking
at Manchester's long-stay car parks, which are remote from the terminals.
Liverpool is opposing Manchester's plans at a public inquiry for a second
runway, arguing its airport should be encouraged to grow to 12m passengers a
year by 2030.
Manchester's second runway is supported by a large majority of north-western
business leaders. Outside Merseyside, most support complementary development
of Liverpool in holiday charter, freight or niche markets, of which the
Direct Holidays expansion will be seen as typical.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941216

