FT942-14849

FT  19 APR 94 / World Trade News: Anglo-French group clinches train deal


   By JOHN RIDDING and JOHN BURTON


   PARIS, SEOUL


GEC Alsthom, the Anglo-French engineering and transport group, yesterday
clinched a Dollars 2.1bn (Pounds 1.43bn) contract to supply locomotives and
electrical equipment for South Korea's high speed railway.
Mr Pierre Suard, chairman of Alcatel-Alsthom, GEC's French partner, said the
group had signed a letter of intent to supply the equipment and technology
for the 430km high-speed line which will link Seoul with the southern port
of Pusan. The total cost of the project, due to be completed by 2001, is
estimated at about Dollars 13bn.
The conclusion of negotiations marks the end of a protracted battle over the
past four years between GEC Alsthom and international rivals, including a
German consortium headed by Siemens and the Japanese Mitsubishi group. The
South Korean contract, one of the largest to be awarded in the industry, is
regarded as a strategically important project which can serve as a
bridgehead for further high-speed railway ventures in the region.
It is the first time that TGV technology has been transferred outside
France.
The South Korean companies will be allowed to sell the TGV to other Asian
countries once they assume full control of the transferred technology and
production in 2002.
GEC Alsthom had been granted sole negotiating rights for the contract last
August. But negotiations were extended as South Korea sought to lower costs
and increase the level of technology transfer.
The final contract price is about Dollars 270m lower than the bid offered
last August. The proportion of local manufacturing has also been increased
from about 44 per cent to 50 per cent, GEC Alsthom said.
The deal will be financed by a consortium of French banks, led by Banque
Indosuez.
Mr Suard said the competition for the contract had been fierce, but it
remained a profitable venture for GEC Alsthom. The project would guarantee
800 jobs for the group and its suppliers for four years.
According to Mr Suard, the price cut had been achieved through the effects
of exchange rate movements, and greater input from the Korean partners.
These include Hyundai Precision Industries, Daewoo Heavy Industries and
Hanjin Heavy Industries.
GEC Alsthom and its Korean partners will supply 46 high speed trains, 34 of
which will be built in South Korea.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940419

