FT944-11176

FT  08 NOV 94 / EU split over Ukraine loan: UK resistance to Germany's aid
call


   By LIONEL BARBER


A German-led drive to promote an activist European Union policy to assist
Ukraine yesterday ran into resistance from Britain and other member states.
The split occurred at a meeting of EU finance ministers in Brussels
yesterday over a proposal to provide an Ecu85m (Pounds 67m) balance of
payments loan to Ukraine.
It suggests that the EU is divided over the key question of whether
President Leonid Kuchma can deliver on his promises of economic reform. In
the background are differing assessments of Ukraine's chances of remaining a
viable state in relation to neighbouring Russia.
Germany - supported by the US and the European Commission - is pressing for
early, generous financial aid to President Kuchma. Their collective view is
that a narrow window of opportunity exists in order to stave off economic
collapse and preserve Ukrainian independence.
But the UK government is pursuing a more cautious policy.
Senior British officials are understood to have doubts about President
Kuchma's ability to face down the diehard conservatives in the Ukrainian
parliament, and want tighter controls on western aid via the International
Monetary Fund.
Other EU member states - notably the UK, France and Italy - are also
reluctant to allow the Commission to play an active role in promoting and
operating balance of payments loans to the former communist countries of
central and eastern Europe.
Their reluctance is symptomatic of the broader battle over how far the
Commission should take the lead in the development of a common foreign and
security policy in Europe as laid out in the Maastricht treaty.
More narrowly, the Rome government is reluctant to support a balance of
payments loan since Ukraine has yet to settle outstanding debts with Italian
companies. Ukraine, with a population of 53m people, has a total foreign
debt of around Dollars 7bn (Pounds 4.2bn).
Since President Kuchma's election last July, the Kiev government has
launched a campaign to persuade western donors that it is committed to
economic reform and that they should provide financial aid and debt relief.
Last month, the Ukrainian national bank passed a decree to unify the
exchange rate, one of the measures which international creditors said was
essential for the credibility of the reform programme.
The government also announced bold measures to liberalise prices and exports
which would cut subsidies on food, rents and energy.
President Kuchma told western donors at a Group of Seven-organised
conference in Canada that the reforms hinge on immediate western aid and a
successful debt rescheduling to cover its Dollars 600m four-quarter balance
of payments deficit.
The US committed Dollars 70m, and pledged to raise the total to Dollars 100m
if the EU provided similar balance of payments aid. Canada pledged Dollars
25m.
Last night, German officials held out hope of a political commitment to
provide aid to Ukraine.
Though this would fall short of a formal decision on balance of payments
support, but it would keep alive hopes of winning the necessary support from
the European parliament later this month.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941108

