FT942-12433

FT  29 APR 94 / UK Company News: Counterbids played down by possible
frontrunners


   By Financial Staff


The buoyancy of Lasmo's share price yesterday suggested that the market is
either expecting Enterprise to raise its offer, or the arrival of a
counterbid.
The second possibility, however, was played down by many of the companies
rumoured to be planning a run at Lasmo.
British Gas, which made an unsuccessful bid for Lasmo in 1991, said it did
not 'comment on market rumour,' and was not planning to make any
announcements on the sub-ject.
Analysts in London dismissed the possibility of a bid from British Gas as
highly unlikely. This view was reinforced by yesterday's profits warning at
the annual meeting.
Elf Aquitaine, the French oil group which was privatised earlier this year,
also declined to comment. But industry observers in Paris played down the
possibility, pointing to Elf's debt-equity ratio of 48 per cent and the
strategy of its chairman, Mr Philippe Jaffre, who has given priority to the
reduction of borrowings.
'Elf is not in a financial position to bid for Lasmo,' said Mr Vincent Bazi,
head of research at Barings Securities in Paris.
Elf may, however, be seeking to restructure its relationship with Enterprise
Oil, in which it currently holds 10 per cent and with which it operates
Elf-Enterprise, a joint exploration and production company owned 66 per cent
by the French group.
Elf is thought to be considering selling its 10 per cent stake in Enterprise
and taking full control of the joint company. 'This would allow it to fully
consolidate cash flow from the company', said one industry observer.
Total, France's other large oil company, denied it was interested in Lasmo.
'We are not a buyer', the group said.
Total already has a strong presence in the North Sea and is expected to see
a sharp increase in production from new sites, particularly in Latin
America.
'They don't really need to reinforce upstream activities, their main
objective is to reinforce downstream and refining,' said one analyst.
Atlantic Richfield, the US oil company, would not comment on speculation
that it would also make a bid for Lasmo.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940429

