FT942-12761

FT  28 APR 94 / Pounds 50bn deposits 'lost to banks'


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


British banks are losing between Pounds 2bn and Pounds 2.5bn of profits each
year because they have failed to compete properly with building societies
and the life and pensions industry for personal savings, a study says.
UBS Global Research says that the loss of cheap deposits from the banking
system over the past 20 years is so marked that banks would now have Pounds
50bn higher retail deposit balances if they had maintained their market
share.
The study argues that banks have been forced to cut branch networks because
they have failed to use branches to gather deposits. It says that they may
face further competition for deposits from new competitors such as telephone
banks.
According to the analysis of deposits since 1975, only a quarter of the
eightfold increase in banks' personal deposits is due to new money. The rest
comes from accrual of interest and the change of Abbey National's status
from a building society to a bank.
Study authors Mr John Aitken and Mr Nick Gough, say banks will find it hard
to replace profits from the loss of deposits without significant new
acquisitions such as Lloyds' Pounds 1.8bn bid to buy Cheltenham & Gloucester
Building Society.
They say there is 'no scope for optimism' about the future of the banking
sector because the new forms of income with which banks have tried to
replace cheap deposits - such as trading in securities - are much less
stable.
Banks' share of personal sector assets has halved to 8 per cent between 1975
and 1993 - excluding the effect of Abbey National and TSB Group. At the same
time, the life and pensions industry has doubled its market share to 52 per
cent.
Banks would have attracted aggregate new deposits of Pounds 170bn if they
had maintained their share. This is nearly Pounds 60bn above the actual
figure, equivalent to a loss of deposits of between Pounds 45bn and Pounds
50bn for the big high street banks.
The study says that the clearing banks have suffered from a narrowing of
interest margins and loss of volume as a result.
The 'opportunity cost' of this is between Pounds 2bn and Pounds 2.5bn, or
about a third of the sector's forecast profits this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940428

