FT942-15918

FT  13 APR 94 / Labour treats poll as referendum on PM


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and ROLAND RUDD


The Labour party yesterday resolved to project next month's local elections
as a referendum on Mr John Major's leadership as it revealed its campaign
strategy for the May 5 poll.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, the deputy leader, said its abrasive attack on a
'disastrous prime minister' would be combined with a strong defence of
Labour's record in local government.
But Mrs Beckett and other senior party figures left little doubt that the
opposition is relying on a national backlash against Mr Major's record since
the 1992 general election to undermine the Tory vote.
Accusing the government of deliberate deception about tax increases and Mr
Major of 'making a mockery' of the office of prime minister, Mrs Beckett
said the typical family would pay an extra Pounds 500 a year in tax this
year to pay for his economic mismanagement.
The decision to focus on Mr Major personally came amid fierce exchanges
about relative council tax charges in Labour and Conservative-controlled
authorities.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's local government spokesman, accused the government
of blatantly rigging the grant system for councils to favour Tory-controlled
authorities. He defended his claim that average council tax levels across
all local authorities were a reliable guide to relative efficiency. On that
basis the tax in Labour-controlled authorities was Pounds 40 less than in
Conservative councils.
The Conservatives, who want to fight the elections on the record of
individual local authorities, attacked the 'rotten record' of many
Labour-controlled councils
Mr David Curry, the local government minister, accused the opposition party
of 'wasted expenditure, political posturing and perverted priorities' as he
published a detailed dossier on the financial record of Labour-run
authorities.
Mr Major remains the Conservative leader most likely to lead the party to
victory at the next general election, according to an opinion poll by ICM in
today's Guardian newspaper.
A majority of the ICM sample said they were less likely to vote Conservative
if Mr Major was replaced by Mr Michael Heseltine, Mr Kenneth Clarke, Mr
Michael Portillo, Mrs Virginia Bottomley or Mr Douglas Hurd.
The poll put the Conservatives on 26 per cent of the vote, up from 24 per
cent a month ago, but well behind Labour on 48 per cent, from 49 per cent.
Liberal Democrat support remained steady at 22 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940413

