FT941-3562

FT  16 MAR 94 / SPD election victor puts party on alert


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


A supremely self-assured Mr Gerhard Schroder, the victorious Social Democrat
prime minister in the state of Lower Saxony, swept into Bonn yesterday to
warn his party colleagues against over-confidence in their own coming
election campaigns.
It was a moment of vindication for Mr Schroder, who was defeated last year
in the contest to become national leader of the Social Democratic party
(SPD) by the altogether more modest Mr Rudolf Scharping, the state premier
of the Rhineland-Palatinate.
This time he was coming back as a winner from the very first poll of
Germany's 1994 election marathon, which will see 18 more polls culminating
in the general election on October 16.
His emergence from Sunday's state election in Lower Saxony with an absolute
majority - albeit only of one seat - means that he can rule without any
coalition partner. That is a luxury enjoyed by the government in only five
other states of the 16 in the federal republic.
Mr Schroder was magnanimous in his victory. He paid tribute to the Greens
who had been his partners in the first red-green coalition in Germany, and
will undoubtedly still be needed to provide some support for his wafer-thin
majority. At the end of Sunday night, his SPD had won 81 of the 161 seats in
the Hanover-based state parliament, against 67 for the Christian Democratic
Union, and 13 for the Greens.
The biggest losers were the Chancellor Helmut Kohl's CDU, which lost 5.6
percentage points to win just 36.4 per cent of the vote, and the Free
Democratic Party (FDP), his coalition partner in Bonn, which failed to gain
the minimum 5 per cent needed to win any seats at all.
Yet Mr Schroder's main warning was to his own SPD party colleagues, not to
relax in the forthcoming election campaigns and regard them as good as won.
And he spoke out strongly against national policies which might prove
disastrous vote-losers in the campaign, such as a national speed limit on
the autobahns, and an increase in taxes on petrol and oil products.
Mr Schroder, whose victory is seen very much as a personal triumph, admitted
he was facing an exhausted CDU in Lower Saxony, with a serious shortage of
personalities in its leadership.
Yet one man had shown he could make a difference in the last two weeks of
the campaign, he said: the arrival of Mr Kohl himself showed that the ruling
party could still boast 'a notable and battle-hardened election campaigner'
who should never be under-estimated.
It was no doubt a neat reminder to his erstwhile SPD rival, Mr Scharping,
about the harsh struggle ahead. Mr Schroder pledged his loyal support to his
national leader, but he firmly ruled out any future role in Bonn for
himself.
He was speaking just five days before the next test in the election
marathon, when 2.1m voters in the state of Schleswig-Holstein must elect new
local councils on Sunday - and where the SPD itself is facing a backlash in
the polls.
State officials of the CDU are hoping to push the SPD into second place and
to emerge once again as the largest party, reversing the positions of 1990.
The biggest loser from the Lower Saxony election was the Free Democratic
party, which failed to gain even the minimum 5 per cent needed to win seats
in the state parliament.
And in spite of its loss of power in the coalition, the biggest winner was
the Green party, which pushed up its vote from 5.5 to 7.4 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940316

