FT942-15531

FT  14 APR 94 / International Bonds: Sweden uses flexible allotment for
Ecu500m five-year deal


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


The Eurobond market saw a handful of new issues yesterday, but activity was
slow as many participants remained sidelined ahead of today's Bundesbank
council meeting.
Close on the heels of Tuesday's Ecu500m five-year deal for the EBRD, the
Kingdom of Sweden issued Ecu400m of five-year bonds via joint leads Morgan
Stanley and Swiss Bank Corporation.
The 6 1/4 per cent bonds were priced to yield 12 basis points over the
French Ecu BTAN at the fixed re-offer price of 99.40, Although the bonds
closed lower at 99.20 bid on a weaker BTAN, the spread held steady at 12
basis points.
Sweden's deal was allocated to the underwriting houses on a flexible
allotment basis, with banks taking only as many bonds as they felt able to
place. 'Allotting bonds to demand allowed for very little flowback,' said
one of the lead managers.
Meanwhile, Rabobank Nederland piggy-backed Tuesday's successful AT&T
Eurodollar deal with Dollars 250m of three-year bonds via SBC. The bonds
yielded 20 basis points over the Treasury note at their 99.91 re-offer
price, which was deemed fair by most market participants.
'Quite a few investors are looking for dollar exposure, and triple-A rated
three-year 6 per cent paper sounds like a safe bet,' said one dealer.
In the D-Mark sector, the German building materials company Heidelberger
Zement Finance made its Eurobond debut with DM700m of 6 3/8 per cent
five-year bonds via joint lead Dresdner Bank. The unrated bonds were priced
to yield 50 basis points over the corresponding domestic bond and traded
around 99.55 bid in the afternoon, yielding 6.46 per cent. Strong demand
from German, Swiss and Benelux investors helped the yield spread narrow to
48 basis points, a syndicate official said.
Elsewhere, Unilever returned to the Euroguilder sector with Fl 350m of 6 1/2
per cent 10-year bonds via ABN Amro Bank. Paying 20 basis points over the
Dutch government bond at the 99.60 re-offer price, the triple-A rated paper
met healthy demand from institutional and retail investors, lifting the
price to 99.65 bid and causing the spread to narrow to 16 basis points.
Standard & Poor's has raised its ratings on Chase Manhattan Corporation's
senior debt to single-A from single-A-minus, on its subordinated debt to
single-A-minus from triple-B-plus, and on its preferred stock to
triple-B-plus from triple-B. Chase Manhattan Corporation's and Chase
Manhattan Bank of Canada's commercial paper ratings were raised to A-1 from
A-2. About Dollars 5.7bn of debt is affected.
The upgrade reflects the success of the company's attack on its credit
quality and capital needs by raising reserves, cutting costs and accessing
the equity markets, the agency said.
IBCA, the European rating agency, raised its long-term and short-term
ratings for Citicorp, Chase Manhattan Corporation and Chemical Banking
Corporation. The holding companies of all three banks were accorded single-A
long-term ratings, from single-A-minus, and A1 short-term ratings, from A2.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940414

