FT941-3582

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (24): Did they get it wrong?
Discuss - Diane Summers browses through a collection of case studies /
Marketing


   By DIANE SUMMERS


The Marketing Casebook
by Sally Dibb and Lyndon Simkin
Routledge, Pounds 15.99 (paperback),
Pounds 30 (hardback)
270 pages
The case study has long played a central part in teaching at business
schools - indeed, Harvard does most of its MBA teaching through case
studies, and has invested heavily in recent years to update and
internationalise its material.
Producing topical, detailed and objective studies of organisations for
students to pick apart, discuss and learn from, is labour-intensive and
expensive. Ready-made case material, of the sort contained in The Marketing
Casebook, is likely, therefore, to be particularly welcome and well-used on
MBA and undergraduate marketing courses, as well as by individuals
attempting to get to grips with marketing issues.
The 15 case studies in the book cover a range of European companies,
including Euro Disney, Harris Queensway, Electrolux, Heineken, Kodak Norge,
and JCB. Each case contains a summary of issues for discussion and
cross-references to theory notes.
The notes, plus pointers to further reading, cover the usual marketing
course topics, including market research, segmentation, product management,
pricing, distribution, and international issues. An introduction provides
some guidance for students on how to tackle a case study and present
findings.
The Euro Disney study, for example, deals briefly with the revitalising of
Walt Disney's marketing worldwide since the mid 1980s, the expansion of its
theme parks and the move into Europe - followed by disappointing attendance,
local hostility and staff layoffs. Discussion points for students (and,
since the company's problems continue to unfold, no doubt for Disney
executives, too) include: 'What were Disney's US core marketing assets? How
applicable were they to its French base in Europe? What aspects of the
marketing environment did Disney ignore? How could it have researched
these?'
The Harris Queensway case study traces the success of the group's flagship,
the Queensway furniture retailing chain, during the 1980s and the events
that subsequently pulled the group down - the reduction in consumer
spending, a failure to keep up with retailing trends, and the unsuccessful
refocusing of the Times Furnishings and Queensway chains.
There was no full marketing research into consumer preferences and no
marketing department. When times got really tough, the study details how all
senior management in non-operational areas were immediately sacked,
including all marketing and planning executives. Issues raised for
discussion include: How could Harris have targeted additional market
segments? What were the main influences on consumer behaviour? How could
consumer needs have been researched? How could a new entrant best challenge
the market leader?
It is easier, arguably, to analyse and draw lessons from the experiences of
companies such as these, which are publicly acknowledged to have made
mistakes and misjudgements. More difficult is to present balanced evidence -
without the benefit of hindsight - of a company which currently seems to be
performing strongly. Some of the cases which fit this category are less
successful.
For example, the study of TGI Friday's, the restaurant chain which is owned
in the UK by Whitbread, reads rather more like a glowing testimonial from a
public relations company, than a cool academic appraisal.
Here are a couple of samples of the kind of prose that sits unhappily with
the more objective material in the book: 'Whether it is a simple coffee, an
unpronounceable cocktail, a bowl of chips or a five-course meal, TGI
Friday's will provide every customer or 'guest' with a truly memorable
experience.' 'Regular visitors to the Friday's talk about the Friday's
experience - a mix of buzzing atmosphere, flamboyant decor and friendly
staff, with a real will to please. . . The staff treat guests as if they
were valued visitors to their own homes. They are met at the door with a
warm welcome and accompanied to their table in a true Friday's frenetic,
good-humoured style.'

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940315

