FT942-14343

FT  21 APR 94 / Clinton steps up air strike threat against Serbs


   By LAURA SILBER, GEORGE GRAHAM and GILLIAN TETT


   BELGRADE, WASHINGTON, BRUSSELS


President Bill Clinton yesterday promised to 'make the Serbs pay a higher
price for violence' by stepping up the threat of air strikes to protect the
UN-designated safe areas for Moslems in Bosnia.
His move came as a rocket attack killed up to 14 people and wounded dozens
in the hospital at Gorazde, the Moslem enclave surrounded by Serbs. Aid
workers said the fighting there had led to suffering without precedent in
Bosnia's two-year war.
Mr Clinton called for an extension of the approach used at Sarajevo, the
Bosnian capital, earlier this year in which Nato threatened to bomb any
heavy weapons left within a 12-mile radius exclusion zone.
'Our proposal would create Sarajevo-like areas - that is, safe zones around
all the safe areas, including Gorazde,' Mr Clinton said in a press
conference, forcefully condemning the Serb forces for shelling Gorazde's
hospital.
But after a day of telephone conversations with President Boris Yeltsin of
Russia, President Francois Mitterrand of France and Canadian prime minister
Jean Chretien, Mr Clinton said the US would also lead a concerted diplomatic
drive to restart peace negotiations.
'The imperative now is not only to address the latest Serb transgressions.
It is to renew the momentum toward peace,' Mr Clinton said. He indicated
that the US was willing to contribute more money for UN peacekeeping troops
in Bosnia, responding to complaints from Washington's allies that the US had
reneged on funding commitments.
He also proposed tightening economic sanctions on the Serbian government in
Belgrade for supporting Bosnian Serbs.
Support for escalating air strikes was stronger in Washington than in
Europe, where officials were wary of alienating Russia and putting UN ground
troops at greater risk in an intensified battle. Moscow has rebuked the
Bosnian Serbs over their continued attacks on Gorazde, but still opposes the
use of force against them. President Clinton claimed to have secured 'broad
agreement on objectives' in a telephone call to President Yeltsin. However,
Mr Pavel Grachev, the Russian defence minister, insisted that both Serbs and
Moslems were responsible for the latest fighting, and that air strikes would
not stop it.
US administration officials said they would press allies to endorse the use
of air power outside the safe areas.
In Brussels, Nato ambassadors gave a cautiously positive response to a
request from Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, for more air
support.
A Nato spokesman said Nato military planners would 'urgently' start drawing
up plans for possible air strikes.
British officials stressed that an ill-planned recourse to air strikes would
put ground troops in danger.
Editorial Comment, Page 29

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940421

