FT944-2346

FT  16 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Sweb dismisses merger speculation


   By MICHAEL SMITH


South Western Electricity dismissed speculation that it could become
involved in a merger or takeover as it reported a 35 per cent increase in
interim pre-tax profits and a 24 per cent dividend rise.
Mr John Seed, chief executive, said there had been no noticeable changes in
its shareholders' register. 'We are not in discussions with anyone and it is
our intention to remain independent,' he said.
As one of the smaller regional electricity companies, Sweb has been
identified by investors as one of the most likely bid targets after Northern
Electric. Trafalgar House announced this week that it was considering a bid
for Northern.
In the six months to September 30, Sweb made pre-tax profits of Pounds 41.4m
(Pounds 30.6m) on turnover of Pounds 374.1m (Pounds 385.8m). The interim
dividend of 8.7p (7p) is being paid from earnings of 25.6p (19.9p).
Sweb said the underlying increase in the dividend was 18.6 per cent but the
amount per share had increased further by the buy-back of 5.1 per cent of
its shares.
Sweb has authority to buy back up to 10 per cent and Mr Seed said the
company would choose an appropriate moment to complete the programme.
If it did so, gearing by the year-end would be about 20 per cent, assuming
no other significant changes.
Distribution unit sales increased by 2.6 per cent on a weather-adjusted
basis, helping to increase profits from Pounds 26.6m to Pounds 36.7m. The
supply business incurred a loss of Pounds 2.5m against a profit of Pounds
3.2m in the comparable period.
Mr Seed said Sweb aimed to cut Pounds 27m from the cost basis over the next
five years, with most of the reductions in the first two. About Pounds 18m
of this would come from improving operation efficiency. Electricity business
staff is scheduled to fall from 2,900 to 2,400 by the end of the century.
Retailing halved its loss to Pounds 500,000. Mr Seed said that if the
company could 'find an opportunity to make an elegant exit from retailing we
would take it'.
Sweb intends to demerge its full holding in the National Grid if flotation
goes ahead.
COMMENT
There were two schools of thought on Sweb in the City yesterday. Some
analysts argue that it is a good bet because it enjoyed a favourable
regulatory review; others see it as being in danger of being penalised by
investors for moving too slowly on cost-cutting, particularly jobs. But in
these heady days evaluation of electricity companies has as much to do with
the likelihood of them becoming bid targets as with their underlying
performance. That is why Sweb's rating is higher than most. Its shares are
trading on a yield of 4.2 per cent, assuming a 29p full-year dividend.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

941216

