FT944-2862

FT  15 DEC 94 / Markets Report: Interest rate optimism gives boost to US
markets


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Eurodollar futures rose sharply yesterday as fears of a rise in US interest
rates next week receded, writes Philip Gawith.
This helped prices across the yield curve, with the March Eurodollar
contract climbing to 92.76 from 92.62.
Markets had been discounting the possibility of the Federal Reserve lifting
rates when it meets next Tuesday.
The dollar weakened slightly to end in London at DM1.5691, from DM1.5728,
and at Y100.26 from Y100.395. New York trading closed with the US currency
at DM1.5690 and Y100.30.
Elsewhere, the Australian dollar finished unchanged at 77.52 US cents.
Earlier it had touched a three-year high of 77.8 cents, during Asian
trading, after the Reserve Bank raised interest rates by 100 basis points to
7.5 per cent.
Sterling lost  1/2 pfennig against the stronger D-Mark, closing at DM2.4513
from DM2.4569, but was unchanged against the dollar at Dollars 1.5622.
The D-Mark maintained its firmer showing in Europe, but there was little
significant movement in rates. The peseta eased to Pta84.13 against the
D-Mark from Pta84.0.
The catalyst for the performance of US interest rate markets was better than
expected consumer inflation and capacity utilisation figures.
The view that an increase in US interest rates might be deferred caused a
short-covering rally in D-Mark and short sterling futures. The March short
sterling contract gained five basis points at 92.55, while the same D-Mark
contract moved upwards to 94.30 from 94.27. Mr Richard Phillips, analyst at
broker GNI, remarked: 'The Americans have given us the lead today and we
have eagerly taken it.'
Volumes were very heavy, with the March Eurodollar contract having some
200,000 lots dealt. One trader commented on the buoyant state of the market,
noting: 'Every single trade I did today was a buy - either short-covering,
or book tidying ahead of Christmas.'
Mr Jonathan Griggs, economic adviser at Barclays in London, said sentiment
had also been affected by the publication of a report in Washington saying
interest rates would not be raised next week. The report came from a
consultancy reputed to have close ties to the Federal Reserve.
Not everyone shares this sanguine view about next week's meeting. Mr Wayne
Angell, chief economist at Bear Stearns, and until recently a Fed governor
himself, said a 50 basis-point rise in rates 'seems logical'.
Along the same lines, Mr David Munro, chief US economist at High Frequency
Economics in New York, has increased the odds of a rate rise next week to
even money following the release of retail sales data earlier this week.
He believes the Fed is more focused on retail sales as current evidence that
the economy is heating up, than on producer prices, which are a backward
looking indicator.
The Australian dollar's progress is the function of rising interest rates
and buoyant commodity prices. Commodity exports are an important dimension
of the Australian economy.
The currency also benefited from the surprise element in yesterday's move.
Most traders in the market had been expecting interest rates to rise last
week. The outlook is for further rises in interest rates, which should help
the dollar. One economist noted: 'There is mounting concern about the
sustainability of economic growth. This could force the Reserve Bank to push
rates even higher.'
Rising economic growth next year in the industrial world should bolster
commodity prices, lending further support to the Australian dollar. Many
analysts expect the currency to rise to 80 US cents during 1995.
The D-Mark continued to profit from political worries in Europe - notably in
Italy and France, and also in the UK ahead of today's Dudley West
by-election. The latest opinion poll gave the opposition Labour party an
almost unheard of 50 percentage-point lead. This put the pound under some
pressure against the D-Mark.
Analysts said the US dollar's ability to remain reasonably firm while the
D-Mark was also strong showed that investors were switching between
currencies in Europe, rather than between the dollar and the D-Mark.
The Bank of England cleared a Pounds 1.3bn shortage at established rates in
its daily money market operations.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

941215

