FT943-13052

FT  21 JUL 94 / Belfast airport to be sold to staff


   By Our Belfast Correspondent and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


Belfast International Airport is to be sold to its 300 management and staff,
the government announced yesterday.
The news surprised many observers who felt that the buy-out bid was the
least likely to succeed.
The management-employee buy-out team defeated three rival bidders on the
shortlist with a bid of Pounds 32.75m which, together with the company's
cash reserves of Pounds 15.15m, will boost Treasury coffers by Pounds 47.9m.
The airport has undergone a Pounds 25m development programme over the past
five years and now boasts some of the best regional airport facilities in
the UK.
Unsuccessful contenders included an Airports Europe Group led by Mr Paul
McWilliams, chairman of Ulster's Local Enterprise Development Unit, whose
partners included Amsterdam's Schiphol airport.
The others were a high-profile group led by Mr John McGuckian, chairman of
the Industrial Development Board, and backed by TBF Thompson and the
Northern Bank, and the Ulster Investment Bank, whose bid was supported by
City financial institutions.
Mr Tim Smith, Ulster's economy minister, said that all of the government's
criteria of price, efficiency and competition, as well as the involvement of
local interests, had been met successfully by the winning bid.
The completion of the sell-off means Northern Ireland's two main airports
are now in private hands.
The Belfast Harbour Airport, near the city centre, is owned by
Shorts-Bombardier, the Canadian transportation group. Both airports have
been involved in heavy competition on domestic routes and that rivalry is
likely to intensify.
Birmingham International Airport, the fifth largest in the UK, yesterday
unveiled an expansion programme which will cost Pounds 400m over the next 10
years and will involve the private sector taking a majority interest in the
ownership, Paul Cheeseright writes.
The airport's local-authority owners - the councils of Birmingham, Coventry,
Dudley, Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall and Wolverhampton - are prepared to give
up at least 51 per cent of their equity to attract private capital, said Mr
Fred Hunt, chairman of the airport company.
Private-sector control will give the airport greater financial flexibility.
Its borrowing is at present subject to government constraints.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940721

