FT942-14373

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (9): Comfort is very variable - Kate
Bevan compares the different standards of ground service


   By KATE BEVAN


It's 3am and you're in Bangkok. It's dark, you've just stepped off an
aeroplane from Sydney and you'll be getting back on it soon to continue to
London. You couldn't care less that it's Bangkok, all you want is a cup of
coffee and to stretch your legs.
If you're travelling economy, the best you can hope for is an uncomfortable
seat in the transit lounge, but if you're travelling at the front end of the
aircraft, you can at least while away the refuelling stop in an airline
lounge.
Or it's lunchtime in London and your flight to New York has been delayed.
You could wander through the shops at Heathrow's Terminal Three, but they're
mobbed. However, your business or first class ticket is a key to the airline
lounge, away from the noisy families, backpackers and other economy
travellers.
These two scenarios should end up in much the same way - the comfort of a
quiet lounge. However, the lounges you find yourself in may be quite
different. If your delayed flight from Heathrow is with Virgin Atlantic, you
can play with a train set or get your hair cut in the airline's comfortable
Clubhouse. But if you're in Bangkok with Qantas, you will find yourself in a
nondescript room equipped with a few sofas, newspapers and drinks . Most, if
not all, of the sofas are likely to be occupied by stretched-out, sleeping
travellers.
If you're passing through Taipei on a British Airways flight, your expensive
ticket gives you just a sofa in a room by the public canteen, while Virgin's
lounge at Boston does not have private toilets - the cossetting ends
abruptly when you queue with everyone else for the facilities by the
check-in desks.
The rule of thumb is that an airline's business class lounge is usually
pretty good at its home airport or a major base such as Heathrow, but away
from home the facilities can be less than luxurious.
Airlines are all keen to talk about the product they offer on the ground,
and equally keen to spend money on it. They point out that it is the
full-fare business and first-class traveller that keeps them aloft, not the
hordes travelling in economy, and they say that nothing is too good for
those passengers.
With some airlines, the treatment starts the moment you lock your front door
behind you. Virgin will whisk you in a chauffeur-driven limousine to
Heathrow from anywhere in the home counties, or provide you with first-class
tickets for the Gatwick Express train. Continental, the US airline, will
also provide chauffeur-driven luxury or first-class Gatwick Express tickets.
It also offers a free night at the Gatwick Hilton the night before.
It sounds good, but of course, once you're in the car or at the hotel you're
as good as on the flight - and unlikely to switch to another carrier.
Larger carriers say they cannot offer such door-to-door services, but they
arrange other perks. For example, United, the largest US carrier, offers a
discounted rate for parking at Heathrow.
The aim is to cut the amount of time the business or first class passenger
spends on the ground. This, say the airlines, is one of the main priorities
for these passengers, and to this end most have separate check-in facilities
to cut the queues. Carriers to the US encourage regular business and first
class passengers to join the Inspass programme so that progressing through
US customs and immigration procedures is reduced to simply having their palm
scanned. Both Heathrow and Gatwick airports at London have introduced a
fast-track system for some airlines' business and first-class passengers
which again bypasses the queues.
In spite of this, airlines still advise arriving at the airport up to two
hours before a flight, but most privately admit that the time margin can be
pushed quite substantially before a first or business class passenger is
denied permission to board. One carrier said it would probably get a
passenger on an aircraft even if he or she arrived with just 12 minutes
before departure - but added that this kind of tardiness was not encouraged.
Once you are airside, you can go straight past the crowds at the shops and
relax in a quiet lounge. Most are fairly straightforward: drinks and snacks
and a comfortable seat as well as access to business facilities such as
telephones, faxes and computers.
However, women travellers may feel slightly out of place in these lounges as
they tend to have overwhelmingly masculine decor such as leather seats and
wood panelling, and are still generally full of men. Often the only women to
be seen are the airline's staff. Virgin's lounge at Heathrow is stuffed full
of boys' toys: it boasts a train set, a video games arcade and a soundproof
music room with a state-of-the-art stereo, although Virgin, like other
carriers, says it does not deliberately set out to make lounges masculine.
Virgin points to its hairdressing and beauty therapy facilities where
travellers can attend to their appearance, and its conservatory - due to
open in the summer - where aircaft-spotters can watch from a plant-filled
haven.
Away from its home base, an airline may share facilities with other
carriers. BA is due to open a new lounge at Hong Kong's Kai Tak airport
which it will share with Qantas, the Australian carrier. Virgin shares
facilities with United at Hong Kong and Tokyo's Narita, while its passengers
at Gatwick and Miami use the airport's own lounge.
But what about when you arrive at the other end? The pampering ends with an
abrupt shock when you find yourself in the baggage reclaim hall not only
with everyone else on your flight but also with a couple of other
jumbo-loads all fighting to get their bags. Priority baggage reclaim is one
way to ease this shock, and most carriers make a point of getting first and
business-class luggage off the aircraft as quickly as possible and ahead of
the economy passengers' luggage.
Another way is to provide arrival facilities, and in this BA is leading the
way at its home base, Heathrow Terminal Four, with its recently opened
arrivals lounge. This has shower facilities and a valeting service so
arriving passengers can go on to the office clean and freshly pressed.
Passengers who have chosen to sleep through breakfast on the flight can eat
on the ground instead at the arrivals lounge, while those who still want
some sleep can snooze in the quiet area. For those arriving at Gatwick,
there are similar facilities at a nearby hotel, a service also offered by
Virgin.
But does all this really make a difference to the regular traveller?
According to one US businessman, 'I don't care which airline I fly. The
timing of the flights is much more important. I just want to get to my
destination at a convenient time and on time.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940420

