FT942-15936

FT  13 APR 94 / Tougher law urged for corporate manslaughter


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


Reform of the manslaughter laws to make it easier to prosecute companies for
acts of gross negligence resulting in death is called for today by the Law
Commission.
The government's law reform body says the failure in 1991 of the case
against P&O European Ferries following the Zeebrugge ferry disaster
highlights the difficulties of holding companies responsible for gross
negligence.
The prosecution failed in spite of the findings of a judicial inquiry that
there had been a failure of management and that, from top to bottom, the
company was 'infected with the disease of sloppiness'.
The commission says it has long been the law that a company can be
prosecuted for manslaughter where it can be 'identified' with the acts or
omissions of one of its controlling officers.
But in order to convict a company of manslaughter it was necessary first to
prove one of its controlling officers guilty of manslaughter.
This might be impossible in a case where death was caused precisely because
nobody in the company was thinking clearly about the safety aspects of the
company's operations, the commission says.
The P&O case failed because the prosecution was unable to show that any of
the company's senior personnel had realised the way the ship was operated
created an obvious and serious risk that it would put to sea with its bow
doors open.
There have only been three prosecutions for corporate manslaughter - in
1927, 1965 and most recently following the Zeebrugge disaster in 1991. None
has resulted in conviction.
The commission says this is a 'very unsatisfactory position' and the law
should be changed.
In a wider report on involuntary manslaughter, it recommends that a company
should be held liable for manslaughter in two sets of circumstances:
Where the company ought reasonably to have been aware of a significant risk
that its conduct could result in death or serious injury.
Where the company's conduct fell seriously below what could reasonably have
been demanded of it in preventing the risk from occurring or from resulting
in the prohibited harm.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940413

