FT941-17189

FT  06 JAN 94 / France launches independent central bank


   By JOHN RIDDING and ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


The French government yesterday completed the final stage of its creation of
an independent central bank, appointing a nine-member council which will
have autonomy in the conduct of monetary policy and the determination of
interest rates.
Mr Edmond Alphandery, the economy minister, described the establishment of
the Bank of France's monetary policy council as 'an historic step'. He said
the central bank would be as independent as the Bundesbank in the
formulation of monetary policy.
The reform, according to Mr Alphandery, should strengthen the credibility of
anti-inflationary policies and brings France into line with the requirements
of the Maastricht treaty on European Union. Under the treaty, member
countries must establish independent monetary authorities as part of the
second phase of monetary union.
The nine-member council will be headed by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, the
governor of the Bank of France and his two deputies, Mr Herve Hannoun and Mr
Denis Ferman. The six lay members, described by Mr Alphandery as 'respected
and representative' are drawn from a range of occupations from journalism to
industry. They include Mr Michel Albert, chairman of Assurances Generales de
France (AGF), the state-owned insurance group, and Mr Michel Sapin, the
former Socialist finance minister. The six lay members have nine-year terms,
while the Bank of France officials have six year terms. Economists and
bankers in Paris said they did not expect any substantial changes in the
conduct of monetary policy.
'Mr Trichet and other influential members of the council support the present
policy of gradually reducing interest rates, while maintaining the stability
of the currency,' said one currency analyst. The newly-independent central
bank does, however, have some room to ease borrowing costs. The return of
the French franc to the narrow European exchange rate bands, from which it
was forced following last summer's currency crisis, could allow a reduction
in the intervention rate, the floor for money market rates, from its current
level of 6.2 per cent.
Editorial Comment, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940106

