FT943-13345

FT  20 JUL 94 / Management: Consultants try to get IT right - Clients are
critical about the quality of the advice they receive


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Information technology consultancy - a market worth an estimated Pounds 750m
a year - has been one of the fastest growing areas for management
consultants. But a litany of embarrassments ranging from Taurus, the London
Stock Exchange's failed paperless trading system, to vast write-offs on
government computer projects, has put the quality of their work under the
spotlight.
'There is considerable scepticism, even cynicism, among many users of IT
consultancy about the contribution that IT consultants can make,' according
to a new report on them by Business Intelligence, a research company.
Consultants' understanding of technology is rarely in doubt. But the
quality, independence and value-for-money of their advice is frequently
criticised, according to a survey of 187 clients carried out for the report.
The clients' complaints about the quality of consultants' advice include
poor understanding of the brief, superficial skills, inadequate control of
the work, lack of quality standards and lack of hands-on experience.
Many clients are concerned about whether the consultants are genuinely
independent, or whether there are hidden links between the consultant and
hardware and software suppliers.
Such links are not necessarily a disadvantage: a relationship between
supplier and consultant could make the consultant more expert at
implementing a product. The main problem arises when the relationship is not
disclosed to the client. There have even been secret payments to consultants
to recommend equipment or software, the report claims.
A common criticism of consultants, who charge up to Pounds 3,000 a day, is
poor value. 'Huge fees now demanded for major projects have become an issue
even for clients with traditionally deep pockets,' says Peter Bartram, the
report's author.
Consultants are often criticised for self-interest. They have a 'pit bull
instinct for continuously regarding us as a future revenue generating
opportunity,' according to John Cross, general manager of IT at BP
Exploration.
Not all criticisms should be taken at face value, however. Consultants
believe clients are sometimes responsible for a share of the blame when
projects go wrong. When Andersen Consultancy was criticised in the press for
its handling of a Social Security computerisation project, it responded by
blaming clients whose 'reluctance to take the advice of experts under the
mistaken belief that it is offered in self-interest also compounds the
problem.'
Moreover, the extent of the dissatisfaction should not be exaggerated. When
clients were asked to rate the consultants on a scale of one (very poor) to
five (excellent) on a sample of 187 projects, the average score was 3.7. The
skills at issue were the consultants' understanding of the brief, the
relevance of a proposed solution, understanding, knowledge, experience,
communication skills, integrity, effectiveness and value for money.
PA Consulting was ranked highest among the large consultancies with a client
satisfaction rating of 4.15. The other large consultancies, in order of
their rating, were LBMS, Coopers & Lybrand, KPMG Management Consulting, Sema
Group, Touche Ross, Andersen Consulting, Price Waterhouse and International
Business Machines.
These large international firms continue to dominate the business, even if
the outlook is uncertain. Some trends are working in their favour, such as
management fashions like business process re-engineering, which involve a
combination of general business and IT consultancy and give large,
broad-based consultancies a clear edge over smaller firms. On the other
hand, smaller operations, many with excellent skills and far lower fees,
represent a growing threat.
Another potential concern for the large firms is that the IT consultancy
business may grow at a relatively modest pace. Over the next two years, 57
per cent of companies surveyed expect spending on IT consulting to stay the
same; the rest were split between expecting it to fall and expecting it to
rise.
The Business Intelligence study believes the cautious approach to
consultancy spending could reflect the pared down IT investment plans of
some organisations. 'More organisations are seeking to make their
consultancy budgets work harder for them - for example, by switching more
work to less expensive boutiques and sole practitioners and away from the
large international consultancies, it says.
The large consultancies could lose business unless they recognise the need
to improve their image and provide greater value for money, it concludes.
The Business Intelligence Guide to IT Consultants, published by Business
Intelligence, Forum House, 1 Graham Road, London SW19 3SW. Price Pounds 395.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940720

