FT944-2685

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (13): Eyes turn westward
 -China and the Pacific Rim


   By PAT KENNETT


A number of countries in Asia and the Pacific Rim are seeking to develop
motor industries, and commercial vehicles feature high on their priorities.
Many nations have turned to the west - especially Europe - to find partners
to help them develop their industrial programmes.
China, the world's largest potential market for industrial products,
including commercial vehicles, is leaning heavily on Europe to develop
transport-related industries. In 1964, Berliet signed an agreement to build
heavy trucks in China, on a progressive technology-transfer basis. That
design remains in production as the Yanan heavy six-wheel truck.
In 1984, the Austrian company, Steyr, now part of the MAN group, negotiated
an agreement to build heavy trucks and diesel engines, initially CKD, but
with increasing local content. Today, local content is just over 80 per
cent, and the agreement has so far produced almost 10,000 trucks over 16
tonnes gvw, and more than 5,000 engines for other purposes. Its success
means that further development beyond 1998 is under review in the eighth
five-year plan.
A similar agreement by Iveco in 1988 to build a modified version of the
'Daily', a vehicle family in the 3.5 to six-tonne class, is in full
production. By late 1994, 65 per cent local content was achieved.
Numerous components companies are manufacturing in China on a joint-venture,
technology-transfer basis, including ZF and Eaton, Bosch, Cummins, Lucas and
Rockwell. It is accepted that negotiations with the Chinese industry
agencies cannot be hurried. Steyr's agreement required six years of
negotiations. That does not dissuade others from trying and the Chinese
agencies remain keen to develop their heavy vehicle industry.
In October 1994, Volvo signed a letter of intent with China National Heavy
truck Corporation (CNHTC) to establish a joint venture company to
manufacture heavy trucks. So far, no dates or investment levels have been
defined, but Volvo Truck's president, Karl-Erling Trogen, has declared that
the Chinese project is 'an integral part of an aggressive expansion
programme in Asia'.
For many years Mercedes-Benz has operated a modest joint venture in Mongolia
called Norinco producing chassis and axles for incorporation into other
vehicles, but is now negotiating with CNHTC to upgrade this to full
technology-transfer heavy vehicle manufacturing. Construction of new
manufacturing facilities was completed during 1994, and a new heavy truck is
expected to roll off the production soon. A letter of intent aimed at a
joint venture with Yangzhou Motor Coach Manufacturing aims at building up to
6,000 complete units a year plus a similar number of chassis for local
body-builders to complete.
While the spotlight tends to fall on China, a great deal of activity is
evident in countries throughout the region.
One of the catalysts for this upsurge in business is the development of oil
and natural gas resources, in China, Indonesia and Malaysia in particular.
For the first time, economical operation of large fleets has become
feasible. Some estimates put China's bus requirement at 30,000 units a year
early in the next century. Rapid industrial expansion in Korea, Malaysia,
Taiwan, Vietnam and Indonesia demands high levels of technology input, and
here, too, European companies are leading the way.
Iveco established a joint venture in Vietnam to build medium-weight trucks
and buses, early this year, and that project is now nearly ready to produce
the first vehicles. . MAN is exploiting considerable expertise in the use of
CNG (compressed natural gas) to power buses, and city trucks. It is
providing substantial numbers of buses to Malaysia and Indonesia, and is
negotiating an agreement for a joint venture, to supply several countries in
the region.
Recognising the difficulties of China, Scania is developing a multi-location
strategy, and in 1993 sold more than 1,300 heavy-duty trucks in the region
with 1,600 expected this year. Scania has bases in South Korea, Hong Kong,
and Thailand, with independent importers in more than a dozen territories.
The principal products are heavy tractive units to haul containers and bulk
tanks. Bus business began in 1993, and more than 50 units were sold in
Malaysia in 1994.
Mercedes-Benz has become very active in the region, following the success of
its deal with Ssangyong Motor in South Korea, which provides engines and
technology for cars and light commercial vehicles. A new agreement suggests
50,000 units a year being produced by 1996.
In mid-1994, Mercedes' Indonesian partner, German Motor Manufacturing (GMM),
began producing a truck range in the 6 to 8-tonne gvw class, and a bus
version will follow in 1995. This range, called MB700, is intended to supply
neighbouring territories as well as Indonesia, and represents a joint
investment of USDollars 42m. Mercedes has joint or independent partners in
15 territories in the Asian region and opened a central parts store in
Singapore in 1994 to support them.
India has become an important international element in the past year,
following a decade of quietly developing its internal markets. Following the
acquisition by Iveco of a substantial holding in Ashok Leyland in 1992, and
rapid development of trucks and buses for Asian and African markets,
Mercedes-Benz has renewed its interest in India. The vehicle operation of
the huge Telco conglomerate (Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co) was once a
joint venture with Mercedes, but became wholly independent in the 1970s. Now
Mercedes has established a new agreement with Telco. While this agreement
covers passenger cars principally, it is acknowledged that Mercedes
technology will help to develop Tata commercials, too. In recent years, Tata
trucks and buses have been successful in south-east Asia and Africa, due to
rugged dependability and ease of maintenance.
Much the same can be said of Ashok Leyland which, as well as older
Leyland-based designs, recently added a simplified version of the Ford Cargo
for domestic and export markets. Between them, Ashok and Telco are building
more than 70,000 trucks and buses a year over 5 tonnes gvw, and about twice
that number in the lighter sectors. Telco is already exporting light
commercial vehicles to France and the UK, and has an agreement with Cummins
to manufacture diesel engines.
Why is there so much co-operation between Asia and Europe, rather than
Japan? The main attraction is that European companies are more willing to
engage in full technology-transfer than the Japanese commercial vehicle
makers. Another reason is that Japanese domestic restrictions on heavy
vehicles mean that European makers have more expertise to offer.
Consequently, India, Indonesia, China, Vietnam, Taiwan, South Korea and
others see themselves as genuine international vehicle producers in the
future.

The Financial Times


London Page V

941216

