FT944-5875

FT  01 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Investors take care as they venture out
again - Richard Gourlay analyses the background to the collapse of the
buy-out for National Parking


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


An air of deep despondency has descended over Prudential Venture Managers,
the venture capital company that was leading the buy-out of National Parking
Corporation until the deal collapsed last week.
The 11th hour loss of a transaction worth about Pounds 600m that would have
been the largest in the industry for three years has taken the gloss off
what Mr Paul Brooks, managing director, says has otherwise been a sparkling
year for the Prudential.
After six intense months scrutinising NPC and its main asset, National Car
Parks, the syndicate's final offer last Thursday was not high enough to
tempt Sir Donald Gosling, the founder and pivotal shareholder.
Yet the decision by Prudential and its syndicate investors not to proceed
should be seen as a victory for common sense.
Not only has the industry turned its back on a deal it thought was
overpriced, it has shown this restraint at a time when venture capitalists
are awash with money they want to invest, and when banks are once again
anxious to lend to management buy-out teams.
So far this year, management buy-out and venture capital funds have raised
more than Pounds 1.5bn in new money. Despite dire warnings a year ago that
fund raising would be difficult, a late burst of flotations early this year
perked up some otherwise ordinary performance figures.
In the event, UK investors and US institutions, who are allocating an
increasing proportion of their funds to what they call 'alternative
investments', stumped up. As a result, 1994 will be the best year for fund
raising since the last boom year of 1989.
At the same time, banks, which had almost entirely stopped providing debt to
management buy-outs, have returned in numbers. A year ago the few banks
still lending, such as Bank of Scotland and NatWest Bank, were unwilling to
take more than Pounds 50m of debt on to their own books in any transaction.
However a number of other banks are now willing to lend more than Pounds
200m on their own.
Mr Jon Moulton, a partner at Apax Partners, a venture capital group, says
the fund raising and banks' appetite to lend has produced 'a wall of money'
and stiff competition for deals.
Some venture capitalists fear the prices of deals will be bid up by hungry
investors and bankers. They fear a repeat of the late 1980s when the
industry backed highly leveraged buy-outs such as that of Magnet, the
kitchens company, and Isosceles, the supermarket group, based on optimistic
assumptions about the businesses' growth potential and ability to generate
cash.
'It is only a matter of time before venture capitalists find a way to
overpay again,' says Mr Moulton. 'There is no doubt that the market will be
very aggressive in the next 18 months.'
Against this background, the refusal of the Prudential syndicate to
'overpay', as they saw it, has led to a degree of self-congratulation. The
'industry is maturing and learning self-restraint', one intermediary said.
There is some justification for this view. At no time was the quality of the
NPC business in question. Its main asset, National Car Parks, has a rock
solid cash flow and an excellent quality of earnings, according to venture
capitalists close to the negotiation.
Yet the very stability of the business meant the Prudential could not pay
any more. While the NCP business was solid, analysts saw it as having
limited growth potential. Yet the Pounds 650m price the founders are
understood to have been asking implied a historic price earnings ratio of
nearly 20.
This would have been a significant premium to the current stock market and
much higher than venture capitalists are usually prepared to pay even for
businesses that are growing quickly.
The Prudential syndicate is understood to have been prepared to pay Pounds
600m including a performance related deferred payment, a sum which the
Prudential said it had 'every confidence' it could raise.
But this implied a valuation of nearly 17 times historic earnings. The
syndicate may have resisted loading the transaction with debt, but it is
still questionable whether this was cautious pricing.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

941201

