FT943-12943

FT  22 JUL 94 / Tap water given seal of approval


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


Tap water in England and Wales is good and getting even better, according to
the government inspector.
Mr Michael Rouse, who heads the Drinking Water Inspectorate, said 3.5m
quality tests last year found sub-standard water in only 1.1 per cent of
cases. Each of these was later investigated but none was found to pose a
danger to health.
Mr Rouse criticised the media for putting about 'ill-founded scare stories'
on water pollution. This resulted in people who could ill-afford it buying
expensive bottled water, the quality of which was not monitored as closely
as tap water, he said.
Mr Robert Atkins, the environment minister, has sent a copy of the report to
Mr Ioannis Paleokrassas, the European Union environment commissioner, in
Brussels. Mr Atkins said yesterday that the UK was the only EU member state
which produced an independently audited report on drinking water quality. He
urged Mr Paleokrassas to encourage other member states to do the same.
Mr Rouse's report comes as water companies are defending themselves against
criticism of fast-rising charges. Next week Ofwat, the water industry's
economic regulator, is due to announce new 10-year price controls which are
expected to impose tougher limits on future increases.
The water companies were quick to seize on yesterday's report as evidence
that their investment in quality was paying off.
Ms Janet Langdon, director of the Water Services Association, said: 'The
quality of water is at an all-time high. At 26p per day for the average
household the cost of top-quality water is excellent value for money.'
She said, however, that Ofwat could not impose price controls which
prevented the water companies meeting their obligations to provide
high-quality water.
The inspectorate's 250-page report, edited highlights of which are to be
distributed in a free pamphlet, showed that water quality was better on 16
out of 17 counts.
The one exception was polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) which is
deposited in water by the tar used until 1970 to protect the inside of metal
water mains. Mr Rouse said that the water companies had programmes in place
to deal with this.
Lead continued to be a problem, although it was small and resulted mostly
from lead piping in people's homes, for which the water companies were not
responsible.
Another problem area, pesticides, also improved with fewer zones failing to
meet the standards.
Enforcement action was taken against water companies over breaches of
regulations in 213 cases but there were no prosecutions. The decision
whether to take a case to court rests not with the inspectorate but with the
environment secretary.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940722

