FT943-13317

FT  20 JUL 94 / Giant step for mankind?: On the 25th anniversary of the moon
landing, Vanessa Houlder asks whether it was all worth it


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Twenty-five years ago, one of the greatest human adventures of the 20th
century reached its climax. The Apollo 11 moon landing was a milestone in
history, a feat of technological brilliance which promised to usher in a
golden age of discovery and exploration.
Yet now that much of the glamour of space exploration has faded, mention of
the Apollo programme often prompts the question: 'what was it for?' Did the
astronauts' landing in an airless, barren wilderness really advance the
human race? How could any endeavour, however heroic, justify a total cost of
some Dollars 24bn?
In this age of financial realism, questions about the justification of the
space programme are often answered in terms of its practical benefits.
Without space exploration, 'the quality of life in the US today would be
inconceivable', according to a recent US newspaper advertisement by
Lockheed, the missiles and space company. 'Countless technologies - things
we take for granted today, from automobile design to sewage treatment - owe
their origins to space,' it says.
The technical innovations that stemmed from the Apollo programme pushed
forward the state of electronics, materials science, rocketry and computer
software. The demands of the space venture to reduce the weight of equipment
provided the catalyst for the development of the transistor and synthetic
substances such as Kevlar and Fiberite, which are used for strong
lightweight materials.
Microwave ovens and weather forecasting satellites are also examples of
sophisticated gadgetry which have emerged as a result of equipment developed
for the space programme. The coating designed to reduce aerodynamic drag on
the return capsule has been used on the bottom of racing yachts. Estee
Lauder uses the digital image analyser software designed to map the depth of
the moon's craters to measure skin wrinkles.
But the potential value of such technological spin-offs played little part
in persuading President John Kennedy to launch the Apollo mission,
originally characterised as 'non-military, non-commercial (and)
non-scientific' by his officials. The driving force behind Kennedy's
decision was the desire to boost national pride and to compete with Russia's
space programme in the face of cold war tensions.
'The primary reason to go the moon was the huge psychological benefit, in
terms of national self-confidence,' says Lewis Branscomb of Harvard
University, who presided over a committee that reported on the scientific,
economic and psychological benefits of the Apollo programme in 1967.
'The main reason was international political competition,' says John
Logsdon, a historian at George Washington University. 'Space was used as an
arena for symbolic competition between communism and capitalism.'
But once the initial awe at the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration's achievement wore off, the agency sought to sustain
political support through stressing the economic spin-offs of the space
launches.
For instance, a study in 1975 by Chase Econometrics, a research group, found
that a Dollars 1m R&D expenditure each year for 10 years by Nasa would
produce a 14-fold return for the wider economy.
Mathematica, another US research group, also found a justification for
Nasa's R&D spending (in 1966, its peak year, the agency's spending accounted
for 13 per cent of total US R&D expenditure). It examined the agency's
influence on speeding up the development of a number of technologies,
including integrated circuits and a computer programme for analysing large
structures.
However, these findings have been criticised. Henry Hertzfeld, senior
research associate at the Space Policy Institute in Washington, argues that
the economic models 'were not sufficiently robust' to ensure the accuracy of
the studies.
Moreover, some observers doubt whether it is possible to isolate the
influence of Nasa's R&D spending. John Logsdon, for example, questions
whether you can 'disentangle what superficially can be attributed to Apollo
while there was a military developing advanced weaponry at the same time'.
Ultimately, attempts to provide a cost-benefit analysis for space
exploration founder on the complexity of quantifying the prestige, economic
benefits and scientific advances arising from the Apollo missions.
Instead, the outcome of the Apollo programme tends to be seen in a more
emotional light. For many people, its most valuable legacy was the
perspective on the earth provided by photographs from the moon: the image of
a blue, fragile globe against an infinite black backdrop of space has
assumed a symbolic importance.
For others, the achievement of setting foot on the moon is viewed in
spiritual terms, as a fulfilment of mankind's fundamental urge to seek new
frontiers.
Set against these grand, abstract ideals, attempts to apply economic
analysis to the space programme risk being treated with scorn. 'The
programme's not about little technical gains, developing Teflon and Velcro,'
says Buzz Aldrin, one of the astronauts on Apollo 11. 'That's not why we
went to the moon.'

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940720

