FT942-14375

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (7): China is fastest growing market -
The success story of Asia's airlines


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


Asia's airlines are the envy of the rest of the world - and the jealousy is
justified. Customers might think the cause of that emotion is the carriers'
unparalleled reputation for service. That may be one partial reason, but the
main explanation is their commercial performance in the past and their
prospects for the future, given the likelihood of continued rapid growth of
their highly profitable short-haul routes.
That does not mean the region is without its problems, but they are trivial
compared with those confronting European and US carriers.
Over the last four years, while the rest of the aviation industry has been
struggling with overcapacity, weak yields, and patchy economic growth,
airlines based in the south-east Asia have enjoyed phenomenal passenger
volume growth in the regional market. This has averaged between 10 and 12
per cent since 1989. Last year, growth in south-east Asia was 9 per cent,
outpaced only by the former eastern bloc in Europe which averaged 10 per
cent, but from a much lower base.
Not surprisingly, four out of five of the most profitable carriers in 1992
were from south-east Asia. According to Air Transport World, the top five
were SIA, Cathay Pacific, British Airways, Thai International and China
Airlines.
Admittedly, in recent months some airlines, such as the Thai and Malaysian
flag carriers, have suffered declines in earnings because of intense
competition on long-haul routes and rising costs. The Japanese carriers,
Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways have also announced restructuring
plans.
But in spite of such problems, prospects remain bright. 'It's widely known
that the Asian market is the most lucrative and attractive in the world. And
it will be the fastest growing into the next century,' says Mr Koji
Yamashita, vice president, international sales and marketing at ANA.
'We're assuming the market will average growth at about 8 per cent between
now and the year 2010,' says Mr David Turnbull, deputy managing director at
Cathay Pacific. 'That's very much greater than the US or Europe, which are
expected to grow by an average of 4 to 5.5 per cent a year.'
The cornerstone of the Asian carriers' profitability is their short-haul
routes. 'Compared with the US and Europe, the fare structure is very stable,
making yields pretty healthy,' says Mr Yamashita.
Unlike Europe, where most money during the 1980s was made from business
class passengers, in the Asian market it is the back section or tourist
class which is the most profitable part of the jet, according to Mr
Turnbull.
Cathay Pacific is dropping first class on its short-haul routes because of
its high cost and questionable return, he says. 'Our primary revenue comes
from economy class in the Asia-Pacific region and that is our main focus,'
he adds.
Admittedly, not all Asian airlines find their short-haul routes so
profitable. The Japanese carriers, plagued by the longest and deepest
recession since the second world war as well as an extraordinarily high cost
base, have been suffering badly in recent years. JAL, for example, is
understood not to make any money on its Asian short-haul routes except those
to China.
The Japanese carriers' yields on Asian regional routes are clearly
inadequate. This is partly because Japanese customers have been using the
carriers' plight to snap up discount fares. At JAL, the yield management
system is being upgraded following a catastrophe last year when seats were
still available at the beginning of Golden Week, normally its most
profitable period.
JAL hopes the slump may be ending. In February, the airline registered a 20
per cent increase in passenger traffic compared with an admittedly subdued
February last year.
Some Asian regional routes are growing faster than others. 'The Philippines
and Indonesia are doing well, and Korea and Taiwan are very buoyant. We're
very bullish,' says Mr Turnbull at Cathay Pacific. Vietnam is an obvious new
destination for both business and tourism, he adds.
But for the rest of the century the most alluring market is China. Passenger
volumes have boomed over the last four years, making China the fastest
growing single market in the world, according to Mr Turnbull.
The rapid expansion of the Chinese market has been matched by profits growth
on routes to that country. 'This is a tightly regulated market,' says Mr
Yamashita at ANA. 'The Chinese still control frequencies and fares
structures and that helps keep yields high.' He expresses concern about US
carriers, however. United Airlines has just started a daily service from
Tokyo's Narita Airport to Shanghai using its fifth freedom rights.
Indeed, one of the most important irritants in this market, according to
Asian airlines, is the behaviour of US carriers. 'What is of concern to us
and other regional carriers is the way US groups are making use of outdated
bilateral agreements,' says JAL. 'They're spoiling the market by dumping
seats in Asia.'
Another irritant is the birth of secondary Asian carriers. South Korea,
Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Hong Kong all have fledgling secondary
airlines that could introduce greater competition and undermine margins in
the region.
However, Mr Turnbull at Cathay Pacific is dismissive of this threat. He
points out that many countries would have to renegotiate bilateral
agreements if they were to allow secondary carriers to land, and that the
chronic shortage of landing slots at Asian airports would hold back
secondary carriers for some time anyway.
This drought of landing slots is the main barrier to the future growth of
the region's airline industry. 'Tokyo's Narita Airport is already full, as
is Hong Kong's,' says Mr Turnbull. 'Tremendous investment will be required
in the region. Hong Kong's new airport, Chek Lap Kok, is due to be completed
in mid-1997 and is the single largest civil engineering project in the
world,' he adds.
A battle is raging between Hong Kong, Shanghai, Taiwan and Seoul to become
the regional hub of north-east Asia. Mr Yamashita discounts the chances of
the new Kansai airport near Osaka which is due to open this autumn. It has
only one runway, and although there are plans for another two the cost - an
estimated Dollars 15bn - is likely to be prohibitive.
The winner would need a minimum of two and probably three runways to avoid
slot restrictions, according to Mr Yamashita. 'There will be only one
dominant hub in the region. The others will complement it,' he says.
One way around the infrastructure problems is to use more local airports.
This has been an option adopted by the Korean carriers which fly to 17
cities in Japan. Passenger volumes and yields on these routes have been
high, especially since the two countries dropped visa requirements. JAL says
the Koreans' move to local airports has slowed the growth of its traffic
from Tokyo to Seoul.
Nevertheless, most Asian carriers plan to expand their routes network in the
region. ANA's main priority is to target Asian cities, while Cathay Pacific
expects most of its growth to take place in the Asia-Pacific region.
For its part, SIA plans to increase its capacity by about 8 per cent a year
until the end of the decade, says Mr Michael Tan, deputy commercial managing
director. The airline intends to increase capacity to Europe by only 5 per
cent a year, but some Asian routes could be boosted by up to 15 per cent.
The carrier has pinpointed India and China as particular targets. 'anyone
who is situated in Asia at this moment would be extremely foolish not to
recognise the opportunities,' Mr Tan says.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940420

