FT944-2564

FT  16 DEC 94 / Technology: The perfect pair of jeans


   By VICTORIA GRIFFITH


The search for the perfect-fitting pair of jeans can turn into a lifetime
crusade for some women, but a new software program is aiming to change that.
A Boston-based company called Custom Clothing Technology has developed a way
of making custom-fitting jeans by computer. The technology is being used in
US stores this month to measure customers for Levi Strauss jeans.
Sales assistants measure women's waist, hips, rise - the distance from the
front waistband, between the legs and up to the back waistband - and inside
leg. The measurements are entered into a computer which identifies a
prototype jean providing the closest match. Each participating store will be
stocked with hundreds of prototypes.
The customer tries on the prototype and after final adjustments the sales
person sends the information by modem to the company's Tennessee factory. A
computerised cutter puts out the pieces, which are then sewn together. Three
weeks later, the customer can pick up the jeans at the store, or have them
mailed. The jeans cost about Dollars 10 (Pounds 6) above the normal price
and will initially be available only at four stores.
But, by the end of January, Levi Strauss plans to offer the product in seven
other stores. Because sales people have to be trained in how to use the
program, however, it may take some time before the product is widely
available.
Sung Park, an ex-IBM software programmer and president of Custom Clothing
Technology, says he developed the program after spending time in Hong Kong,
where he could get a suit tailored in a day.
'I thought, wouldn't it be great if this were available to the mass market
in the US?,' says Park. 'And then I started wondering what the best
applications would be.' Park says he asked his female flatmates which piece
of clothing it was most difficult to find a good fit in, and the answer was
unanimous: jeans.
Park has an exclusive contract with Levi Strauss for tailored jeans, but he
is talking to other companies about custom-made bathing suits and men's
suits.
Levi Strauss says it will expand the product to men's jeans and other styles
for women if the tailoring proves popular.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

941216

