FT941-5614

FT  05 MAR 94 / Brown forces issue on to agenda


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, struck a populist chord - and a blow for
his prime ministerial aspirations - when he attacked excessive boardroom
salaries this week.
But the real credit for forcing the issue on to the political agenda belongs
to Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, who raised it last autumn in his
shadow budget.
Mr Brown has concentrated his fire on the substantial increases in executive
salaries that have occurred in most of the privatised water and electricity
companies.
He has also pointed out that many former cabinet ministers, including those
involved in the privatisation process, have been beneficiaries.
However, Mr Brown has reserved his most pungent criticism for the
discretionary share option scheme, launched in 1984, which many companies
use to give executives tax-efficient rewards.
Mr Brown says share options worth more than Pounds 12bn have been issued to
a small number of highly-paid executives at a cost to the exchequer of about
Pounds 1bn over the next five years.
That would provide about Pounds 200m a year if the scheme was abolished  - a
handy contribution to the Pounds 10bn a year that Labour says can be raised
by closing tax loopholes.
Labour's claims have been dismissed as fanciful by the government, which
says that most of Labour's so-called tax loopholes are inventions.
Ministers also argue that Labour is wrong to suggest that all the
beneficiaries of the scheme are highly paid.
The Inland Revenue says that more than 585,000 employees were granted
options under the scheme between 1984 and 1992, with an average value of
just under Pounds 19,000.
The scheme is popular with executives because the options are free of income
tax, provided they are exercised between three and 10 years after they are
issued.
It allows for grants of options worth up to Pounds 100,000, or four times
the recipient's salary, and the price can be as low as 85 per cent of the
market value. The only tax payable is capital gains tax when the shares are
sold.
According to the Revenue, the tax receipts forgone amount to between Pounds
30m and Pounds 55m a year; the cost was Pounds 45m in 1991-92, the latest
year for which figures are available.
The figures represent the difference between the income tax revenue which
would have been payable if the scheme did not exist, and the amount of CGT
actually paid.
The CGT liability is lower than the notional income tax liability because no
CGT is payable on the first Pounds 5,800 of taxable gains.
Labour increases the total of revenue forgone by including the benefits to
spouses of option holders, to whom options can be transferred.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940305

