FT944-2669

FT  16 DEC 94 / Delegates with a history of violence


   By STEWART DALBY


The 10 loyalists who met senior British government officials yesterday were
in two five-man delegations - one from the Progressive Unionist party and
one from the Ulster Democratic party.
The Progressive Unionists have insights into the Ulster Volunteer Force and
the Ulster Democratic party is familiar with the thinking of the Ulster
Defence Association, the other main unionist paramilitary group.
The PUP and UDP have only two elected councillors between them and won only
0.5 per cent of the vote in the last local elections. Two councillors from
the Rev Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist party have recently said they will
defect to the UDP.
By contrast Sinn Fe'in, the political wing of the IRA won 10 per cent of the
vote in the last elections and has almost 50 representatives on the
province's 26 district councils.
Five of the 10 loyalists at the talks in Stormont, the former parliament
outside Belfast, have served prison sentences for terrorist crimes. A sixth
was interned in the early 1970s.
The PUP's Mr David Ervine, who once served a prison sentence for possession
of explosives, has been the most visible loyalist leader since the Loyalist
United Military Command announced a ceasefire on October 13.
He has pioneered the idea that the loyalists must talk to Sinn Fein at some
stage and has tried to distance the PUP from the constitutional unionist
parties.
There was surprise that he did not lead the PUP delegation yesterday. This
task fell to Mr Billy Hutchinson, who served 15 years of a life sentence for
the murder of two Roman Catholics in Belfast's Falls Road in 1974. Having
renounced violence, he is now a community worker in the Shankill Road.
The other PUP delegates were Mr William Smith, Mr Jackie Mahood and Mr
Lyndsay Robb. Mr Smith, a 40-year-old former union representative at the
Harland and Wolff shipyard, was jailed for 10 years in 1972 for the
attempted murder of a Catholic in Belfast. He is now a community activist in
the Shankill area.
Mr Mahood served a prison sentence in the 1970s for attempted murder. Mr
Robb is the only member not have served a prison sentence.
The UDP delegation was led by Mr Gary McMichael, the only member of the
loyalist talks team who is an elected representative. The 25-year-old
councillor from Lisburn is the son of Mr John McMichael, a UDA leader who
was murdered by the IRA at Christmas 1987.
Mr John White was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of a
nationalist senator at Stormont in 1973. He is prisons spokesman for the
UDP.
Mr Tommy Kirkham, a former Democratic Unionist party councillor for
Newtonabbey, recently switched to the UDP because of his dissatisfaction
with the DUP leadership.
Little is known of the other two UDP delegates. Mr David Adams, a
42-year-old father of three from Lisburn, has twice stood in council
elections. Mr Joe English was interned in the early 1970s and was part of a
six-man delegation which visited the US in October on behalf of the
loyalists.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941216

