FT941-4047

FT  12 MAR 94 / Fashion (The Global Wardrobe - At a Wedding): The bride
wears white but the guests are a mess - In the last of our series on dress
codes around the world, FT writers attend a wedding / Frankfurt


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


Ken and Barbie time comes round again sooner than you can say 'chiffon'. The
Frankfurt wedding season, heavily concentrated as elsewhere in the
springtime, provides opportunities for all involved to dress up in a fashion
which reflects the diverse influences at play in an essentially central
European city where almost 30 per cent of the population is foreign.
Even among the natives, the bride and groom will almost inevitably be clad
in extravagantly 'romantic' styles, some of which appear better suited to a
variety show stage than to a church aisle. The bridal basics are much as
elsewhere: white frock and veil.
But the devilry is in the detail. Expense is no object, and, in many cases,
nor is 'good taste'. The simplest dress is often laden with supernumerary
decorations. Any portion of the bodice or skirt - hipline, topside, backside
 -which can support a silken swag or a bundle of artificial pearls or
flowers is decorated accordingly.
The complete Barbie look may be achieved during a lengthy colouring and
contouring session in one of the city's hundreds of beauty parlours.
The groom, who elsewhere might be expected to shrink into a suit, the better
to enhance his partner's appearance, is more likely to dress to compete. A
shiny suit with a cut-off double-breasted jacket, winged collar, coloured
bow tie and black patent shoes would be extravagant enough.
But your man-about-to-wed will rarely stop there. As an extension of his
persona, his car will also come in for the treatment. My local florist has a
nice little seasonal earner in dressing up soft-tops. The car will emerge
with the cockpit completely ringed with appropriate blooms, and an
arrangement better suited to a dinner table strapped across the bonnet.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940312

