FT941-3317

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (14):
Watchword for the future - Global mobile communications / Paul Quigley
charts the rapid progress towards a mobile millenium in communications


   By PAUL QUIGLEY


'Mind the gap]' warns a familiar, faceless voice to travellers on the London
Underground. This could well be the watchword for the future of global
mobile communications as a radical revolution takes place.
The 'gap' in this case is 'globalisation and personalisation' - the main
themes of the wireless age.
Few of us could have predicted the all-pervasive influence which personal
computers would come to have in business and personal life over the last
decade. Yet we are seeing the integration of voice, data, image, and
communications in a natural evolution towards the multimedia workstation.
Similarly, emerging technologies in mobile communications have catapulted
wireless, mobile and personal communications into one of the fastest growing
markets in the world. The range of technologies becoming available is
immense. Many people know about and use cellular telephones and radiopagers.
Others are aware of mobile data and digital cordless technologies. Plans are
well under way for future wireless and mobile communications systems which
will obfuscate the demarcation lines between wireless and fixed
telecommunications.
First generation cellular technologies - those in use today - are
predominantly analogue systems such as AMPS (American Mobile Phone System),
TACS (Total Access Communication System) and NMT (Nordic Mobile Telephone)
systems.
Radiopaging has been dominated by the POCSAG (Post Office Code Standards
Advisory Group) system. Second generation mobile technologies are now
becoming commercially available, introducing digital architectures to mobile
communications. These include GSM, CT2, DECT, CDMA and the lesser-known
IS-54 and PDC.
The speed of developments in the mobile industry accelerates apace. For
example, it took cellular phone manufacturers eight hours to make a cellular
phone in 1988; 30 minutes in 1992. Today it takes a mere 12 minutes - and
this is a telephone containing computer capacity of between 30m and 40m
instructions per second, equivalent to the power of mainframes of only a few
years ago.
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications) is in the limelight around the
world. Developed by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(ETSI), the technical standards body, GSM is the first harmonised European
standard to catch the imagination and the investment of users, operators,
and manufacturers alike.
GSM was developed as a pan-European digital cellular radio network
architecture; it has evolved over more than 10 years into the standard we
see today. Set to grow at an unprecedented rate over the next five years,
GSM is already far more than merely a European standard. Already it has been
adopted as the preferred choice of international mobile network operators in
countries as diverse as Australia, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, Hong
Kong, China, India, Pakistan, and the Gulf states.
A report entitled 'GSM - Going Global', by consultancy Nexus Market
Analysis, forecasts that there will be 40m GSM users by the year 2002 in
Europe alone. Driven by falling handset prices, competitive tariffs and
wider network coverage, the market is growing at a phenomenal rate. The
international roaming capability of GSM, coupled with the phase two
supplementary service enhancements such as data communications and fax, is
making GSM a serious contender as the benchmark for future global mobile
systems.
DCS1800, a digital cellular standard based on the GSM specification for
lower power handsets, points to the future in the wireless market. Operating
in the 1.8 GHz band width, DCS1800 is intended for use as a mass market
personal communications network, or PCN.
With a design philosophy quite distinct from its forbears, the key to the
PCN market will be simplicity and ease of use. The target market for the
'personal communicator' is you and me.
In the UK there are two licensed PCN operators. Germany has licensed one
DCS1800 operator; so has Thailand. France is in the process of licensing a
DCS1800 operator and others are sure to follow. There is growing speculation
that US telecom regulators will grant Personal Communications Services (PCS)
licences to operators touting DCS at 1900 MHz.
Cordless technologies such as CT2 (second generation digital cordless
telephony) and DECT (Digital European Cordless Telecoms) are also reviving
the industry. CT2 has recently experienced mixed fortunes around the world.
The failure of CT2 as a public telepoint technology in the UK made many
people think it was a dead-duck digital technology. However, mass uptake of
CT2 in Hong Kong, France and elsewhere has forced a re-evaluation of its
future. (The advent of the DECT standard may have somewhat dampened this, as
DECT has found converts in the cordless PABX arena, the wireless local area
network (WLAN) market and even in the wireless local loop market.)
In radiopaging, developments in memory capacity, functionality and coverage
are vying to re-establish this elder statesman of mobile communications as a
flexible and feature-rich medium.
'Wireless Messaging' is the term used by many people in the industry for
radiopaging. ERMES (European Radio Messaging), the ETSI standard for digital
paging, is taking longer than expected to launch. Third generation systems
are already on the drawing board, with concepts such as 'Future Public Land
Mobile Telecommunications System' (FPLMTS), 'Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System' (UMTS) and 'Universal Personal
Telecommunications' (UPT) already well under development.
The backbone of these third generation systems will be Intelligent Networks
(Ins) which will enable users to rely on the intelligence in the digital
network to handle the mechanics and logistics of routeing, storing and
forwarding of data.
Competition in Europe and across the world has driven the market -
competition not only in handsets and equipment manufacture, but especially
between network operators. At a recent IBC conference on Pan-European
Digital Cellular Radio in Athens, GSM was seen as the de facto global
standard.
Yet, despite GSM's runaway international success, there is a continuing
debate within the industry over the future air interface of digital cellular
systems. GSM, DCS1800, DECT, and others use TDMA (Time Division Multiple
Access), which breaks up speech channels into multiple time slots. Over the
last few years the industry has been rocked by an alternative digital air
interface: CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access), a spread-spectrum
technology making better use of available frequencies.
As we hurtle headlong towards a new mobile millennium, a blurring of the
edges in place-to-place and person-to-person communications will give rise
to wholesale change. We're going global in a wireless world. Mind the gap]
Stand clear of the doors, please]

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940316

