FT943-12845

FT  22 JUL 94 / Pensions unease may have cost Prudential sales


   By ALISON SMITH


UK sales of premium life and pensions policies by Prudential Corporation,
the UK's largest life insurer, fell by almost one-fifth in the first six
months of this year compared with the same period of 1993.
This contrasted with some sharp increases in sales in Australia and other,
much smaller, Asia Pacific operations, and a recently improving position for
Jackson National Life, the group's US subsidiary.
Prudential's first-half new business figures, published yesterday, showed a
fall of 20 per cent in UK sales of single premium life and pension products
to Pounds 1.12bn and a drop in annual premium sales of life and pensions
products of 18 per cent to Pounds 126m.
Sales of personal pensions to people transferring out of an occupational
scheme fell by one-quarter, from Pounds 165m in the first half of 1993 to
Pounds 123m in the first six months of this year.
Caution on the part of both customers and life companies in the pensions
transfer business, following widespread concern about standards of selling,
was reflected in figures released by the Association of British Insurers.
These showed that sales of single premium personal pensions dropped sharply
across the industry in the first quarter of the year.
But there was better news in the UK investment business, with sales of
regular premium unit trusts and Pep business rising to Pounds 64m from
Pounds 12m - more than offsetting the drop in sales of single premium
products to Pounds 99m from Pounds 110m.
'In contrast to the first half of 1993, 1994 has - so far - proved to be a
difficult time for the UK insurance market,' Mr Mick Newmarch, group chief
executive, said. 'However, the market for investment products is currently
proving to be much more buoyant.'
This is the first time Prudential has reported sales of investment products
along with sales of life and pension policies.
Mr Newmarch said that Prudential had begun updating and enhancing its range
of products to position it for the introduction of the new rules for
disclosing information to customers.
Single contribution sales at Jackson National Life were, at Dollars 844m
(Pounds 544.5m), down on the first half of 1993, but higher than the second
half of last year.
Impending tax changes in Australia helped Prudential almost to double single
premium insurance sales to ADollars 886m (Pounds 421.9m), though annual
premium product sales were flat at ADollars 32m.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940722

