FT944-14607

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (20): Jugglers' turn
for the limelight - Charges / The percentages may sound innocuous, but they
mount up over time


   By BARBARA ELLIS


Unit trusts are the latest investments to have their charges brought under
the glare of regulatory disclosure. A consultative paper issued by the
Personal Investment Authority (PIA) in late September, calling for responses
by October 26, recommended adapting the method used by mutual funds in the
US.
This provides prospective investors with two columns of figures. Both
represent accumulated expenses and charges over several periods of years.
But one assumes that the investment is cashed in at the end of each
timespan, while the other assumes that it remains in place. The US mutual
funds use a notional investment with a standard growth rate of 5 per cent as
a basis for projecting future expenses.
The PIA proposal is that Britain's unit trusts should produce similar
two-column illustrations, showing the effect of charges at the end of years
1, 3, 5 and 10, but using a growth rate of 7.5 per cent - or 9 per cent in
the case of tax-free Pep unit trusts. Funds levying exit charges would have
to supply additional figures for each of the first five years, or fewer if
the charges were phased out before that point.
The charges and expenses are to be those actually applied by the unit trust
concerned, rather than an industry average or standard figure.
Finalised rules on disclosure of commission, as well as on charges and
expenses, are expected to come into force on January 1, 1995. But that is
assuming there is none of the recalcitrance among unit-trust management
groups plainly hinted at by Julian Tregoning, chairman of the trade body,
the Association of Unit Trusts and Investment Funds (Autif).
'The disclosure of charges on unit trusts is already more explicit than any
other financial services product,' wrote Tregoning, in Autif's September
newsletter. 'It would be madness for us to throw away the excellent
reputation we have achieved in the public's mind by appearing to be
reluctant over the last few changes that will be needed to bring
comparability with other products.' He urged unit trusts to seek to resolve
any technical difficulties over disclosure 'openly, quickly and without
reluctance'.
But a certain amount of last-minute jibbing is probably inevitable, given
the way juggling with charges has lately become so central to unit-trust
marketing.
As currently declared to investors, typical unit-trust charges of 6 per cent
initially and 1.25 per cent annually may seem low, especially when compared
with the charges on life assurance policies. But over 20 years, those
typical unit-trust charges total 31 percentage points - more than double the
13.25 percentage-point 20-year limit in force before deregulation in 1979.
Investors who have been offered cuts in initial charges on Pep unit trusts
in the last few years have tended to face increased annual charges, which
leave the long-term total almost unchanged but allow the managers to afford
yearly renewal commission now practically insisted on by intermediaries.
Unlike renewal commission on endowment policies - normally a set pound
amount per year - renewal commission on unit trusts is an innocuous-sounding
0.5 per cent annually. But what makes it so popular with intermediaries is
the fact that it is based on the value of the fund at the time of renewal.
Present regulations do not allow differential pricing - different charging
structures for trusts sold direct and those sold through intermediaries. But
in a way, this does happen when management groups launch a trust or a Pep
aiming mainly for sales via intermediaries but attracting direct business at
the same time. The direct investor paying the same price and charges as the
intermediary client is, in fact, paying more in order to cover the cost of a
non-existent adviser.
The M&G Group has taken Pounds 400m into its Managed Income Fund Pep, about
60 per cent through intermediaries, since February when it removed the
initial charge on the plan and introduced a sliding scale of exit fees for
investors cashing in during the first five years.
The Managed Income Fund is a fund-of-funds investing in M&G unit trusts, and
Pep investors pay an annual charge of 1.5 per cent. But the annual charge on
the underlying unit trusts is as low as 0.75 per cent (M&G Dividend), and
investors can put any of these trusts into a Pep independently.
Assuming no growth in the investment, it will take just over six years for
an investor who pays 5 per cent initially and 0.75 per cent annually to pull
ahead of another with the same investment who pays no initial charge but an
annual 1.5 per cent.
Geoffrey Mushens, of M&G, locates the break-even point for investors
somewhere between eight and nine years into the life of an investment,
noting that most of the M&G unit trusts carry a 1 per cent annual charge.
His calculation is also based on no-growth.
'Investors don't like to say they are going to be in for nine years, though
a large number do stay that long,' he said. On average, M&G investors hold
units for seven years. And although Peps have only been on the market for
seven years, Mushens extrapolates trends to estimate that M&G Pep-holders
will stay for between 10 and 11 years. Over that length of time, he says,
there is virtually no difference between a Pep with no front-end load and a
1.5 per cent annual charge and a plan charging 5 per cent to start and 1 per
cent a year.
Another use of charges in marketing became possible only in May, when the
Securities and Investments Board decided to allow some unit trusts to offset
all or part of their annual management charge against capital instead of
income. This gave managers a valuable opportunity to add up to 1.5
percentage points to the quoted yield of an income fund at a time of low
interest rates.
So far, both Mercury and Save & Prosper have launched new income unit trusts
using the altered charging basis, and Schroder plans to convert an existing
trust next February. But a number of groups have reacted more cautiously,
weighing possible tax and other disadvantages.
Framlington managing director Anne McMeehan forecast that competitive
pressures would push newly-launching funds to charge fees against capital,
but thought groups like hers might be slow to alter existing funds. 'We have
to make sure we inform investors and don't upset them,' she explained.
Lewis McNaught, of Gartmore, said his firm would not make any immediate
move: 'We are not sure yet whether the full impact on capital performance is
understood by investors. Total return is such an important priority.'

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941021

