FT941-4227

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (14): Demand runs further ahead
of supply - A new constitution adopted last December enshrines inalienable
private property rights for the first time in post-Soviet history / Russia


   By LEYLA BOULTON


As Russia has made strides to strengthen fledgling property rights over the
past year, demand has outstripped the supply of property in Moscow, the
centre of the country's real estate market, by more than ever before.
A new constitution adopted in a referendum last December after President
Boris Yeltsin crushed a parliamentary uprising enshrines inalienable private
property rights for the first time in post-Soviet history. A presidential
decree dating from October - which has yet to be submitted to a parliament
which may reject it - allows for the unhindered sale and purchase of land
except by foreigners, who can only do so in partnership with Russian
companies.
Under the old constitution, the re-sale of land was subject to a 10-15 year
moratorium. As privatisation has gathered pace, there have also been more
opportunities to buy property from owners who have acquired clear title to
it.
But because it is largely due to a shortage of quality space, the increase
in unsatisfied demand has been in spite of, rather than because of, the
progress with legislation.
'There is more order in the system than less. That still does not mean it is
an ordered system, but it means we are vaguely heading in the right
direction,' says Mr Adrian Moore, in charge of property deals at the Moscow
office of solicitors Norton Rose.
Mr Moore says that some of the new property business comes from foreign
companies such as his own which began leasing small amounts of space as 'an
experiment' and then decided to take larger premises as their business
expanded in Moscow.
A lot of the development is generated by new Russian companies and banks
which are more at ease with the system than foreigners. A popular source of
enrichment for underpaid officials has been the bribes paid by businessmen
wishing to acquire property at exceptionally low prices and make a killing
from its subsequent development.
In theory, foreign companies and individuals can own buildings outright.
They can also lease land but not own it except when it is attached to a
privatised enterprise.
But while picking one's way through the labyrinthine Russian bureaucracy in
order to obtain 'good title' is possible and creates good business for
lawyers, western real estate developers say life remains tough.
Apart from the red tape and the background fears that political instability
could one day lead to expropriation, it remains extremely difficult for
developers to raise finance on the strength of Russian property projects.
Mr Moore says the main obstacle is the absence of a system for registering a
lender's legal charge, or his right to realise his security. 'The key thing
any lender is looking for is to register the fact they made the loan and can
take valid security over something like the development'.
Mr Haluk Gercek, in charge of the Moscow office of Enka, the Turkish
construction company which has been able to bring its own funds and bank
finance to Russian projects, believes the main problem is psychological.
After 70 years of communism, Mr Gercek finds that many Russians have only a
faint grasp of such concepts as private property, venture capital and
investment. 'You can't fix this with laws and regulations. It is a matter of
long-term acceptance of property rights and private ownership. People think
they are doing you a favour if they offer you investment opportunities
without offering security for your capital.'
As an example of Russian attitudes to what constitutes an opportunity, he
cites Russian officials who have offered Enka buildings inhabited either by
tenants with rights to the property or illegal squatters.
Still, he believes a presence on the Russian market is essential to benefit
from its future promise. He claims that Enka is now the biggest foreign
contractor on the Russian market, and he says the company's reputation for
getting jobs done faster and more cheaply than the competition helped clinch
it a Dollars 22m contract to help rebuild the White House after it was
shelled by army tanks to quell last October's parliamentary rebellion.
Mosenka, Enka's joint venture with the Moscow city construction authorities,
has been renovating buildings on which it has a 25- to 49-year lease, and
renting them to foreigners. The scarcity of properties mean that office
space in Moscow is among the most expensive in the world, costing Dollars
800-Dollars 900 a sq m a year.
Independently of its Russian joint venture, Enka is presently studying
projects whereby the Moscow city government would give it dilapidated
buildings - which abound in the city - to renovate in return for 50 per cent
ownership of the final product - with no guarantee that this will include
the land beneath the buildings.
'We are proceeding very slowly, with foreign and Russian lawyers so we can
get as much security as possible that this won't be taken away from us
later,' says Mr Gercek.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

940311

