FT942-12257

FT  30 APR 94 / The clock starts to tick for Major: The fault-lines that may
threaten the prime minister's survival


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


The conversation is about Mr John Major's prospects of survival. The
minister sitting across the restaurant table hopes he will hold on to 10
Downing Street. But he is just as uncertain as the rest of us about the
prime minister's chances.
The Tory leadership has disappeared these past weeks from the front pages.
The respite is misleading. As the local and European elections approach, the
talk at Westminster is of nothing else.
Scratch beneath the surface and there is something else. Some senior
Conservatives have begun to think the unthinkable. The question they ask is
not whether the prime minister will last the summer but whether the party he
leads can be saved from self-destruction.
Back in the restaurant, the minister wants first to know how active Mr
Michael Heseltine's lieutenants have been. Is the trade secretary, the
favourite for the succession, encouraging them to campaign? Have colleagues
been promised jobs in a Heseltine government?
And what about Mr Michael Portillo, the Treasury chief secretary? Is it true
that the 40-year-old guardian of the Thatcherite torch has decided he will,
after all, stand in any leadership contest? What is the judgment among
political journalists on how many of the Euro-sceptic right would choose
Portillo over Heseltine?
The talk turns to the fading fortunes of Mr Kenneth Clarke. Six months ago
the chancellor was everyone's front-runner. Now he has disappeared from
view. It is time, his friends say, for Mr Clarke to resurrect his profile.
The discussion has a surreal quality. Most ministers are horrified that the
party which once prided itself on discipline and unity might turn out a Tory
prime minister for the second time in four years.
Mr Major won the general election. For all his faults he has held the party
together over Europe. Economic recovery is at last a visible reality. In six
months or a year the government's fortunes might be transformed.
But the fatalistic speculation permeates every conversation among the
journalists, ministers, and Tory backbenchers who daily fill the restaurants
around Westminster.
They are waiting for the explosion. The ordinary business of government is
paralysed. The fear - and for many the expectation - is that the local
elections on May 5 and the poll for the European Parliament a month later
will convulse the Conservative party.
The clock on this electoral timebomb will start ticking next Friday with the
results of the voting up and down the country in about 200 local
authorities.
If the outcome replicates national opinion polls - which show Labour between
20 and 25 points ahead of the Tories - the Conservatives will be swept from
power in virtually every town hall.
The central batteground will be suburban London (see article below), which
four years ago stood aside from the national backlash against the then Mrs
Margaret Thatcher's government. The polls point to the possibility of an
unprecedented Tory collapse around the capital.
Ministers think the outcome will not be so catastrophic. Doorstep
campaigning points to a patchier result. A surge in the Liberal Democrat
vote would complicate the arithmetic. The Tories often do better locally
than nationally. But the local elections are just the beginning: a dress
rehearsal for the main, European, event on June 9.
The risk is the voters will treat the European Parliament poll as a
referendum on the government's performance. Along with the Eastleigh
by-election it will offer a chance to get even with Mr Major's government
for the economic recession, tax increases and government disarray over
Europe.
Even before the start of the campaign the Tory fault-line over Europe has
re-emerged beneath the careful attempts of Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary, to reconcile the Europhobes and Europhiles.
If a semblance of unity cannot be restored the Conservative vote may well
collapse. The polls suggest the Liberal Democrats could win up to 10
Euro-seats in south-west and southern England. Labour might add the same
number to its present 45. The government would then see its 32 reduced to no
more than 12.
It is that scenario that provokes scarcely-suppressed panic in ministers and
backbench Tory MPs alike. The dispossessed on the right are floating
possible 'stalking-horse' candidates to unseat Mr Major in the autumn if he
cannot be persuaded to go quietly in the summer. The names most commonly
mentioned are Mr Norman Lamont, the embittered former chancellor, and Mr
Kenneth Baker, the distinctly Eurosceptical former home secretary.
Mr Major is aware of the risks. The talk in 10 Downing Street is of a
strategy for survival during the summer. His planned cabinet reshuffle may
come sooner and be more extensive than we think. Friends are assured that
the prime minister is more determined than ever to remain in office.
The leadership crisis may, anyway, be a symptom rather than a cause. There
is the possibility that the Conservatives are on the threshold of
self-destruction. Ministers no longer dismiss the thought that a split over
Europe might do to the Conservative party in the 1990s what the divisions
over economic policy did to Labour in the 1970s. It is not lost on them that
the opposition has spent 15 years in the political wildnerness in its
efforts to repair the damage.
There has been much superficial sound and fury at Westminster this week: Mr
Major does not have a masterplan to threaten Britain's withdrawal from the
EU if its partners do not accept its agenda at the intergovernmental
conference due in 1996. Nor has the prime minister torn up the manifesto
drafted by Mr Hurd for the election this June.
But two important things have happened. The Eurosceptics on the backbenches
have been gaining new recruits for a more uncompromising stance against
further deepening of the Union at the 1996 conference.
Encouraged by one or two of their cabinet allies, they have also floated the
idea that Britain might soon face a stark choice between deeper entanglement
in a European superstate and withdrawal from all but the EU's trading
dimension.
For the overwhelming majority in the government that is an absurd option: in
Mr Hurd's words, it is out of touch with geographical reality, with
commercial reality and with the reality of collective security.
Try telling that to the cabinet minister who has been musing that his party
made a historic mistake 30 years ago when it embraced Europe, or to the Tory
MPs whose political thinking was shaped by the angry rhetoric rather than
the more sober reality of Mrs Thatcher's approach to Brussels.
Mr Major and Mr Hurd throw bridges over the chasm in the party by
emphasising Britain's decentralising agenda is at last making headway with
its partners.
But the sceptics have grown bolder in their defiance, scathing about the
prime minister and careless of the electoral consequences. Better to be
honest in opposition than corrupt in government is how one of them put it
recently.
So it may be that the Conservative party is destined to break itself apart
over Europe. The coming weeks may signal not just another Tory leadership
battle but a seismic shift in British politics. As the minister put it as he
left the restaurant: 'If we get rid of another prime minister, the
Conservative party will not be worth leading.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940430

