FT942-14700

FT  19 APR 94 / UK Company News: Cheaper at half the price? - Peter John
examines Reuters' share split exercise


   By PETER JOHN


Shares in Reuters Holdings, the news and financial information group, closed
yesterday at 484p, their first day of trading after a 4-for-1 share split.
The move ended Reuters run as the most expensive single share in the FT-SE
100 index. Meanwhile, the US-traded American Depositary Receipts have only
been halved from their previous level of about Dollars 87 (Pounds 59.50).
Each ADR represents six shares.
Share splits are commonplace in the UK, particularly among FT-SE 100
companies but the logic behind them is hard to pin down.
Companies say splits make their shares more marketable and more attractive
to private investors.
The same rationale is used for consolidations. When shares are trading
below, say, 30p relatively small trades can markedly affect the price - and
this volatility can lead to illiquidity. Saatchi & Saatchi, the advertising
group, carried out a 1-for-10 consolidation in June 1992 when the shares
stood at about 15p each.
The dentist from Halifax with a few hundred pounds to spare might be
interested in 100 Glaxo shares at 600p each but doesn't like the idea of
buying 50 at twice that price and while she might like the cachet of owning
4,000 Saatchi shares she might not appreciate the fees.
That is the logic that persuaded Glaxo to have two share splits in the
company's glory period between 1989 and 1991. The pharmaceuticals group
said: 'The aim is to bring a price down to a level that makes shares more
available to shareholders. History shows this is usually done around the
Pounds 14 to Pounds 16 limit.'
Reuters takes a similarly pragmatic line. Mr Mike Cooling, corporate
relations manager, says: 'There is always an assumption that it will assist
in liquidity. You could argue that if you reduce the price of the stock, the
dealing size becomes greater for institutional trading. Both arguments sound
logical but there is no proof either way.'
However, there is a strong case for allowing a share price to appreciate
without splits, particularly for fund managers, who make up some 75 per cent
of the UK equity market. Ahead of the split, Reuters' spread - the
difference between the the bid and asking prices of the shares - was quoted
by marketmakers at 15p. That translates to a spread of 0.75 per cent. .
The new spread for Reuters is 7p on a share price of about 500p guaranteed
for a single trade of up to 100,000 shares. This translates to a spread of
1.4 per cent.
Even Mr Brian Newman, analyst with agency broker Henderson Crosthwaite and a
long-time supporter of the shares, finds the process slightly mysterious.
'It doesn't stand up to too close examination' he says.
There have been very few analyses of share splits and most fund managers
tend to echo the sentiments of Mr Peter Jones, investment director of M&G'In
theory it makes not a slight bit of difference,' he says. 'Personally I
would always support a share split where it is into double figures but ask
me to prove why and I can't'
However, Mr Warren Buffet, the billionaire Nebraskan investor, wrote a
damning condemnation of the practice for the annual meeting of Berkshire
Hathaway, his US investment group. 'Brokers, using terms such as
'marketability' and 'liquidity' sing the praises of companies with high
share turnover . . . but investors should understand that what is good for
the croupier is not good for the customer. A hyperactive stock market is the
pickpocket of enterprise.'
Perhaps the reasoning boils down to something as basic as the British fear
of standing out from the crowd. 'We want to have a share split because we
were the only stock trading above Pounds 20 and that makes us an exception,'
says Mr Mike Cooling of Reuters.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940419

