FT944-10930

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (17): Weaver to wearer - Naazneen Karmali
studies garment export tactics


   By NAAZNEEN KARMALI


To sharpen their competitive edggarment exporters are increasingly seeking
collaborations with their foreign customers. The advantages accrue to both
sides. Customers who are confronted with a shrinking manufacturing base in
their country find India a low cost sourcing point. The Indian exporter gets
an assured buyer on a long term basis and much-needed technical assistance.
Examples abound: Gruppo La Perla and Mafatlal Industries, a Bombay based
textile company, have recently invested Rs135m in a modern garment factory
near Delhi. The factory is equipped with imported machines and its
production is being supervised by Italian technicians. Most of the fabric is
supplied by Mafatlal.
The garments are made exclusively for export and will be sold overseas under
La Perla's label.
In another Rs300m venture, Mafatlal is taking technical help from the German
company Schiesser to make premium quality knitted clothes. Schiesser has
agreed to buy back half of the total production.
These collaborations highlight the current concerns of the textile exports
industry. It faces the prospect of a free market since the quota system of
the existing Multi-Fibre Arrangement is to be phased out over a 10 year
period once Gatt comes into being. (Under bilateral agreements, most Western
countries impose annual quotas on certain textile items from India).
The government has warned exporters that the absence of quota restrictions
will not necessarily lead to higher export sales. Exporters will have easier
access to markets, but equally importing countries will have the freedom to
shop around. Unless Indian exporters can match their competitors on price
and quality, they could lose out.
Textiles and garments account for 26 per cent of the country's total
exports. The industry has been consistently surpassing targets in the last
three years. Export sales in the year to March 1994 were Dollars 8bn,
reflecting a 21 per cent growth over the previous year.
The ministry of textiles is confident that the Dollars 9bn target for the
current year will be achieved. Official figures show that exports in the
first quarter up to June 1994 have increased by 19 per cent over the same
period last year. Yet exporters are worried that this year's performance may
not be as spectacular as in the previous years. Garment exports in the first
quarter were Dollars 890m, about Dollars 70m more than in the same period
last year.
But according to Mr Arvind Pradhan, director of the Apparel Export Promotion
Council (AEPC), exporters do not have as many orders in hand as they used
to. At a recent buyer-seller conference in Europe organised by the AEPC,
'the response was poor', says Mr Pradhan. The AEPC has also organised trade
delegations to countries which are potential markets, such as Latin America;
it is urging exporters to look for new niches and non-quota items like
industrial garments and infant wear.
But quotas, particularly for the US which is a big customer, have not yet
been fully utilised. Exporters say that increased raw material costs,
chiefly yarn and fabric, have made their prices uncompetitive in the
American market. In August, a declaration by the US Consumer Products Safety
Commission that Indian-made chiffon skirts were inflammable led to
consignments being recalled and a ban on imports.
The government has taken steps to boost exports. For example, importing
textile machinery, both new and second hand, no longer requires a licence
and import duties have been brought down to 25 per cent. Exporters are being
asked to step up value addition. Though budget garments and grey fabrics
drive volumes, they are more price sensitive. In this segment, India's big
competitors are China, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka.
Exporters say that the measures taken by the government are not enough. They
would like local supplies of processed fabrics to be of consistent quality
and the freedom to import fabrics required against export commitments.
Some manufacturers have begun to take advantage of the new rules and are
investing in new technology. Large composite mills have brought in second
hand machinery from Europe and Japan. 'Improving quality by upgrading
technology is the only way to survive and grow,' says Mr Kamlesh Kapadia,
Mafatlal's vice president, exports. Joint ventures with foreign textile
companies, he adds, will contribute to improving the product mix.
 ------------------------------
    TEXTILE EXPORTS RS. BN
 ------------------------------
Year                   Value
 ------------------------------
1991-92                 5.8
1992-93                 6.6
1993-94                 8.0
1994-95 (target)        9.0
 ------------------------------
Source: Export Promotion
Council and Commodity Boards
 ------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941108

