FT941-5460

FT  07 MAR 94 / EU to boost Ukraine trade pact


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


The European Union is to offer Ukraine a more generous political and trade
agreement in an effort to bolster the country's moderate political groups
ahead of its elections later this month.
A meeting of European foreign ministers in Brussels today is expected to
give the European Commission a mandate to conclude the deal, which is
similar to the partnership agreement concluded with Russia earlier this
year.
The deal promises greater political co-operation and contains a commitment
to discuss the establishment of a free trade zone by 1998. However, it falls
considerably short of the partnership deals offered to the Baltic states and
eastern Europe, and, in contrast to the deal now agreed with Russia, gives
no endorsement of Ukraine's economic reform.
Commission officials said the omission was intended to signal EU concerns
about the limited nature of Ukraine's economic reforms, and put pressure on
Ukraine's leadership to act more decisively.
But the omission has angered Ukrainian officials, who insist there is no
reason to treat Ukraine differently from Russia. 'It is not fair to label us
a country that does not want to change. We consider we are an economy in
reform,' said Mr Volodymyr Vassylenko, Ukrainian ambassador to the EU.
He added that Ukraine was hoping that closer ties with the EU could help
defuse tensions with Russia over regional issues such as Crimea. 'We want
the EU to recognise that Crimea is Ukrainian territory and send a clear
signal to Russia to that effect,' he said. But EU officials have so far
responded with caution to suggestions that the EU could act as a mediator in
the dispute over the Crimea.
However, coming after a year in which EU ministers have paid scant attention
to Ukraine, the agreement highlights a new attempt, led largely by the
German and French, to bolster EU links. This shift has been triggered by
growing concerns about Ukraine's economic instability and nuclear arsenal,
and by growing doubts about the reliability of Russia as a partner.
'The members states of the EU are more interested now in the Ukraine than
they have been for a long time,' said a diplomat in Brussels. 'They want to
do something for the Ukraine because it is starting to co-operate over
nuclear weapons.'
The EU is also considering opening talks with Moldova, Belarus and
Kazakhstan with a view to offering similar agreements.
A Ukrainian delegation is due in Brussels later this week for a final round
of talks on the agreement, which will also set up a framework for market
access talks to cover areas such as steel, coal and agriculture.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940307

