FT944-6020

FT  01 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Air travel incentive agreements under fire
 -UK watchdog warns about damage to competitiveness of smaller airlines


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


Action should be taken against large airlines which offer financial
incentives to companies to use their flights, the UK's Civil Aviation
Authority said yesterday. The authority said supervisory bodies should keep
a 'watchful eye' on frequent flyer programmes and code-sharing agreements to
ensure they were not being used to keep smaller airlines from competing.
In a report on competition on long-haul routes to and from Europe, the
authority said that bilateral airline agreements remained the most serious
obstacle to competition.
Mr Christopher Chataway, the authority's chairman, said: 'Aviation is a
mature industry and policies based on nationality and an equal division of
benefits between airlines are increasingly out of touch with modern
economies.'
He added: 'There is intrinsically less scope for competition from smaller
airlines on long haul routes than on short haul. Given this, the major
airlines' commercial strategies must not be allowed to threaten the
continuation of such competition as there is.'
The report said deals between large carriers and companies, under which the
companies received financial incentives in return for using the airlines'
global network, had anti-competitive effects.
The authority said any action against such agreements 'would need to be at
supra-national level, involving at least the European Commission and the US
authorities and probably others'.
Frequent flyer programmes run by large airlines had the potential to be a
substantial barrier for smaller carriers with fewer routes, the report said.
It concluded, however, that intervention against frequent flyer programmes
would be premature.
This was because smaller carriers could benefit from alliances which allowed
frequent flyer points to be transferred from one airline to another. The
authority said, however, that the effect of the programmes on smaller
carriers should be closely monitored.
The report added: 'If it proves necessary to intervene in the future this
might be achieved by requiring larger airlines to accept smaller carriers as
members of their frequent flyer programmes or by making awards
transferable.'
The issue of code-sharing was less clear cut, the authority said.
Code-sharing is when two airlines use a single flight number to market a
route. Passengers might begin the flight on one of the airlines and change
to an aircraft belonging to the other during a stop-over.
The report said code-sharing was sometimes used to benefit smaller airlines,
enabling them to compete more effectively with large carriers. The
difficulty occurs when code-sharing results in the withdrawal of an existing
service by one of the airlines involved. However, the authority did not
recommend immediate action.
The report said ways were needed to be found to promote competition between
European and non-European airlines, particularly on routes where competition
was weak. Bilateral air agreements hampered competition, but these were
likely to come under pressure in future, the report said.
Among developments likely to weaken the bilateral agreement system were the
growth of cross-border airline shareholdings and the need for carriers to
have access to wider sources of capital.
Airline Competition on European Long-haul Routes from CAA, PO Box 41,
Cheltenham, Glos. GL50 2BN. Pounds 19.20.
See Editorial Comment

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941201

