FT944-2730

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: Investors welcome spin-off of
General Mills restaurants


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Investors have welcomed the decision by General Mills, the US food group, to
spin off its restaurant business and concentrate on breakfast cereals.
Yesterday its shares closed Dollars 1 3/4 higher at Dollars 57 5/8 .
The restaurant business, forecast to have revenues of Dollars 3.2bn in the
current financial year, has nearly 1,200 outlets, including the nationwide
Red Lobster and The Olive Garden chains.
Late on Wednesday, General Mills said it was divesting the company to
shareholders, giving them one share in the new business for each share in
the existing company. The restaurant company, so far unnamed, will be quoted
on the New York Stock Exchange.
General Mills said that after the split, it would become a tightly-focused
consumer food group with expected sales this financial year of about Dollars
5.5bn.
The move completes a long period of reorganisation for General Mills, during
which it has disposed of numerous peripheral business including
Kenner-Parker toys, Eddie Bauer clothing and Monet costume jewellery.
Mr Bruce Atwater, chairman and chief executive, said the latest divestment
would enhance shareholder value because separate organisations with separate
incentives would produce the strongest growth.
The split is due to take place in June next year when Mr Atwater, now 63,
retires. In the meantime, Mr Stephen Sanger, the 48-year-old president of
General Mills, has been appointed president and chief executive officer of
the company. Mr Joe Lee, General Mills's 54-year-old vice-chairman, will be
president and chief executive of the restaurant operation.
The spin-off comes as both parts of the business face tough competitive
pressures. The food side of the business, in particular, has been suffering
from tough competition in the US breakfast cereal market. Earlier this year,
General Mills cut promotional spending and slashed prices in an attempt to
increase market share.
The casual dining sector is also highly competitive in the US. Yesterday
General Mills produced figures for its second quarter to November showing
that restaurant profits had fallen by 3 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941216

