FT942-14952

FT  18 APR 94 / International Capital Markets: World futures dream hits
reality - Laurie Morse considers Globex's options following the loss of CBoT


   By LAURIE MORSE


Friday's defection by the Chicago Board of Trade was a widely expected blow
for Globex, the electronic futures trading system. Just how serious, though,
remains uncertain.
While the CBoT's bond futures and options contracts are the largest in the
world, they generated the least volume of any contract listed on Globex.
Conceived in 1987 but not launched until mid-1992, Globex was meant to be a
worldwide, round-the-clock trading system that would list the all world's
main futures contracts. Instead it has attracted only meagre volume. Only
France's Matif has found a way to use the system profitably.
Globex was developed and is operated by Reuters, the financial information
and news group. With the departure of the CBoT from the end of this month,
only Matif and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange remain as Reuters' Globex
partners.
Executives at Reuters and the CME say the CBoT's loss will be more than
compensated for by Globex's expansion in Asia.
After long regulatory battles, Globex terminals are being installed in Hong
Kong, Japan, and Singapore, which places Globex in the time zone that was
its original target. Mr Jack Sandner, CME chairman and the chief executive
of Globex, says he is optimistic he will persuade either Germany's DTB or
London's Liffe to list contracts on Globex within the next 30 to 45 days.
Recently announced computer enhancements may also broaden the system's
appeal.
However, the race to secure Globex's future will be short. Under the new
governance agreement with Reuters, if the CME fails to trade 25,000
contracts per day on the system within a year, Reuters can terminate the
deal and close Globex. In March, Globex's busiest month ever, the CME's
average daily volume on the system was just 4,500 contracts.
Meanwhile Globex faces several challenges. Liffe is talking with the Tokyo
International Financial Futures Exchange about offsetting trading
arrangements for Euroyen futures, and has not completely closed the door to
sharing trading rights to interest rate contracts with the CBoT.
The CBoT is also negotiating an alliance with New York-based Bloomberg
Financial Markets to trade CBoT financial contracts on Bloomberg terminals
after hours. Bloomberg, with a reputation for innovation and 37,000
subscribers worldwide, including 4,000 in Asia and 11,000 in Europe, would
be a significant challenge to both Reuters and Globex.
Mr Michael Bloomberg, Bloomberg's president, said the arrangement would
require additional software development, but that his system was
'technically capable' of handling CBoT trades. However, the CBoT must gain
regulatory approvals for the project in the US and all overseas trading
locations, a process that could take years to complete.
The CBoT plans to list its financial products for after-hours trading on a
local computer network sometime in July. Until then, the exchange's bond
futures will be shut for a large portion of the Asian and European business
day, increasing risk to CBoT customers during a period of interest rate
volatility.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940418

