FT941-3319

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (12): A
global scramble for partners - The big telecom operators / The emergence of
global service providers able to meet the needs of multinational
corporations is being slowed by a range of cultural and technical problems


   By MARK NEWMAN


Telecommunications giants are stumbling towards global alliances which will
bring down national barriers and sideline second-division telephone
companies.
The telecommunications big boys say alliances are a response to the
communications needs of multinational corporations, but, at times, it seems
as though the customers are the sideshow, and the main event is a showdown
between telephone operators determined to outmanoeuvre each other.
BT carries much of the responsibility for the high levels of activity among
the world's largest telephone operators over the last three years. It tried
to set up an exclusive partnership with Deutsche Telekom and Nippon
Telephone and Telegraph in 1991. This fell apart after Deutsche Telekom
insisted on including its French allies, NTT got cold feet, and both the
Japanese and the Europeans realised that their competition authorities might
not think a joint venture company intent on exercising global competitive
strength was a good idea.
In fairness to BT, it saw a market emerging for the provision of global
communications services, and this has been the motivation behind its
attempts to put together worldwide alliances. Many other companies, despite
their claims, would be happy to keep the status quo and to exclude BT from
their markets.
Events have moved on since 1991: BT has taken a 20-per-cent stake in MCI,
the second largest US long-distance telephone company, and the two companies
are setting up a new company dedicated exclusively to selling services to
multinational corporations; France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom have set up
a joint venture company of their own; three second-tier European telephone
operators, PTT Telecom Netherlands, Telia of Sweden, and Switzerland's PTT
Telecom have set up a venture called Unisource; and American Telephone and
Telegraph has also announced a world strategy of its own.
Brokers in the global power game will emerge from these four groupings, but
the next few years will see a jockeying for position among the global
communications protagonists and the expansion of existing partnerships.
Other telecommunications companies waiting on the sidelines are US
long-distance operator, Sprint, Japanese operators, KDI and NTT, Cable &
Wireless, Spain's Telefonica and Telecom Italia, the group that will emerge
from the restructuring of Italy's telecommunications services sector, but
they will face a number of obstacles along the way which will slow the
progress of global partnerships. The main ones are:
US partners: most multinational corporations are headquartered in the US.
The idea of a global communications company is that it can deliver services
in all of those countries where multinational companies have offices.
A presence in the US, therefore, is vital. Two of the groupings, Unisource
and France Telecom/Deutsche Telekom need US partners. AT&T, MCI and Sprint
are the three obvious candidates for anyone in search of a US partner.
MCI has already thrown in its lot with BT, so this only leaves AT&T and
Sprint. France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom were in serious discussions with
AT&T last year with a view to an alliance that would have involved a pooling
of international telecommunications activities in a new company but Project
Atlantic has broken down following suggestions from the competition
authorities in Brussels that it would fall foul of rules on mergers. A
less-ambitious alliance is now under discussion, but this may not satisfy
the ambitions of AT&T.
Unisource appeared to be lining up Sprint two years ago when the two sides
agreed to interconnect their data communications networks, but the agreement
was terminated at the end of last year after Unisource lost one of its first
customers, Swedish conglomerate, SKF Group, because of problems with the
interconnection of the two networks.
Systems integration: telecommunications networks are constructed in
different ways and by different manufacturers. When SKF Group cancelled its
contract with Unisource, it cited the failure of Unisource and Sprint to
provide seamless network integration.
Systems integration will be one of the main tasks facing BT and MCI when
they construct a global network platform. Customers in the US will connect
on to MCI's network, while BT is installing network facilities in Europe.
Old friends: partnerships already exist between international telephone
operators. When a UK company orders an international private circuit from
BT, for example, from London to Paris, BT has to liaise with France Telecom
for the half-circuit on the French side. Similarly, international telephone
operators have to pay each other for delivering calls to their customers.
Accounts are settled according to the international settlements procedure.
Complications arise when a country has more than one international operator.
For example, the UK has BT and Mercury, while the US has three large
international carriers, AT&T, MCI and Sprint.
In this case, BT would divide its international outgoing traffic between the
US operators according to the market share of the three operators for
international calls from the US.
AT&T has roughly 60 per cent of the US long-distance market, so it receives
60 per cent of all incoming calls. This business is highly lucrative as the
settlements procedure sets prices at above cost. If AT&T was to side against
large international operators, it could threaten existing relationships.
This explains why AT&T says it would prefer to offer global services in
partnership with state-owned telephone companies rather than in competition
with them.
Regulation: few countries allow competition with state-owned telephone
operators in basic voice telephone services. In Europe, restrictions will
not be removed until 1998, although many companies are already exploiting
uncertainties about the rules for competition in services to closed user
groups. Global alliances will also attract scrutiny from both national and
regional governmental bodies.
BT's acquisition of a 20 per cent stake in MCI had to go before the the US
State Department and Department of Justice, as well as the Federal
Communications Commission, the telecommunications regulatory authority. It
also needed clearance from the European Commission.
An alliance between AT&T, France Telecom and Deutshce Telekom would face
even closer scrutiny, and is the main reason for the decision of the three
operators to seek a less-ambitious alliance than was originally envisaged.
Outsourcing: global alliances are founded on the assumption that
multinational corporations will, over the next few years, decide to
outsource their telecommunications networks to third parties. But Mr Lenny
Elefenbein, the managing director of US telecommunications consultancy, Lynx
Technologies, notes that 'while an impressive number of users have put out
requests for information, very few have actually awarded their businesses to
one of the carriers.'
He says that even the large carriers have been confused by the high ratio of
activity to closed deals and that several of them have commissioned internal
studies to determine 'why they they are not getting their share of the
perceived big outsourcing bonanza.'
Cultures: while MCI is an aggressive, marketing-driven company, BT is still
making the transition from a government department nine years after its
privatisation and ten years after the ending of its monopoly. Many observers
question the ability of the two companies to work together effectively.
The problems will be even greater for other transatlantic partnerships.
Other telephone companies in Europe are still under state-control and have
not even begun to make the transition to commercially-run companies that BT
started in the late 1980s.
There will be other problems along the way, many of them arising as global
consortia threaten to take lucrative business contracts from state-owned
telephone operators in smaller countries, leaving them only with the
unprofitable residential customers.
A momentum has built up behind the formation of global alliances which will
assure their emergence, but there will be problems along the way, and big
businesses - in whose interests the alliances are being formed  - will have
to wait a little longer before operators deliver the services that match
their global service claims.
The writer, Mark Newman, is editor of the FT newsletter, Telecom Markets
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
THE WORLD'S TEN LARGEST TELECOMMUNICATIONS OPERATORS*
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Operator        Country      Revenue   % change   Lines (m)   % change
                                1992    1991-92        1992    1991-92
                           (dollars m)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
NTT***            Japan       51,353        1.7          57        2.7
AT&T**               US       39,580        2.0         n/a        n/a
DBP Telekom     Germany       34,550       14.3          35        5.6
BT***                UK       23,379       (0.7)         26        1.9
France Telecom   France       23,164        5.9          30        3.4
SIP               Italy       17,492       10.8          24        2.8
BellSouth            US       15,202        5.2          19        3.4
Nynex                US       13,155       (0.9)         16        1.9
GTE                  US       12,644        0.6          17        3.6
Bell Atlantic        US       12,093        2.5          18        2.4
TOTAL                        242,613        7.1         242        3.2
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
*Ranked by 1992 revenue; **AT&T does not offer local exchange line
services; ***indicates year ending March 31, 1993.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Financial Times Telecom Markets Newsletter
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940316

