FT941-3571

FT  16 MAR 94 / High street spending slows as tax rise nears: CBI survey
shows second month of weak retail sales


   By EMMA TUCKER and ANDREW TAYLOR


Retail sales growth slowed for the second month in succession in February as
consumers restrained their spending ahead of next month's tax increases.
The Confederation of British Industry said its new distributive trades
survey confirmed that unimpressive sales in January were more than a 'flash
in the pan'. The data showed that last month retailers reported the lowest
year-on-year increase in sales since volumes started to rise in January
1993.
The weakness of consumer demand suggested by the survey may increase
pressure on the government to ease interest rates, particularly if today's
official retail sales and unemployment figures confirm the gloomy picture.
However, other figures yesterday pointed to robustness in the UK building
industry. Construction orders won by contractors were 30 per cent higher in
the three months to January 31 than in the corresponding period 12 months
earlier.
The figures, published by the Department of the Environment, indicated that
the upsurge in orders since the autumn was continuing, providing further
evidence that the recession in the industry might be coming to an end.
The CBI said it was not particularly concerned by the slowdown in retail
sales growth. Mr Nigel Whittaker, chairman of the confederation's
distributive trades panel, said this trend probably reflected the fact that
some consumers were anticipating the impact of the tax increases which are
due to take effect in April.
'Equally, other consumers may also be holding back until they are sure just
how much their pay packets will be affected,' he said.
Retailers were confident that they would 'weather the storm' of tax
increases. Mr Whittaker said: 'It will cause a bit of a blip for a month or
two. But the underlying trends suggest we are going to emerge from it in a
satisfactory way.'
Overall, 40 per cent of retailers surveyed said that business was higher
than it was in February 1993, while 30 per cent said it was lower. The 10
per cent balance between the two figures compared with a positive balance of
15 per cent in January, and was the smallest since January 1993.
Only 16 per cent of retailers surveyed said sales were good for the time of
year, while twice as many - 33 per cent - thought they were poor. The
balance of minus 17 per cent represents a further decline since January,
when the balance was minus 15 per cent.
Inflation continues to show few signs of picking up, according to the
survey. A positive balance of 20 per cent of retailers reported that prices
were up on 12 months earlier. With the exception of January's balance, that
was the weakest price trend reported since the survey began in 1983.
The survey also showed that imports were increasing their presence in
British shops. The CBI said the proportion of deliveries from suppliers
accounted for by imports increased in the year to January. A positive
balance of 1 per cent in January rose to 7 per cent in February.
Mail order boosts retail sales, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940316

