FT941-5692

FT  04 MAR 94 / Survey of World Tyre Industry (3): Black is taking on a
grey-green hue - New compound promises significant saving in fuel


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Tyres are not only round and black, they are turning green.
For an industry fighting fiercely for competitive advantage in every product
area, the arrival of the 'green' tyre - defined by its performance not its
actual colour - is being viewed as one of the most significant developments
since the advent of radial tyres to replace the cross-ply.
Using silica in its compound instead of the traditional carbon black, it
offers the advantage of significantly less rolling resistance than a
conventional tyre without compromising the very high levels of grip and
handling which modern tyres achieve.
Michelin, which is already producing such tyres, estimates that if the EU
car population switched to green tyres, total EU car fuel consumption would
fall by 5 per cent, or well over 1bn gallons, a year. This is based on a
reduction in rolling resistance of 30-35 per cent for the silica-based
tyres, so dramatic is the difference.
Such tyres are a particularly important development for North America, where
car makers have to meet minimum fuel economy standards for their vehicle
ranges - the Cafe (corporate average fuel economy) rules.
Whereas big companies such as Ford and General Motors can balance their
fuel-slurping big cars like Lincolns and Cadillacs against their small
economy cars to meet the required average, companies specialising in the
large executive and luxury sectors find the Cafe rules much harder to meet.
Failure to do so requires sometimes substantial financial penalties.
The 'green' tyres are, therefore, a boon to companies such as Jaguar,
Mercedes, BMW and Rolls-Royce - and Mercedes is specifying the new tyres
across most of its North American range.
A key element of the 'green' tyre's attractiveness is that the silica allows
it to retain good wet-weather performance, traditionally one of the big
stumbling blocks of previous attempts to make low rolling resistance with
materials other than carbon black.
'It might not be as big an innovation as radial tyres 30 years ago but there
is no question that green tyres are important', says Pirelli's
deputy-chairman, Carlo Banchieri. However, Pirelli does not see a complete
conversion to green tyres overnight.
There are two reasons:
One is that, even more than with most other conventional tyres, the 'green'
tyre needs to be developed with the new car for which it is intended, so
that its ride and handling behaviour complements that particular model's
weight distribution, suspension characteristics and other factors. 'Green'
tyres do not, therefore, lend themselves to simple wholesale substitution on
all manufacturers' model ranges.
The other is that large-scale production of such tyres requires significant
re-engineering of manufacturing plant and equipment to take account of the
differing characteristics of silica from carbon black.
However, as an interim step Michelin, Pirelli and others also see good
market prospects for what the industry is coming to call 'grey-green' tyres.
These still reduce rolling resistance by 15-20 per cent compared with
conventional tyres. But the concentration of silica is not sufficient to
require any significant revision to production equipment.
'Grey-green' tyres are, therefore, likely to be the first high-volume
applications of the technology with the leading tyre makers likely to devote
growing capacity to them over the next few years.
Following the industry's rule-of-thumb formula that each 6 per cent
reduction in rolling resistance yields 1 per cent improvement in fuel
consumption, there is the potential for an individual car to travel 3-4 per
cent further for every gallon of fuel consumed and a potential gross fuel
saving within Europe of at least 500m gallons a year.
There remains, however, a good deal of caution in the industry about how
widely such tyres might be accepted in the replacement market, which is
nearly twice as big as that for original equipment and which offers bigger
profit margins than the wafer-thin ones between vehicle makers and their
tyre suppliers. They are likely to cost 10-15 per cent more than
conventional tyres, at least until substantial economies of scale can be
achieved.
Even though this is certain to be recouped over the life of the tyre,
nevertheless this is accepted as a deterrent for many motorists who regard
tyres as mainly a distress purchase.
Even so, the next 12 months are likely to see capacity coming on stream for
'green' and grey-green' tyres at all the leading tyre makers. In Europe,
most of the output will be for the small and medium cars sector, with Fiat,
Peugeot and Rover Group expected to be early users.
Although such tyres have a long way still to go in development terms before
their full capabilities are realised, in five years' time it is likely that
'grey-green' tyres at least will be approaching the status of standard
fitment.
However, it does not necessarily mean the demise of the carbon black supply
industry. Already carbon black suppliers have begun a fight-back, seeking
formulations to lower their own product's rolling resistance.
Tyre makers are content that the silica and carbon black factions should
fight it out, seeing only further technology benefits accrue.
The 'green' tyre is being developed against the background of continuing
fragmentation of car and truck markets. Like the vehicle makers, says
Goodyear's European president, Bill Sharp, any tyre maker wishing to remain
a long term, powerful presence must also have the resources to make a wider
variety of products, to make them viably in ever smaller batches and to
replace them more frequently.
To this variety imposed by the vehicle makers, however, is that created by
the tyre makers themselves in search of that extra technical edge over
rivals that might lead to extra market share or might merit a price premium.
One such development is the premium rain tyre also designed to provide high
performance on dry roads - Goodyear, with its Aquatred, and Germany's
Continental with its Aqua Contact design. The tyres have in common a deep
central groove so that in cross-section it appears to be two narrow tyres
side by side. Continental maintains that the design improves the ability to
disperse water - and thus prevent dangerous aquaplaning - by about 20 per
cent compared with conventional tyres.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940304

