FT943-809

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (4): The westerner's
choice - City profile: Budapest


   By VIRGINIA MARSH


In the five years since the collapse of communism, Hungary has emerged as
the top choice for western companies investing in the former eastern bloc,
and Budapest has regained its pre-war reputation as one of Europe's most
cosmopolitan and dynamic capital cities.
By mid-1994, substantial investments by multinational companies such as
General Electric, General Motors, Nestle, Siemens, Suzuki and
Volkswagen-Audi had lifted total foreign investment in Hungary to over
Dollars 7.5bn - more than half the amount invested in all eastern Europe's
former communist states
Western companies in Budapest say the country has a historic advantage over
its eastern neighbours, in that it was the first of the former communist
countries to begin the transition to a market economy and to become open to
foreign investment.
'Hungary had a head start, and it shows. . . It is a western-oriented
country, and Budapest already has a sophisticated business culture which
makes it very attractive to investors. Hungarian businessmen speak the same
language as western businessmen,' says Mr David Young, director of business
development at Price Waterhouse Hungary.
Western companies say that expatriates enjoy living in Budapest, and that it
is not difficult to persuade good staff to relocate to the city.
'Budapest is a tremendously liveable place to be - it's beautiful, it's
cosmopolitan, the cuisine is great, it has all the creature comforts,' says
Mr Ed Bush, chief executive of the First American-Hungarian Insurance
Company, the local AIG subsidiary.
Although Hungarian is one of the region's more impenetrable languages, Mr
Bush says the numbers of Hungarians speaking foreign languages has increased
markedly in the past four years. 'In 1990, the first thing you searched for
was a bilingual secretary, who you had to pay several times more than a
brain surgeon; and the second, was a bilingual accountant. Now, these people
are available. Hungarians are very keen to learn foreign languages and the
principles of a market economy,' he says.
As in other former communist states, bureaucracy, often-changing regulations
and the rapidly evolving business environment can make it difficult for
foreign (and local) companies to set up and plan their businesses. But Mr
Bush says business life and the economy have begun to normalise, and that,
unlike in 1990, foreign investors can draw on the services of the many top
western banks, law and accountancy firms with offices in the capital.
Budapest is also central Europe's largest city, with a population of more
than 2m - about twice that of Prague or Vienna. Its size and downtown
commercial district give it an advantage over Prague, another of the
region's up-and-coming cities, says Mr Chris Bennett, head of property
company Debenham Zadelhoff's central European operations.
'Budapest has the potential to be a major commercial centre - it is
developing a business district in the heart of the city. With its historic
buildings, Prague cannot do this - most commercial developments will have to
be further away from the centre,' he says.
Commercial property prices in Budapest have fallen and stabilised since 1991
and 1992, and are now lower than in most western European cities.
'In 1990, there was virtually no modern stock of office space. Companies
were desperate for modern buildings with telephones and prices went up very
quickly,' says Mr Bennett. A building boom has since satisfied much of the
demand, and good commercial property in the centre now goes for around DM45
(Dollars 29) a month, compared with DM50 in Prague and DM42 in Vienna,
according to Mr Bennett.
Infrastructure remains a weak point, but is gradually being brought up to
western standards. By 1996, the number of telephone lines will have
increased to more than 3.2m - up from less than 1m in 1989; while a
ring-road around Budapest and motorways linking the city to Austria in the
west and to Croatia and Romania in the south and east are under
construction.
The city needs a good infrastructure if it is to capitalise on its position
at the centre of Europe, says Mr Frigyes Banki, managing director of the
Hungarian Investment and Trade Development Agency, which was set up by the
government to promote foreign investment and exports last year.
Mr Banki says western companies have been attracted to the country by the
low cost of high-quality labour - the average monthly wage is just Dollars
300. He says companies relocating production to Hungary can cut costs, but
remain at the centre of the huge European market. Although the country has a
relatively small population of 10m people, 240m live within a 1,000km radius
of Budapest. The country's association agreement with the European Union
gives it preferential trading rights with the EU and the prospect of full
membership by the end of the century.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940927

