FT944-6165

FT  30 NOV 94 / T&N makes Pounds 100m asbestos charge


   By SIMON DAVIES


T&N, formerly one of the UK's largest asbestos suppliers, yesterday
announced a surprise Pounds 100m provision against future asbestos-related
claims, just three months after a US court ruling that indicated a declining
trend in claims.
T&N's share price fell 35p to 186p by the close of trade, knocking Pounds
176m off the company's market capitalisation, as T&N's asbestos-related past
continued to overshadow its successful automotive components and engineering
operations.
Mr Colin Hope, chairman, yesterday said that T&N had paid Pounds 250m of
compensation before this latest charge. Insurance companies had met around
Pounds 100m of these claims, but T&N had now used most of its cover.
The provisions will come as a blow to the group, which was hoping to put
asbestos behind it, and move forward with the DM300m (Pounds 122m)
acquisition of a majority stake in components manufacturer Kolbenschmidt, a
Metallgesellschaft subsidiary.
The Pounds 100m reduction in T&N's shareholders funds will increase its
gearing from about 50 per cent to more than 60 per cent, increasing the
likelihood that it will fund the Kolbenschmidt acquisition through a rights
issue.
The latest asbestos provisions relate to a rise in the number of
asbestos-related injury claims before the August court ruling.
These claims are handled by the US Centre for Claims Resolution, on behalf
of 20 members, and the share of costs is related to the number of claims
against individual companies.
Since the group announced interim results in early September the number of
cases had dramatically surpassed forecasts.
Mr Hope said this was a result of an increasing number of cases from sectors
where T&N had greater exposure, such as construction and process industries.
He was adamant that this could not have been foreseen.
In addition to the Pounds 100m charge, T&N is likely to carry an annual
provision of between Pounds 30m and Pounds 40m, compared with a Pounds 21m
provision in 1993. However, Mr Hope said this figure should decline from
1996.

The Financial Times


London Page 49

941130

