FT943-13055

FT  21 JUL 94 / Move to cut building trade gap


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


A taskforce to reduce Britain's Pounds 1.44bn trade deficit in building
materials was launched yesterday by some of the country's biggest
contractors, property developers and consultants.
The initiative was supported by the Department of the Environment which has
seconded a senior civil servant, Mr Malcolm Dodds, to be director of the new
Construction Procurement Group.
Its aim is to work closely with building-material and component producers to
increase the competitiveness of UK construction products in domestic and
export markets.
Members include chairmen of leading contractors Amec, Bovis, John Laing,
Tarmac and Taylor Woodrow as well as senior directors from property
developers MEPC, Land Securities, Stanhope Properties and Greycoat.
The property developers include some of the industry's biggest critics which
say they have turned to overseas suppliers because British companies do not
produce the products they want, or lack the ability to supply adequate
quality.
Mr Nigel Thompson, chairman of the group and a director of consultants Ove
Arup, said: 'In one horror story, very large concrete cladding panels were
made in Kentucky, hauled halfway across the United States, sailed across the
Atlantic and transported across the UK to be fixed on a building in
Stevenage.'
The group intends to identify products 'where there is insufficient choice
from domestic manufacturers'. Members will work with suppliers to help them
'develop the product and services they offer'. A few leading producers will
be asked to join the group after initial studies.
It is the latest in a series of joint initiatives by the environment
department and the industry to improve its competitiveness.
An independent review, jointly financed by the department and the industry,
this week recommended wide-ranging measures, including legislation, to
reduce conflict and improve management practices in the sector. Its aim is
to cut UK construction costs by 30 per cent by the end of the century.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940721

