FT943-12713

FT  23 JUL 94 / Whitehall computer spending 'to fall'


   By ALAN CANE


Spending by the civil service on computer systems is set to fall in 1994-95
for the first time in five years, according to one of the first detailed
analyses of expenditure by the government on information technology.
The biggest fall, of 48 per cent, is at the Department of Social Security
which, with the Exchequer - comprising Treasury, Customs and Excise and
Inland Revenue - and the Ministry of Defence, accounts for about two-thirds
of the Pounds 2.5bn spent annually by government departments and agencies on
hardware, software, external services and computer staff.
The analysis, carried out by Kable, a research group specialising in
public-sector information systems, does not take into account the dramatic
decline in prices for computer hardware over the past few years. Kable
concludes nevertheless that the boom is over for equipment suppliers. It
says: 'Civil service hardware spend has risen an average 5 per cent a year
over the past four years. At the depth of the recession in 1991-92,
government was decidedly popular with the computer industry as budgets rose
20 per cent. This year, equipment spend is set to drop 10 per cent.'
The Kable study sets benchmarks for government IT spending when, as a
consequence of market-testing and the outsourcing of computer operations,
the picture will become much more complex.
Personal computers accounted for 42 per cent of spending on hardware by the
civil service last year. The MoD alone spent Pounds 86. The most successful
supplier that year was the US manufacturer Compaq with a 14 per cent share.
Some Pounds 303m was spent on software last year, representing 12 per cent
of overall IT spending. The largest share, 45 per cent, was spent on
specially written software. In commercial data processing, pre-written or
packaged software is increasingly preferred.
Departments spent a total of Pounds 127m on consultancy, representing 5 per
cent of their systems budgets. However, the DSS and the Exchequer each spent
8 per cent of their budgets while Northern Ireland spent less than 0.1 per
cent.
Market testing - where the performance of in-house operations is measured -
also threw up broad differences. The leaders - the Exchequer and the MoD -
have each tested Pounds 350m worth of services while the Department of
Social Security and the Lord Chancellor's Department have not tested
activities worth more than 1 per cent of their gross running costs.
Kable Market Profile: Civil Service IS 1994-95. Kable. 40 Bowling Green
Lane, London EC1 0NE, Pounds 2,250.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940723

