FT942-14948

FT  18 APR 94 / International Company News: Digital Equipment losses raise
questions of control - A look at the US computer group's shock decline


   By LOUISE KEHOE


Hopes of a short-term recovery for Digital Equipment, once second only to
International Business Machines in the computer market, have been dashed
with the company's report of far larger than expected third-quarter losses.
Digital stunned investors on Friday by reporting third-quarter losses of
Dollars 183.3m, or Dollars 1.34 a share, about four times higher than
analysts' projections. Revenues fell 6 per cent to Dollars 3.26bn.
Worse, Mr Robert Palmer, president and chief executive of the computer
company, acknowledged that he too had been taken by surprise by the
'unacceptable' results, raising serious questions about financial controls.
Only nine months ago, Digital appeared to be on the road to recovery. After
three years of heavy losses, the company reported a modest quarterly profit.
A broad restructuring, initiated by Mr Palmer soon after his appointment in
1992, was cutting costs, and a new line of computers based on Digital's
powerful Alpha microprocessors promised revenue growth.
Optimism began to fade, however, as Digital reported losses for the first
and second quarters of fiscal 1994 (ending in June). Now the heavy
third-quarter losses have made it painfully clear that Digital's problems
are far from being solved.
Confidence in Mr Palmer has been shaken. 'There are no excuses' for the
company's disappointing performance, he acknowledged. 'In one critical
dimension, that of profitability, we are not succeeding.'
Like IBM, Digital is struggling to adapt to fundamental changes in the
computer market. The company is in the midst of a product transition from
its proprietary VAX minicomputers to a new generation of 'open systems'
products that adhere to industry software standards.
Digital's new 'Alpha' products have been well received, with sales more than
doubling from the second to third quarters. It has also made remarkable
progress in the personal computer market, rising from the ranks of 'also
ran' to the Top 10 in the past two years.
It is apparent, however, that these successes have masked a sharp decline in
gross profit margins on product sales, down almost 10 percentage points in
the third quarter from the same period last year.
Gross margins on a new Alpha computer are 6 to 7 per cent lower than on a
similarly priced VAX minicomputer, Mr Palmer explained.
Thus, as sales of the new products increase and those of the older VAX
products decline, Digital's profit margins will continue to erode. Expanding
PC sales, with even lower margins, are exacerbating the problem.
Digital's third-quarter results revealed another serious problem in its
services business, which until now has provided a stable source of revenues
and profits. Service revenues in the quarter fell 11 per cent to Dollars
1.5bn. As Digital's customers replace older equipment with more reliable
products, particularly new data storage systems, demand for high-margin
maintenance agreements is diminishing, Digital said.
Gross margins on the service business fell by 1.6 per cent in the third
quarter, signalling that Digital's cushion against profit declines on
product sales may be thinning.
Mr Palmer said that Digital will accelerate its current restructuring plans
to cut costs, with 7,000 jobs now expected to be cut by the end of the
fiscal year in June.
By then, he said, Digital will come up with a new restructuring plan, which
will probably involve several thousand more job losses.
Digital's biggest challenge, however, is how to cut costs without slowing
sales. The company has a far larger salesforce, in proportion to its
revenues, than competitors, Mr Palmer acknowledged. Yet it cannot afford to
cut back until alternative 'indirect' sales channels, via third parties,
have been established.
'If we move too fast to take out (people from) sales before we have
developed indirect sales channels, the revenue is going to fall faster than
the cost. This is not a happy outcome.'
Yet Mr Palmer was clear that Digital 'needs to move to a competitive cost
structure as quickly as possible.' He plans to present a new restructuring
plan in June that 'will not be insubstantial'. Analysts expect Digital to
cut up to another 20,000 jobs and take a write-off of about Dollars 1bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940418

