FT941-5555

FT  05 MAR 94 / MEPs may vote for even stricter car exhaust rules: Brussels
faces rejection of emissions legislation


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


European Commission officials have given a warning that legislation setting
new car emission standards may be abandoned because of opposition in the
European parliament.
The parliament will vote on Wednesday on the Commission's package - already
accepted by ministers - which would cut petrol and diesel car exhaust
emissions substantially in 1996 compared with 1992 levels.
But after the parliament's environment committee demanded stricter emission
standards last month, Commission officials fear the parliament will reject
the legislation in its present form.
Mr Reinhard Buscher, a member of the European Commission's industry cabinet,
says if the measure is rejected, it will 'mean more delay which will make it
very hard for industry to comply with the 1996 standards'. He believes the
parliament is attempting to use the issue to illustrate its new
post-Maastricht political muscle.
The parliament's committee resolutions are being roundly condemned as
ill-judged and unrealistic by Europe's motor industry, assembling in
Switzerland for next week's Geneva motor show.
Leading industry figures say the tighter standards proposed could not be
achieved technically within the 1996 deadline.
MEPs yesterday denied deliberately seeking to challenge the Commission over
the affair, and maintained that the new proposals were based on genuine
environmental concerns.
But with most of the majority socialist and Christian Democrat parliamentary
groups expected to vote against the current package, along with the green
parties, they agreed that there was a very good chance of a vote in support
of the amendments.
The amendments include demands that:
Emission levels for 1996 are made more stringent, with specific new levels
set for 1999 of half the 1996 levels and a commitment to establish tougher
levels after 2000.
Member states should be free to use fiscal incentives to encourage their own
car manufacturers to meet the target levels at a faster rate than the EU
guidelines.
Legal limits should be set for CO emissions.
To block the current package, at least 260 out of the total 518 deputies
serving in the parliament need to support the demands for further
amendments. The socialist group has 198 deputies and the Christian Democrats
162.
If the parliament rejects the measure, the only solution to the stalemate
will be to use the new conciliation procedure established under Maastricht
treaty - the first such environmental case taken to the procedure.
But that is unlikely to produce results before autumn at the earliest.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940305

