FT943-800

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Mauritius (8): Barons braced for rationalisation -
The sugar industry


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD


Up to one third of Mauritian sugar factories are expected to close in a
series of measures aimed at making the industry more competitive.
Plans to diversify the country's agriculture have been devised after cuts in
agricultural subsidies were agreed during the Uruguay round of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Mauritian sugar barons have agreed five or six of the existing 18 sugar
factories should shut, and production rationalised into bigger, more
efficient mills, if the industry is to maintain profitability.
In a bid to avoid political resistance to mill closures, the sugar barons
are offering to set up an investment fund to allow planters and workers -
who form a powerful lobby - to acquire a 20 per cent equity stake in sugar
factories. It is the first time employees have been offered a shareholding.
The government believes it is doing its part in keeping the industry
competitive: investing in irrigation, landscaping the island's volcanic
terrain and abolishing the 4 per cent export duty on sugar.
In return, Kailash Ruhee, agriculture minister, expects sugar barons to
modernise production and move into food crops for local consumption. At
present, more than 90 per cent of the island's arable land is devoted to
sugar cane.
Since the mid-1980s the industry has been squeezed by rising production
costs and a fall in the guaranteed price paid by the European Union, which
buys more than three - quarters of the island's production.
A small, but rich Franco-Mauritian elite controls the industry, but 35,000
'petit planteurs' form a powerful and vocal constituency, as do the 40,000
sugar workers in the mills and larger plantations. Although the island's
sugar quota of 506,900 tonnes a year will not be affected by the GATT
accord, the intervention price the EU is prepared to pay is expected to
fall.
Patrick D'Arifat, director of Mauritius' Sugar Producers Association, says
mill closures will not take place immediately. The capacity of the remaining
mills will first have to be enlarged; new buyers must be found for the sugar
cane planters; and transport must be arranged to take the cane to more
distant factories.
Mr Ruhee, a former head of the department of crop production at the
University of Mauritius, says: 'There is potential to transform sugar cane
into a feed stock.' As an example of an alternative market, he says a South
African firm is planning to produce citric acid from sugar cane.
The government is also encouraging producers to diversify into 'special
sugars' - muscovado, demerara, golden granulated and organically grown sugar
 -for which there is a small but lucrative market.
'Mauritius supplies 80 per cent of the world market for special sugars,'
says G. Rajpati of the state-run Sugar Authority. With proper promotion, he
believes global demand for these products could grow.
He does not expect a dramatic fall in the EU intervention price - it would
be an unpopular move with sugar beet producers in Europe - but he admits
Mauritius is not in a strong bargaining position. Without the Sugar Protocol
between the EU and African, Caribbean and Pacific countries in 1975, the
Mauritian sugar industry would have long ceased to exist.
Mr D'Arifat said: 'We could not possibly compete with large producers like
Thailand or Australia. We are limited by our scarcity of land and labour.
The government, for its part, is lobbying the EU for a share of its sugar
refiners' deficit, estimated at 300,000 tonnes a year. Mr Ruhee recently
returned from Europe, where he met nine of the EU's 12 agriculture
ministers.
'If we were allowed to supply 80,000 tonnes of the Euro - refiners' deficit,
we would be totally insulated from the world market,' Mr Ruhee says.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940927

