FT941-3561

FT  16 MAR 94 / Portuguese take on banks: Consumers boycott debit cards in
protest against surcharge


   By PETER WISE


   LISBON


Portugal's hard-pressed consumers took on the country's big banks yesterday
 -organising a 24-hour boycott of their widely used direct debit cards in
protest at an attempt by the banks to charge commission on use of the cards.
They were responding to an angry appeal by consumer associations,
supermarket chains, petrol stations and other businesses to protest against
a decision by banks to charge a commission of 1 per cent on purchases made
with the cards.
Shop owners said banks would earn Esc8bn (Pounds 30.7m) to Esc10bn a year
from the charge, due to be levied from April. They warned they would be
forced to pass on the extra cost to consumers because retail profit margins
were already low.
The Multibanco card system in Portugal, considered the most advanced in
Europe, allows consumers to shop, pay utility bills, dine out and book train
tickets without using cash or cheques. The cost is immediately debited from
their bank accounts and paid into the account of the supplier.
The system, run by Sociedade Interbancaria de Servicos (SIBS) for almost all
Portuguese banks, provides 3,000 automatic teller machines countrywide where
cardholders can withdraw and deposit money, consult their accounts, and
order cheque books. Retail outlets are equipped with 30,000 electronic
points of sale (Epos) integrated into the system.
'We will take the banks to court for operating a cartel,' said Mr Jorge
Morgado of the Deco consumer association that led the call for a boycott.
'They all plan to introduce the same charge at the same time without
offering consumers any choice.'
Mr Luis Cid, SIBS director, said it was natural that banks should seek to
regain operational costs through a charge for a service that has been free
since it was introduced in 1985. Three years ago British consultants
estimated each Multibanco operation cost Es100, considerably less than the
cost of processing a cheque.
The decision to levy a charge on card use comes as falling interest rates
are sharply reducing earnings from loans and deposits and banks are seeking
to improve their balance sheets through commissions and fee-based income.
However, the use of cards has allowed banks to reduce staff levels. It has
also improved services for customers, who until recently had to wait in long
queues for the simplest of banking services.
'We want banks to be flooded with cheques as a result of the boycott to
remind them of what a boon the Multibanco system has been to them,' said Mr
Morgado. He said Deco had been overwhelmed by messages of support and
challenged a statement from SIBS that use of the Multibanco system yesterday
was normal or even above average.
Paying for his lunch yesterday with cash instead of a card as usual, Mr
Paulo Garcia, a computer engineer said: 'The banks have enticed us into the
Multibanco system over the past eight years by levying no charges. 'Now they
want us to pay. I support the boycott and will stop using my card for
purchases altogether if they go ahead with the charge.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940316

