FT944-2968

FT  15 DEC 94 / The Lex Column: Trafalgar House


If Trafalgar House bids for Northern, much will be made of potential
synergies: in particular, how a cyclical engineering and construction
business benefits from acquiring dependable utility profits. But the issues
dominating the debate are likely to be tax, and the motives of Trafalgar's
largest shareholder, Hongkong Land, which would underwrite any funding.
Since Hongkong Land bought into Trafalgar in 1992, shareholders have
suffered asset write-downs and two rights issues. Those that remained have
done so because they expect a sharp recovery over the next three years -
hence Trafalgar's prospective price-earnings ratio of over 20.
With such a high p/e, virtually any acquisition would enhance earnings in
the short run. But given that Northern's earnings profile is dull, profits
growth will be less spectacular. Tax could answer such concerns. Northern's
profits and the impending Grid demerger will create substantial tax
liabilities. Trafalgar has written off close to Pounds 200m of Advance
Corporation Tax, due to the recent profits collapse. This ACT could be
revived as a meaningful asset.
How would an offer be funded? The most obvious options - a big rights issue
or borrowing that leads to gearing over 100 per cent - are unappealing. An
offer of convertible preference shares would be a logical alternative. If
they are non-redeemable, they would count as equity rather than debt, even
under the latest accounting standards, so protecting Trafalgar from high
gearing. They would also postpone earnings dilution and offer a slightly
lower risk investment for institutional investors.
But that is where Hongkong Land enters the picture. It has Dollars 7.7bn of
net assets, virtually no debt and serious misgivings about the future of
Hong Kong. Underwriting a Trafalgar convertible issue could enable it to
channel more cash into the UK and gain control of Trafalgar, following
conversion, without paying other shareholders a premium. Trafalgar will need
to convince investors that this is not the game plan or it could derail any
bid.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941215

