FT942-15675

FT  14 APR 94 / Accountancy Column: Standard setting not the panacea for all
ills - Gerry Acher argues that business life is too complex for prescriptive
rules to override personal judgment


   By GERRY ACHER


Today, the Accounting Standards Board has published FRS 5, the standard
primarily designed to curb off-balance sheet finance. It reflects how
accounting judgment is rapidly taking second place to prescriptive rules.
By comparison with earlier standards - even SSAP 16, which introduced
current cost accounting and an entirely different system of profit
measurement - this standard is of colossal length, albeit much in the form
of application notes.
Business life is far more complex than the one dimensional approach of
double entry bookkeeping. Very few accounting facts can be expressed in
black and white. The function of the accountant is to communicate the
colourful reality to a particular audience in an honest way that makes sense
to them and enables them to make informed decisions.
The process of standard setting started innocently enough more than two
decades ago. Because of the complexities of business, it was possible to
adopt a number of completely different, but arguably equally acceptable,
ways of looking at the same result. Some narrowing of the range was
desirable.
But this perfectly reasonable process is increasingly in danger of
transformation into an ever expanding 'cook book' exercise in which it is
more important to observe the rules than it is to get the message across.
One has only to look at the example of the leasing standard, SSAP 21, and
the distinction it makes between finance leases (which feature on the
lessee's balance sheet) and operating leases (which do not).
What it actually says is that the criteria for a finance lease should be
presumed to apply if the present value of the minimum lease payments amounts
to 'substantially all' the fair value of the leased asset. It says that
'substantially all' will normally mean 90 per cent or more. In practice, the
figure is taken as an absolute barrier, and almost limitless effort is
expended in order not to breach it. This is not what judgment, still less
auditing, is all about.
The US experience of goodwill is another example of the way in which a
detailed standard degenerates into a mechanistic approach. Under US GAAP,
goodwill is capitalised and amortised, over a period not exceeding 40 years.
Of course, practically everyone opts for the longest possible period,
relying on the standard for support. It has taken the Securities and
Exchange Commission, a much more interventionist regulator than exists in
the UK, to force certain types of company to use a shorter period.
A number of factors have contributed to this cook book situation. One could
look to Brussels as a convenient bogey, with its directive-driven mentality.
But the fault, I am afraid, is much nearer to home and lies with
professional accountants.
The process of preparing and auditing accounts varies in its nature. In many
cases, there is a relationship of mutual respect between management and
auditors, who see their joint objective as that of arriving at audited
accounts which best reflect the activities of the company.
In others, the process involves a degree of tension. Managements wish to
emphasise their successes and to minimise their failures. It is one of the
auditors' roles to moderate this tendency and to ensure that a more balanced
picture is presented.
It is sometimes forgotten that it is the duty of the directors to present a
proper account of their actions to the owners of their business, the
shareholders. Equally, auditors have retreated from their task. The
existence of an increasing body of standards has provided a crutch for lazy
minds.
There arises a perception that as long as you comply with the standards, the
accounts must be 'right' and, more dangerously, it risks an attitude that if
there is no rule against a treatment, then it must be acceptable. Quite
apart from the fact that the standards we have are by no means a
comprehensive set of principles, this is an abdication of judgment. More
attempts by the standard setters to produce a comprehensive set of
instructions will simply encourage us to fall into this trap.
In the days before we had accounting standards, the 'true and fair' view was
paramount and weighed heavily in auditors' minds. Since then, we have
allowed the audit to become an exercise in compliance, a checklist to be
completed, rather than an endorsement of the way commercial and financial
judgments are presented. This is totally wrong: the independent attestation
of financial reports is fundamental to the efficient operation of our
economic system.
I see FRS 5 as a watershed. It is not the fault of the Accounting Standards
Board. Indeed, David Tweedie, its chairman, is on record as saying that the
standard was only as long as it has turned out to be because of pressure
from the accounting firms. This pressure simply represents the demand from
audit partners for rules which they can turn to when confronted with a
difficult situation.
We can either move further towards a US system, where fair presentation
simply means that accounts comply with the rules, or we can try to
revitalise the process of financial reporting so that judgment has a greater
role to play and the myriad facets of a business are synthesised into
something more than the sum of a cook book's parts. We, as auditors, have to
convince the financial community that we have the qualities to exercise the
judgments required, in a proper, timely and consistent way.
I am not looking to reverse the clock. Business life evolves continually,
and accounting must do so too. Today's complexities were unthought of 20
years ago. But I would much rather my intelligence was taxed and I was able
to make a positive contribution to financial reporting, than my role should
be reduced simply to checking that all the rules have been observed - and to
hell with the result.
Can this be accomplished? The precedents are not encouraging. If we are to
achieve the necessary change in attitude and approach, directors must
remember their reporting responsibilities as stewards, rather than as
management, and auditors must be worthy of the respect their responsibility
entails.
The auditing profession has already moved a considerable way towards this
objective. As a profession we have made mistakes in the past, but the
accounting firms are putting their houses in order. I sense a new awareness
of the importance of auditing even at the potential expense of new jobs and
the top line.
In my firm as in others, senior partners review difficult issues and poor
judgment is not tolerated. We need to build on our philosophy and encourage
robustness of opinion, based on proper consideration of the facts and not on
truculence.
Externally, the workings of the Financial Reporting Review Panel have at
least made people pause for thought, although I have to say that the way the
panel's remit is phrased, and the approach it often adopts, is far too rule
book-driven for my taste.
I am by no means certain that this change can be accomplished. I am much
more certain that if we, collectively, do not attempt to change direction
now, the juggernaut will gather even more momentum and we will never be able
to get off the path that we are presently following towards a cook book of
rules, and ultimately more interventionist regulators as we have seen
elsewhere.
It is up to auditors, directors and regulators to decide if they are up to
making the necessary effort of will. My opposite numbers in the accounting
firms, the 100 Group of finance directors and the ASB, will all have a
central role to play. If we fail, we will be all the poorer as a result.
The author is head of audit and accounting at KPMG Peat Marwick

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940414

