FT942-12857

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Hong Kong (14): Mainland risks underwritten - A
look at the prospects for the colony's insurers


   By RICHARD LAPPER


Mr Michael Haynes, managing director of Swire Fraser Insurance Brokers, the
insurance broking arm of Swire Pacific, the low-profile British trading
company, is a familiar figure in the factories sprouting up around the
rapidly growing southern Chinese towns of Guangshou and Shenzhen.
Mr Haynes now spends at least one day a fortnight in China, fixing insurance
for local clients who are shifting their electronics, toy and watch plants
across the border to take advantage of wage rates that are less than a fifth
of those in Hong Kong.
'There is hardly a company that doesn't have a China relationship,' he
explains. 'You can even imagine the border moving back a little. Southern
China could all become like Hong Kong.'
By contrast, Mr George Miller, who headed Swire's Hong Kong brokerage
operation for more than 20 years until moving back to London in 1991, admits
that he barely ever visited the mainland. Nothing illustrates more clearly
how things have changed.
In recent years the Hong Kong market has been among the fastest growing in
the world. Overall gross non-life premium income in the territory grew by 20
to 30 per cent in 1993 to more than HKDollars 17bn, according to Mr Stephen
Ip, insurance commissioner. This followed a 26 per cent increase in 1992 to
HKDollars 14.2bn, and indicates that despite inflation of 8 to 10 per cent
over the last two years, the market is experiencing real growth of more than
10 per cent per year.
Directly or indirectly, China is the main reason. Investor interest in Hong
Kong from both China and overseas has spurred growth of the property market,
leading to plenty of work for local construction firms and a big increase in
demand for insurance covers.
The new Hong Kong airport is the biggest construction project in the world
and the contract to insure it was the subject of fierce competition. Swire,
together with Willis Corroon and Gilman Insurance Brokers, a subsidiary of
Inchcape Group, were the eventual winners of a deal which should generate
more than Dollars 200m in insurance premiums.
Premium income from property insurance for the market as a whole rose by 21
per cent in 1992, even though rebuilding costs rose at a somewhat slower
pace than property prices.
Only one overseas company, AIG of New York, is currently licensed to
underwrite in China, where it is geographically restricted to Shanghai. Yet
Hong Kong-based insurers can underwrite some mainland Chinese risks,
opportunities which have increased with seven out of 10 Hong Kong
manufacturers now based in China.
Businesses based in China can insure with overseas companies their
non-Chinese risks, such as product liability exposures which might emerge on
exports to the US. And local brokers, such as Swire, are allowed to handle
the insurance needs of Hong Kong companies operating in China.
One area of business in which interest is rising is the provision of cover
for privately financed billion dollar energy and transport projects. Nelson
Hurst, the UK insurance broker which was listed last year, has formed a
dedicated joint venture with Hopewell, a Hong Kong-based conglomerate which
has pioneered the development of the build-own-operate or
build-operate-and-transfer technique in the region.
So enticing have the prospects become that fresh capital seems certain to be
attracted to the sector. Several companies are apparently preparing to step
up commitments. Chinese-owned companies registered in Hong Kong, such as
Ming An Insurance Company (HK), have become more interested in underwriting
commercial risks business.
According to Mr Ip, Chinese companies doubled their overall market share in
1993 from 12 per cent to about 25 per cent of the total life and non-life
market. Ms Clare Kwok, deputy managing director of Nelson Hurst Insurance
Brokers (Hong Kong), says that the Chinese carriers have all become much
more aggressive 'mainly in price' over the past three years.
'They used only to do Chinese business. If the risk is small to medium
sized, the rate is very competitive.'
Ming An, which has an estimated market share of about 9 per cent, is
particularly aggressive according to its rivals, picking up CAR and cargo
business.
'We are losing business to Chinese companies as they get better known,' says
one UK underwriter.
A second source of competitive pressure is likely to stem from new overseas
companies licensed to underwrite from Hong Kong. The number of insurance
companies licensed in Hong Kong has fallen in recent years - from more than
300 to 229 at the last count, according to Mr Ip. Yet an increasing number
of overseas companies are interested in obtaining business licences. Most of
the newcomers see involvement in Hong Kong as 'a springboard to access the
Chinese market,' he says.
Last year, Mr Ip gave licences to two European companies, Groupe des
Assurances Nationales of Paris, and Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs of
Aachen. Six further applications are under consideration and several more
foreign companies have expressed interest.
One way or another, the local market looks set for a turbulent time.
Underwriting losses in 1992 fell to HKDollars 13.4m (loss of HKDollars
261.7m) and this positive trend appears to have continued last year.
However, there are signs of a return to fierce competition in the commercial
risks area. Underwriters accept that rates for commercial risks are
insufficient and pressures here could feed through to the rest of the
market, such as motor and personal accident.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940427

