FT941-3433

FT  16 MAR 94 / Rail groups face Pounds 500m leasing charge for trains:
Treasury likely to offset extra cost with subsidies


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR, Transport Correspondent


Rail companies that take over British Rail's passenger operations will pay
about Pounds 500m a year to lease the trains they will need.
This sum is in addition to the Pounds 2.2bn which the government said last
month the rail companies would have to pay for the right to run their trains
on the national rail network.
The government's programme to privatise BR involves creating three rolling
stock leasing companies, which will take over BR's existing trains and also
buy new ones for leasing to train operators. The operating companies will
not be required to lease their rolling stock but most are expected to do so.
Details of the leasing arrangements have been eagerly awaited by potential
bidders for BR franchises, which are expected to go on sale next year.
Negotiations between the Department of Transport, the Treasury, BR and
Hambros, the merchant bank that is advising on the rolling stock companies,
are continuing. The government is keen to establish a commercial regime for
pricing the leasing deals but this is proving difficult in the absence of an
existing market for rolling stock leases. Treasury approval for a leasing
regime has yet to be given.
In theory, the Pounds 500m leasing charge will not prove a burden to the
rail companies because it will be matched by an increase in the Treasury
subsidy. However, any increase in the subsidy requirement could demotivate
managers, some of whom have already expressed concern at the track charges
they will have to pay.
Potential bidders for rail franchises are concerned that very few details
have been released about the rolling stock companies less than three weeks
ahead of the formal creation of a devolved railway network on April 1.
Details of the leasing agreements were due to be announced to BR's operating
companies at a meeting in Reading earlier this month but the presentation
was called off at the last minute.
Appointments to the boards of the three rolling stock companies - two of
which will be based in London, with the third in Sheffield - have progressed
slowly and only one managing director designate is understood to have been
appointed.
The Department of Transport expects to reach an agreement on the details of
the leases by June and to have concluded agreements with the present BR
operating companies by September or October.
No detailed agreement has yet been reached on how the leasing charges will
be allocated to the 24 BR operating companies to be franchised. The charges
are unlikely to mirror the allocation of track charges because they will
depend on the type and age of the rolling stock in use.
Treasury urged to act on Tube funds, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940316

