FT944-14619

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (9): London waits on
gilts


   By TERRY BYLAND


The final quarter of the year promises to be a testing time for the UK stock
market and for the nerves of its profesional participants.
At the end of the third quarter, the FT-SE 100 index was still 20 per cent
short of the City consensus forecast for the year-end. Yet the market was
faltering, having stumbled around the 3,000 mark for some weeks as worries
over global interest rates unsettled bond markets.
Confidence was not helped by slackening trading volumes in the stock market,
accompanied by hints that further redundancies in the securities industry
might not be far away.
The London market could only hold on to a 3.7 per cent gain over the three
months, having been nearly 12 per cent ahead in the middle of the period.
FT-SE All-Share index stocks gave a total return of 4.4 per cent,
outperforming most of their global rivals, at least in sterling terms.
London also leaned heavily on strong performances from a handful of
big-capitalisation, blue-chip stocks. The top 100 stocks, admittedly those
most likely to attract fund managers, gave a return of 5 per cent, while
returns from the Mid 250 and SmallCap stocks were only 3.2 per cent and 2.7
per cent respectively.
Within the Footsie list, utilities stood out, water stocks returning 14.6
per cent, electricity issues 14 per cent and gas distribution 10.9 per cent.
Strictly local factors, notably favourable reviews from their regulatory
bodies, made the running for utilities. In particular, dividend policies,
both actual and potential, drove the shares ahead and also brought in the
institutional buyers who were becoming fearful for their income flows as
global bond markets trembled.
Increasing dividend and earnings flows across UK companies provided the
impetus for a stock market where the falling interest rates could no longer
be counted on to turn up trumps for equity investors. Indeed, the half point
rise in domestic base rates in mid-September surprised only by its timing,
and City bets are for a further rise before Christmas.
The prospect of higher interest rates across Europe and the US has thrown
yet greater emphasis on market hopes that recovery in the UK economy, in the
form of rising corporate earnings and dividends, will secure a further
advance in the market, taking it at least into the middle of 1995.
Unfortunately, by the end of the third quarter, faith in the corporate
earnings flow had come into question. Some consumer companies admitted to
stiff pricing competition and tighter margins, and business surveys
continued to cast doubt on the progress of consumer spending.
Strongly phrased profits warnings from the merchant banking sector increased
the market's worries.
Entering the final quarter, there are signs that some analysts' nerves are
beginning to fray. Forecasts of a Footsie year-end figure of 3,400-3,600 at
the top end of the range of predictions are put forward less vigorously than
a few months ago.
The City of London is no longer a happy place.
The moment of decison is likely to occur in the bond markets when British
government securities show their response to the hike in Federal Reserve
rates now seen as almost inevitable. A stable bond market could still turn
the trick for equities and release the pent-up investment demand which is
ready to celebrate economic recovery.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

941021

