FT943-1010

FT  27 SEP 94 / Counting on the Americans: James Harding finds Haitian
business nervous about Aristide


   By JAMES HARDING


In Haiti, how you count money depends on who you are.
In the slums of Port-au-Prince, the street vendors tend to give prices in
gourdes, the national currency. At the restaurants and boutiques of
Petionville, the affluent town in the hills above the capital, prices come
in Haitian dollars - a fictional currency but a confusing shorthand for five
gourdes.
The different languages of money are more than just an illustration of the
disparity of wealth in Haiti. The dollar, so called, dates back to the last
US occupation, from 1915 to 1934, when the Americans guaranteed the Haitian
currency at five gourdes to the US dollar. Since then, the gourde has been
devalued and the guarantee has slipped.
But the Haitian business community - whose power is in the hands of a
reclusive, fractious group of commercial families - may be hoping that the
US again takes a position as guarantor of Haiti's economic stability.
The co-operation of these economic barons with US forces and their attitudes
to the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide will be critical in the
effort to restore democracy.
Few in the business community relish the prospect of Aristide's return. Many
remember the thousands on the street and the speeches inviting the poor to
take what was rightfully theirs from the wealthy, during the seven months
the elected president inhabited the presidential palace.
Even though Mr Olivier Nadal, secretary-general of the Haitian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry and president of his family company Nadalsa, has seen
his turnover contract from Dollars 25m (Pounds 16m) to Dollars 5m and his
workforce shrink from more than 500 to less than 100, he is not sure that
the lifting of the embargo compensates for the restoration of the populist
leader. 'Lifting the embargo is for sure good, but we need security in and
around my factories, security to invest in my land. Aristide never gave us
that.'
While some people may fear President Aristide's populist credentials, many
hope that three years in Washington and a return facilitated by the US will
have tempered his left-wing radicalism.
'The President can do great things for this country,' explains Mr Gregory
Mevs, one of the most powerful businessmen in Haiti. 'He is like Mao
Tse-dong, a great leader, but he needs a good Chou En-lai, a good mandarin
to guide him. Maybe it'll be the US.'
Mr Johnny Brandt, a businessman whose riven family's interests stretch
throughout the Haitian economy, strikes a common note of mea culpa and
acknowledges the responsibility lies with people like him. He is 'scared not
knowing what Aristide is going to do.'
The baronial class is made up of several dozen families, most of them
mulatto. The established grandees are still thought to hold the keys to
stability and development in Haiti. None is more influential than the
Brandts and the Mevs.
The Brandt empire was founded on textile production, after OJ Brandt, an
immigrant from Germany with Jamaican connections, built the first textile
mill in Port-au-Prince in 1946. The family has broken up and its business
has since diversified to include an edible oil refinery, poultry production,
assembly plant leasing, retailing and agricultural production.
The Mevs control another big wedge of the economy, including a monopoly on
sugar trade and production, shoes, plastics and detergents manufacture, a
downtown industrial park and recent infrastructural developments on the
quayside in Port-au-Prince and Gonaves.
Both are engaged in leasing agreements with the US army. Many have pointed
out the irony of such co-operation, whereby the US stations its forces and
supplies in Mevs and Brandt facilities. The families were understood to have
been among the financiers of the 1991 coup which ousted Aristide and have
since been powerful lobbyists in Washington to prevent his return.
However, US commanders have clearly recognised that they would ostracise
such powerful interests at their peril. The Mevs' Terminal Varreux
development, a port facility and 43m-gallon petrol storage station, has
become the third most important stategic position for the US army in a
country where the embargo has forced petrol prices up to nearly Dollars 20
per gallon.
If it is not surprising that the US should do deals with powerful interests,
it is in character for the leading families to link with the ascendant
authority in Haiti. The Brandts and the Mevs built their businesses into
empires during the three decades of Duvalier rule and have survived the
seven years of turmoil since with delicate and monied diplomacy.
Mr Claude Deschamps, who employs 200 people in his schoolbook and paper
production facility and is related by marriage to the Brandts, believes an
active role and a low profile are the ingredients for commerical longevity
in Haiti's polity. 'The business sector prefers to work in the shadows, in a
place where politics is unstable, if you put your face up front you're going
to get punched in the face,' he says.
The ability to put a positive gloss on all political developments is matched
only by adaptability in business. The Mevs empire moved from import
substitution in the 1970s into export production, and then, when the embargo
cut off their raw materials, they turned their capital to infrastructural
development.
The kilometre stretch from the docks to the Cite Soleil shanty is now a
shipping terminal, shiny and empty, but sitting pretty as the US lifted
unilateral sanctions against Haiti yesterday and the embargo is expected to
follow.
Mr Mevs is very optimistic that, when that happens, not only he but all
Haiti can expect substantial developments. He emphasises the preconditions
for growth: proximity to the US market, preferential access under both the
Caribbean Business Initiative and the EU Lome agreements, cheap land and
labour, and the hefty stake the US has taken in Haitian success.
To make the most of that, the institutions of the state, Mr Mevs argues,
must be made compatible with a civil society.
A civil service of sinecures must be replaced with a functioning
bureaucracy. The economy must be secured to allow for a democratisation of
capital.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940927

