FT942-15464

FT  15 APR 94 / Flag is lowered on 'grand apartheid'


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


   UMTATA


Major General Bantu Holomisa stood erect, the bugler sounded the Last Post,
and the flag of Transkei was lowered for the last time. Nominally
independent since 1976, self-governing since the mid-1960s, victim of
corrupt leaders as well as apartheid itself, the territory was yesterday
re-incorporated into South Africa.
It was an act which, declared Mr Walter Sisulu, the guest of honour and
veteran African National Congress leader, marked 'the burial of the
apartheid system'.
Not quite: Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi continues to exploit the legacy of
apartheid, fighting for what amounts to an autonomous KwaZulu state in the
new South Africa. But that bitterly disputed issue was not allowed to spoil
yesterday's celebrations.
There were, however, some tense moments. The Escort to the Flag had to use
unconventional methods to discharge his solemn duty and save the day from
embarrassment. A particularly stubborn knot threatened to prolong the
attachment of the Transkei flag to the pole once it had reached the ground.
The white gloves of the officer did not help; strong white teeth did the
trick. A firm grip, a sharp tug, and the crowd cheered as the homeland of
Transkei was symbolically set free, and Bazooka Ben and his Band came on
stage to set feet tapping.
'The occasion symbolises the closing of the last chapter of the apartheid
system. . . It signifies the imminent dawn of a new era of a representative
government accountable to all South Africans,' the general told the crowd in
Umtata's independence stadium.
Comrade Johnson Mlambo, of the radical Pan-Africanist Congress, put past
injustice in the forefront of his concern. The average land holding in the
Transkei was under 2.8ha, while across the 'border' commercial farms spread
out over 1,500ha. The inequity must be addressed, he said.
Popular as a PAC campaign strategy this may be, Gen Holomisa made clear that
Xhosa-speaking Transkei is ANC country. Its favourite sons include Mr Nelson
Mandela, ANC president.
Gen Holomisa is himself well regarded locally. Number 13 on the ANC's list
of candidates for the national assembly to be elected in a fortnight, he is
earmarked either for a senior cabinet post or a top position in the
integrated defence forces.
The general, who took power in a bloodless coup at the end of 1987, has
proved a canny politician. He soon aligned himself with the ANC and the PAC.
Yesterday he was looking for votes. Transkei had suffered because Mr Mandela
and others from the territory had been in the vanguard of the battle against
apartheid, he told the crowd.
This historical grievance had to be redressed by the post-election
government, said the general. 'And it will,' he vowed, 'for I will be part
of the team'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940415

