FT941-17123

FT  06 JAN 94 / Technology: The appliance of ski science - Andrew Fisher
considers the latest developments in Alpine technology


   By ANDREW FISHER


To those who lurch clumsily down Alpine slopes while others glide along with
grace and speed, technology might not seem to have much of a role in skiing.
Some people simply ski better than others.
But skis, boots, bindings and even ski poles have developed considerably in
the past few years. They do not just look better than their predecessors,
they perform more effectively and durably for skiers of all skill levels.
Skis are designed to absorb more shock impact, boots to provide comfort as
well as support, and bindings to be adjustable for soft, hard or icy
surfaces.
These days, says Robbie Young, a UK sales representative with Salomon, the
French ski equipment company, people tend to ski longer during the day and
on harder surfaces. 'Skiing has changed dramatically as a result of
artificial snow,' he says. Many European resorts have snow machines and
those in North America use them early in the season to lay down a deep snow
base.
With the range of ski equipment on offer, however, it is easy to become
confused. Advanced materials, new methods of manufacturing skis, and the
variety of skis and boots - stronger, lighter, and more efficient at
transmitting energy from the body to the ski edge - have added the
complexities of high technology to Alpine sports.
'Gone are the days of flexing skis from the rack in a shop to discern their
finer qualities,' writes John Vaitkus, head of the test team of Ellis
Brigham, the UK winter sports retailers, in its latest brochure. 'I'm afraid
most manufacturers' blurb is best described as bull]'
Ellis Brigham tests out the newest equipment every year at Chamonix in
France. Most buyers will not be aware of, or care too much about, the latest
techniques used by ski makers such as Salomon, Rossignol, Kastle, Fischer or
K2. They will pick what suits their pocket and ability, bearing in mind that
much equipment will be used only for a week or two each year.
David Whitlow, Ellis Brigham's marketing director, says the company ignores
what manufacturers say about their products when it tests them. 'We only
really buy skis which make skiers smile.' Among its recommendations (and
those of Snow + Rock, its UK rival), is the monocoque range developed by
Salomon.
The monocoque is built as a one-piece shell, the aim being to transmit more
energy to the edges, on which most skiing is done. The load-bearing shell is
made from epoxy glass or composite material and filled with wood or
high-density foam. The part of the ski (the platform) under the boot is
designed to absorb shock and give skiers an accurate feel of the snow.
Salomon claims its skis are at least 20 per cent more efficient at
transmitting energy to the edges than most other makes. But rivals have also
come up with high-tech products.
The 4SV ski made by Rossignol, also French, for expert skiers uses a 'double
torsion box' structure with an inner layer of kevlar and carbon and an outer
casing of reinforced metal fibre strengthened at the sides with Quarztel, a
new quartz fibre.
Kastle, an Austrian company, developed its Syncap system with the Formula
One motor racing team run by its owner, Italy's Benetton family. The system
comprises a hard body shell of fibre - glass and epoxy for strength and
control and an inner layer of softer visco-elastic material to dampen
vibrations. For real speedsters, it mounts a carbon-kevlar reinforced
acceleration plate on the back of its top skis to stiffen them and give a
'catapult effect' out of the curves.
To reduce weight, Kastle uses a light wood core, fine air channels and
synthetic fibres on its lightweight Air Technology skis which it says are
some 25 per cent lighter than earlier models. These are for skiers who put
elegance and comfort above speed.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940106

