FT941-3429

FT  16 MAR 94 / Break-up threat to pension fund fantasy league


   By BARRY RILEY


It is the annual results season for the UK's occupational pension schemes.
Trustees are poring over sheets of opaque investment numbers, the two main
measuring agencies are about to publish their aggregated returns and fund
managers are preparing variously to boast or to make excuses.
But as the annual league table exercise nears its climax, there is a strong
feeling that the game is changing. Britain's unique focus on a shrinking
universe of so-called balanced managers who are engaged in the tweaking of
near-consensus strategies may be shifting.
As pension plans become ever more mature - that is, they move towards a
position where they will pay out more in benefits than they receive in
contributions - their risk tolerance grows smaller and their need to match
their assets in a customised way to their individual liabilities becomes
greater.
Yet if the old order is going out, it is retreating in some style. According
to provisional figures from one of the measurers, Caps, the median fund
returned 29 per cent last year, a result only beaten once (in 1989) in the
past decade. The five-year average annual rate of return for the median fund
now works out at 16.7 per cent, a long way above assumed actuarial returns
which are based on a small margin over growth in average employee earnings.
Certain managers achieved exceptional returns last year, such as Schroders
with almost 33 per cent. Morgan Grenfell did well too, and among the smaller
contenders Newton hit 35 per cent. The market leader Mercury Asset
Management keeps its figures to itself - there is a wide dispersion among
its hundreds of client funds - but Gartmore and Phillips & Drew Fund
Management both had unexciting years: Gartmore was pulled just above the
median at the end of the year by Hong Kong but PDFM stayed just below after
its bearish dash for cash proved ill-timed in the final quarter (though it
will have enjoyed this year so far).
But with equity and bond markets booming worldwide the value added by the
average manager does not appear to have been substantial. No great strategic
initiatives appear to have been taken in 1993. According to Caps, exposure
to UK equities drifted by 2 percentage points to 58 per cent of the average
portfolio, while overseas equities expanded by 1.5 points to 24.5 per cent.
Overseas bonds at 6 per cent scarcely budged, nor did UK fixed interest
bonds at 3.5 per cent (the government's Pounds 50bn gilt-edged selling
programme passed pension funds by).
The biggest current bets appear to be in international equity allocations,
where the US and Japan together accounted for only 30 per cent of overseas
equities at the end of 1993 although they represented 65 per cent of the
world ex-UK capitalisation. Many managers, however, have recently been going
back into Japan and moderating the extreme exposure to continental Europe
and the Pacific Rim (ex-Japan). The latter two regions accounted for 65 per
cent of pension fund overseas equity holdings, but for only 24 per cent of
the world ex-UK market.
Despite these tilted weightings, the present allocations of UK pension funds
can be almost wholly explained by the passive cumulative impact of past
returns. Instead of targeting an asset allocation and then periodically
rebalancing (by selling assets that have outperformed and buying others that
have underperformed) the managers have let their winners run. That may sound
reasonable but it ignores the accumulation of risk.
Now the balanced managers have reached an 82 per cent exposure to equities.
Some pension plans such as that of British Rail are beginning to buckle
under the strain and set up dedicated bond portfolios which are better
matched to their ever-shortening liability structure.
More generally, the fully-discretionary mandate is being phased out in
favour of benchmarks, usually set in terms of a combination of indices (or
for a specialist mandate, only one). This process is rapidly turning the
general performance table into a kind of fantasy league, which will have to
be replaced by many different specialist league tables.
It will be a whole lot more rational but a whole lot less fun.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940316

