FT942-14937

FT  18 APR 94 / World Bond Markets: Reversal seen in Ecu underperformance -
International


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


Fixed-income analysts are exhorting investors to buy Ecu bonds, arguing that
their underperformance during recent months of turbulence is about to be
reversed.
'Ecu bonds are cheap,' declares Mr Steve Major, senior bond analyst at
Credit Lyonnais Euro-Securities.
'We have a very rare situation which should make investors sit up and pay
attention,' echoes Mr Bob Tyley, senior strategist at Paribas Capital
Markets.
What makes Ecu bonds so attractive, they say, is that their yield spread
over German government bonds (bunds) has widened significantly. Similarly,
the gap between theoretical and actual Ecu bond yields is now close to flat,
and they expect the actual yield to recede below its theoretical counterpart
in coming weeks.
The theoretical yield is the yield which would result from constructing a
synthetic Ecu bond from the underlying constituent markets. The actual yield
is that earned from Ecu bonds trading in the market.
On Friday, the theoretical 10-year Ecu yield stood at 7.01 per cent,
compared with the 7.00 per cent actual yield on the benchmark Ecu bond. In a
normal market, the actual yield tends to trade around 20 to 25 basis points
through the theoretical yield.
Meanwhile, the 10-year Ecu benchmark yields about 60 to 65 basis points
above its German counterpart, and analysts say it could narrow to around 30
 -40 basis points in coming months.
According to Mr Tyley, the sector's weakness is not due to negative factors
pertaining to the market itself, but rather, to the Ecu having fallen by the
wayside during recent bond market turbulence.
'In volatile market environments, the Ecu market tends to be neglected,' he
says. 'Investors have enough to do trying to cope with the volatility in
their domestic markets, before worrying about the Ecu.'
Currency considerations are a further attraction, says Mr Major. If the
dollar rises to DM1.80 over the next three to six months, the Ecu/D-Mark
cross should rise to above DM1.95, from the current level of around
DM1.9350, he says.
'This should provide the opportunity for a significant increase in total
return for D-Mark-based investors and is a strong argument for increasing
exposure to the Ecu sector.'
Supply poses little threat, traders say. Last week saw Ecu1.2bn of Ecu
Eurobond issuance, spurred by arbitrage opportunities and a slight increase
in demand.
'We've seen some demand from investors - especially in the Far East - who
want exposure to Europe but don't feel confident to pick individual European
markets,' said one trader.
Some say that massive Ecu bond redemptions will facilitate the absorption of
new supply. Some Ecu14bn in bonds mature this year, and while those funds
won't necessarily all flow back into the Ecu market, retail investors have a
propensity to reinvest in the same currency, says Mr Tyley.
Nevertheless, many investors appear to be holding back in the face of more
near-term issuance. 'We've had some investor inquiries, but they know
there's more supply' in the pipeline, reports Mr Hans Knol ten Bensel,
Eurobond manager at Kredietbank in Brussels.
The UK is set to issue an estimated Ecu500m of 5 1/4 per cent notes due 1997
tomorrow and Spain is rumoured to be planning an Ecu1bn - 1.5bn bond over 10
to 15 years in coming weeks.
Moreover, investor confidence is still shaky, and likely to stay that way as
long as uncertainty over the direction of US interest rates keeps bond
markets jittery, says Mr Knol ten Bensel.
Until confidence in the longer end of the US and European yield curves
revives, he expects investors to keep their money in short maturities, which
stand to benefit most from further European interest rate cuts.
Meanwhile, a proposal floated late last year by the Commission of the
European Union to issue bonds to finance European infrastructure projects,
is dying a slow death after running into opposition from some EU member
states. 'The whole idea was not very well thought through and should be left
to die its natural death,' said a banking source.
The EU expects to borrow about Ecu4.5bn this year for projects which have
already been approved.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940418

