FT941-5551

FT  05 MAR 94 / The British miner's broken home: It is 10 years since the
last miners' strike. Since then, nine out of every 10 pits have stopped
producing. It is not only coal that has been lost. A whole culture is
disappearing with it


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


It was at a National Coal Board function in Yorkshire in the late 1970s that
I heard an old miner, a union official at Bentley Colliery, disputing
vigorously with one of the board's engineers. When the engineer left I
commented on the robustness of the old man's attack.
'I'm not bothered,' he said. 'Anyway, I'll be retiring soon.'
'What will you do then?'
'Oh, I'll read some philosophy,' he replied. 'Kant, mostly.'
It emerged that after years working down the pit he had gone to Oxford
University as a mature student to read philosophy, politics and economics. I
assumed he had attended Ruskin, the trade union college.
'No,' he said, 'Balliol.'
'May I ask what degree you got?'
'Well, it were a First.'
More startling than this admission was the fact that this man simply could
not adjust to the prospect that had been opened up to him in the south; he
went home to his own community and back down the pit.
It could not happen today. For one thing, Bentley Colliery, which was then
proudly displaying the latest in hydraulic pit prop technology, closed last
December. No private operator has shown an interest in it.
Ten years ago this week, it was the announced closure of another South
Yorkshire pit, Cortonwood, that set off the longest and most bitter strike
in the miners' history. They fought for a year in defence of their jobs and
communities but were divided and finally crushed.
Even when the strike ended, a year later almost to the day, neither the coal
board (now British Coal) nor the National Union of Mineworkers foresaw just
how savage the contraction of their industry would be. From 170 deep mines
employing 175,000 men in 1985 the state industry has shrivelled to 17
working pits employing fewer than 11,000 men. Of the 28 other mines which
British Coal has offered to lease to the private sector, one has started
producing and up to seven others may be reopened.
At its peak, just before the first world war, coal provided employment for
1m men, a tenth of the male working population. Britain was the world's
biggest coal exporter: its 3,000 mines produced half the coal in Europe, a
fifth of world output. The long retreat was inevitable as the steam age
passed, American and other coal competitors emerged and Britain's
manufacturing dominance faded; but it was partly arrested by two world wars
and, in the early 1970s, by the Opec cartel's quadrupling of oil prices. The
promised reprieve has been scotched by the government's decision to
privatise the electricity generators, to permit the 'dash for gas' as an
alternative fuel, to subsidise nuclear power and - finally - prepare the
pitiful remnants of the coal industry for privatisation next year.
But it is not only coal that has been lost. A whole culture is disappearing
with it and it is a loss that many non-miners nostalgically regret. The
public may have been outraged by the sight of picket line violence and
fearful of the revolutionary rhetoric of union leaders, but has shown
remarkable tolerance of the miners' demands and sympathy for their decline.
It was a public outcry in the Tory shires which forced Michael Heseltine,
president of the Board of Trade, to retract his announcement in October
1992, that 31 pits must close. (The number of pits closed since then is more
than 31, but the rundown has attracted much less attention.) When during the
1974 miners' strike, Edward Heath called his 'who rules?' general election,
the voters, in spite of their fear of 'political strikes', rejected him.
Even after suffering power cuts in the 1972 strike the public seemed to
agree with Lord Wilberforce that the miners deserved to be moved to the head
of the manual earnings league.
Some of this support is based on romantic sentiment, owing more to the books
of D H Lawrence and George Orwell than to familiarity with modern mining. As
Alan Mardghum, branch secretary of Wearmouth colliery (closed before
Christmas), said: 'In the south of England they still view coalmining as a
little lad of 12 gettin' down the pit with his pony and pushing tubs of coal
around. People need to be aware that it's a high-tech, highly-competitive
industry that's been butchered.' (The last pit ponies surfaced last month
when Ellington colliery, the remaining pit in the north-east, was closed.)
The popular image, says Professor Vic Allen, one-time amanuensis of the NUM
left, in his book The Militancy of British Miners, is of 'hard, unrefined
men, distinct and separate from other workers, hewing in mysterious dungeons
of coal; of dirty, strange men, in some ways frightening and for this reason
repellent, yet attractive because they are masculine and sensuous.'
Such romantic stereotyping has often worked to the miners' advantage, of
course. During the 1972 strike, Lawrence Daly, the NUM general secretary,
was heard shouting down the phone to the leader of a group of pickets who
were refusing to give up the social delights of being billeted with Essex
University students.
Yet the monochrome image of taciturn, blackened musclemen is often resented.
Olive Fowler, a former secretary of miners' leader Arthur Scargill, who now
works at Yorkshire Art Circus, a local authority-sponsored workshop in
Castleford, said the group had published three miners' autobiographies which
had only one feature in common: all three men knew Latin (one had Greek and
Hebrew, too). Another miner had exhibited his charcoal sketches of
underground scenes at the Royal Festival Hall in London, and had sold every
one.
If the public has relished the cultural pyrotechnics of mining communities,
miners themselves have always been ambivalent about the job. No doubt, it
was the difficulty, danger - and formerly poverty - of the work that created
the impressive structure of self-help, charity and solidarity in pit
villages. There were Christmas parties for the pensioners, trips to the
seaside and cheap booze at the welfare club. There were bands and parades
and festivals, such as the Durham Miners' Gala now struggling to survive
into its 110th year, where Labour politicians were permitted to address the
rank-and-file of the movement.
The miners' union was a social institution, recorded Will Paynter, the Welsh
miners' leader, in his autobiography: 'Harassed wives who had fallen behind
in hire-purchase instalments on some household goods, or had accumulated
arrears of rent . . . would require letters to be sent. Many times have I
appeared in the local court to testify as to the character of a man or child
who had fallen foul of the law.'
But if there was a choice of other work, miners often looked for it. A boy
who tamely followed his father down the pit was not necessarily seen as a
recruit to the praetorian guard of the proletariat, says Robert Houston,
former editor of The Miner, the NUM journal - he might just be too thick to
get a job anywhere else. The youth in the working men's club with his hand
round a pint of bitter is not necessarily a miner: he is just as likely to
be a hairdresser. But escaping was never easy.
Neil Greatrex, leader of the Nottinghamshire-based Union of Democratic
Mineworkers, wanted to join the army as an engineering cadet. His mother was
keen but his father refused to sign the paper, saying: 'What's good enough
for me is good for you.' Because of the union split, Greatrex's father
stopped talking to his son at the start of the strike, and died five years
later without relenting - an example of how the 1984-85 strike tested
solidarity to destruction.
Some, like Houston, escaped into journalism. Others found an exit via the
colliery brass band into professional music. Football has profited
enormously from Scottish mining: the same coalfield delivered up Sir Matt
Busby, Bill Shankly, Jock Stein and George Graham, the present Arsenal
manager. From the north-east coalfield came, among others, the Charlton
brothers and Bobby Robson. They say in the north that if you wanted a good
team all you had to do was go and shout down the nearest pit-shaft.
The same austere climate produced some remarkable political leaders - who
did not in most cases seek to enter the House of Commons; indeed, parliament
was often seen by ambitious union men as a place to which rivals could
safely be dispatched. Sometimes, as in the case of Lawrence Daly, this
extra-parliamentary skill was combined with extraordinary intellectual flair
and gift of oratory. The passion for self-education, especially in Scotland
and South Wales, was most marked on the political left. Professor Allen
observes haughtily that 'there are no books by any of the right-wing leaders
of the National Union of Mineworkers.'
The emphasis on miners' education was a feature of Scargill's rise to power
in Yorkshire: young men, chosen, one suspects, as much for their socialist
militancy as for their intelligence, would attend lectures in Sheffield and
Leeds to debate the distinction between delegatory and representative
democracy.
Naturally, the Communist Party took particular interest in the miners. Yet,
despite the emergence of men such as Abe and Alex Moffat in Scotland,
followed by Michael McGahey (whose father was a founder member of the
British party) or of Arthur Horner, Will Paynter and Dai Francis in Wales,
there was always the feeling in party circles that these men were miners
first, revolutionaries second.
When the Welsh communists, according to a party veteran recently, warned the
King Street comrades that coalmining was in terminal decline they were
simply contradicted.
McGahey, a fine orator who was on his first soap-box at the age of 13, liked
to intone the dogmas - 'as Lenin said, once the line is clear, organisation
is everything' - but showed a certain lack of attention to deep doctrinal
matters. During one lunch-break when he was presiding over the Communist
Party congress in London - it was the year the British party chose the
Eurocommunist road and the Kremlin had sent a full member of the politburo
to observe - McGahey seemed to be more interested in press coverage of a
local pit dispute.
His own annual conference was a model of democratic centralism, or what he
called a 'unanimity conference', leaving plenty of time for discussion of
other matters - history, people, world affairs. On one evening, discovering
the correspondents of the Financial Times and Morning Star playing snooker
in an upstairs room, he growled: 'Ye're dissipatin' yer youth. Come doon and
have a drink wi' me.'
For all the media attention men like McGahey had received during the 1960s
and 1970s, the left was always in a minority on the NUM national executive
until after Scargill's rise to power. Historically, too, the miners were
slow to move towards socialism, according to the historian Michael Jackson,
being the last big union to leave the Liberal Party for the Labour Party
(which Keir Hardie, another Scottish miner, was instrumental in creating).
The union, he says, was always pragmatic and ready to co-operate - even in
the contraction of the industry - in order to show that the much-desired
nationalisation of 1947 had 'worked'.
The last NUM president, Joe Gormley, epitomised this strategy of managed
decline. Gormley was the last person to promote national strikes - although
he put himself adroitly at the head of his men when, as in 1972 and 1974,
the dam was about to burst - and the first to promote market-related schemes
such as the incentive bonus payments that put money into miners' pockets.
His close relationship with Lord Ezra, former chairman of the coal board,
was seen by the Thatcher government as more like connivance and was one of
the factors which prompted its decision to confront and destroy the power of
the union.
It has been a long ascent and a long decline for the miners. At the
beginning of the 17th century they lived no better than slaves, says the
historian of the Scottish miners, Robin Page Arnot. They lived in hovels of
unspeakable squalor, were denied the right of habeas corpus and were buried
in separate ground. Nearly 400 years later, on the eve of the 1984 strike,
they were among the best-paid manual workers in the country, with access to
mortgages, cars and foreign holidays, the rewards of advances in technology
and productivity.
But the rules of the game had changed, decades of uncertain government
intervention had come to an end and, with the militant, uncompromising
Scargill at their head - to this day he will not acknowledge what happened
as a defeat - the NUM was confronted and its power destroyed. This political
drubbing was followed by commercial retribution, leaving today a swathe of
ghostly pit yards and derelict villages round the country for fresh-faced
sociology students to pick over. Perhaps some of them will win Firsts at
Oxford.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940305

