FT944-11174

FT  08 NOV 94 / Russia tries to end securities market chaos


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


President Boris Yeltsin of Russia issued a long awaited decree yesterday,
aimed at regulating the country's fledgling and chaotic securities market.
The decree, in part a reaction to the collapse of the MMM finance company in
early autumn which ruined thousands of small savers, should also provide a
legislative underpinning to a market in which both domestic and foreign
investors have been wary of investing because of the lack of an adequate
method of registering shares.
The decree, as reported by the Interfax news agency, says that all banks and
other financial institutions must be licensed by the government - 'in
concert with the central bank' - by the end of the year. It allows the
distribution of government securities, registered shares of corporations and
banks, options and warrants of securities, bonds, housing certificates and
other securities permitted by law.
Several Russian funds have taken advantage of investors' gullibility by
offering high rates of interest, sucking in money and then either vanishing
or closing down. The most notorious collapse was that of the MMM fund, whose
head, Mr Sergei Mavrodi, is now ignoring investors' demands for their money
back since he suspended trading in company shares.
The Yeltsin decree also orders the formation of a federal commission for
securities and the stock market, to be headed by Mr Anatoly Chubais  - the
new first deputy prime minister for the economy and finance. Previous rules
and decrees for a commission affiliated to the president's office have been
scrapped.
The present commission, largely inactive, has been composed of
representatives from the central bank, the ministry of finance, the
anti-monopoly committee and other official organisations. The president's
decree calls for a list of members of the new commission to be drawn up
within a month, and for the commission to set out a licensing procedure and
define the responsibilities of the financial institutions operating in the
market.
The decree has been issued as work advances on establishing a country-wide
network of brokers to deal in the shares of the 20,000 companies the
privatisation process has brought on to the market and to cater for an
estimated 40m shareholders. Groups of brokers have been assembled in Moscow,
St Petersburg and the other main regions of Russia. A dealing system based
on the Nasdaq screen-based model should be in place by early next year.
A consultant to the government charged with developing the broker network
said last night: 'In a country the size of Russia, with so many regional
centres across eight time zones, we will see emerging a system where most
deals are handled by regional dealers, handling regional companies, for
regional investors. However, maybe 100, growing to 500, companies will be of
interest to foreign investors.'
The decree does not make clear, however, how far the central bank will have
responsibility for regulating and intervening in the market, if at all.
The issue could be important as there is a fierce debate in Russia on the
relative benefits of the Anglo-American system of raising capital largely
through a freely operating stock exchange, and the German system whereby
commercial banks, under Bundesbank regulation, play a larger part in capital
provision and often join in the management of big industrial companies.
However, the most influential Russian officials concerned with the
development of the markets - especially Mr Dmitri Vassiliev, the deputy
chairman of the privatisation committee - appear to prefer the
Anglo-American model.
Twisting and turning, page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941108

