FT942-16049

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (3): Growth is expected to double - The
economy reflects consolidation and steady progress


   By PATRICK BLUM


Consolidation and steady progress are the fashionable words among economic
policy makers in Ljubljana, prompted by some of the best economic indicators
in central and eastern Europe.
After the initial post-independence disruption, Slovenia is begining to reap
the benefits of consistent, market-orientated reforms and of its
disengagement from former Yugoslavia.
The economy grew by about 1 per cent in 1993. Growth is expected to double
this year. Foreign reserves are at a record Dollars 1.7bn - and rising.
Inflation has been brought down from 22 per cent a month in 1991 to less
than 1.5 per cent a month now. A 1994 government inflation target of 13 per
cent looks as if it will be achieved, provided that wage rises are held back
and spending by local authorities is contained.
The budget deficit is small, representing less than 1 per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) last year. External indebtedness, at Dollars 1.8bn,
is relatively low, although Slovenia has inherited part of the former
Yugoslav debt.
The country has benefited in other ways. Under the old regime, the Yugoslav
economy was already less centralised and rigid than its communist
neighbours. As the richest of the former Yugoslav republics, Slovenia had a
relatively modern and open economy and some of its companies were able to
compete in western markets. The country's small size and homogeneous
population also helped.
But there were big challenges in making the systemic change. Inflation had
to be brought down, and tough adjustments made to offset the loss, caused by
the war in Bosnia and United Nations sanctions on Serbia, of about 40 per
cent of export markets. With exports accounting for 60-65 per cent of GDP,
losing these markets threatened a wave of bankruptcies.
In the event, most Slovene companies adjusted, mainly by slashing jobs; as a
result, unemployment has grown to more than 14 per cent of the workforce and
continues to rise. Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister, says that the
government's first priority was to stabilise the economy, then to encourage
a resumption of growth.
Throughout the process monetary policy had to remain restrictive and the
budget had to be balanced to bring down inflation. Unemployment, Mr Drnovsek
says, is unlikely to fall rapidly - even with recovery. 'It was not easy
during the past two years, but I think we are through the worst, and we can
now envisage faster than expected economic developments,' he says.
The rise of unemployment puts pressure on the budget, although the social
impact has been partly offset by the large number of people working in the
grey economy. Nevertheless, Mr Mitja Gaspari, the finance minister, says
that social transfers are likely to rise to about 5.2 per cent of GDP this
year, compared with 4.8 per cent of GDP in 1993.
This year's budget has yet to be discussed and approved by parliament, but
it has already faced considerable opposition from ministers because of tough
expenditure constraints. Mr Gaspari foresees a 1994 deficit of tolars 7bn,
representing about 0.5 per cent of GDP. 'We want to keep the deficit low.
There will be no important changes in our orientation,' he says. But the tax
system is being modernised and streamlined; there are new taxes on tobacco
and alcohol; and value added tax will be introduced in 1995-96. Tax
collection will be improved and simplified.
Nevertheless, Mr Gaspari is cautious about prospects. 'All the figures we
have do not yet confirm a sustained growth pattern. Domestic consumption
alone is not enough to sustain growth and it is not certain that we can
continue with a restrictive wage policy.' There is strong trades union and
political opposition to cuts in real wages and living standards, and private
consumption has remained high, rising by 8.8 per cent in 1993.
This is obvious in Ljubljana's commercial and shopping centre. It bustles
with activity. Popular pizzerias are full of students who spend more money
on their lunch than students in most other former communist countries.
Slovenes had the highest standards of living in the former Yugoslavia. With
per capita GDP at about Dollars 6,000 a year, it remains almost double that
of Hungary and more than twice that of the Czech Republic, whose living
standards are the highest among the former Soviet bloc reforming economies.
Such prosperity is reflected in the region's highest labour costs, although
this is partly compensated for by higher productivity, better
telecommunications and and more developed infrastructure. Productivity is
estimated to have risen 3.7 per cent last year, and is expected to rise by
another 2 per cent in 1994. 'Productivity in Slovenia is the highest among
the whole group of reforming economies in central and eastern Europe,' says
a senior western executive with a large joint venture in eastern Slovenia.
But the government felt compelled to introduce wage controls in 1993 and may
re-introduce them this year. The prime minister worries that 'high wages are
a problem which can endanger the competitiveness of our companies.' He
complains that managers and workers in self-managed companies have been used
to awarding themselves excessively high wage rises - he hopes this will stop
once companies are privatised and face market pressures.
Dissolution of the former Yugoslav market meant that companies lost access
to cheap materials and inputs. Now they need to reduce costs by modernising
production lines and developing new products - and looking for new markets.
But with real interest rates at about 12 per cent for prime customers, and
18 per cent for others, companies say they cannot afford to borrow and
invest. Government efforts to force interest rates down more rapidly failed,
as the banks fought to hold on to their margins, but rates are now falling
very gradually.
Meanwhile, foreign investment is being officially courted, although there is
still considerable public resistance to selling Slovene companies to
foreigners. There are more than 3,000 joint ventures with foreign partners,
and more than Dollars 1bn of foreign capital has been invested since 1990.
Mr France Arhar, governor of the central bank, leads the charge against
popular fears of foreign investment. 'A small economy must have an open
market for capital movements, goods and services. This is a precondition if
we want to maintain or increase production.'
Privatisation and foreign investment are expected to accelerate the pace of
restructuring, which until now, critics say, has consisted mainly of cutting
jobs rather than modernising production to meet higher western requirements.
With domestic demand expected to stagnate this year, growth prospects
continue to depend mainly on higher exports and recovery in Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940412

