FT942-15841

FT  13 APR 94 / UK Company News: Float to value Brewin Dolphin at Pounds 40m


   By SIMON DAVIES


Brewin Dolphin, one of the UK's oldest and largest private client
stockbroking groups, is to be floated on the London Stock Exchange this
summer. The company will be valued at up to Pounds 40m.
This follows the Pounds 7m purchase of Bell Lawrie White, Scotland's largest
broker, from TSB in April 1993, a move which almost doubled its client base.
The proceeds from the flotation will be used to pay off its Pounds 4.5m of
long-term bank debt and Pounds 1.1m of preference shares.
Mr John Hall, managing director, said there was no evidence of specialist
private client brokerages being squeezed out from between the larger
institutionally-orientated houses and the execution-only operators.
Brewin Dolphin has seen a steady increase of new clients and funds, and it
remained profitable throughout the volatile market conditions of the
late-1980s.
The company, which employs 420 people, made record pre-tax profits of Pounds
3.5m last year  - before a Pounds 300,000 exceptional loss related to the
cancellation of Taurus, the Stock Exchange's failed electronic settlement
system.
With a full-year contribution from Bell Lawrie, and the pay-down of its
debt, 1994 would be expected to show a marked improvement.
Brewin Dolphin maintains portfolios for 32,000 private clients and trustees,
and controls Pounds 4.5bn of funds, of which Pounds 900m are held on a
discretionary basis. It also owns Stocktrade, which offers an execution-only
broking service to TSB branches and a number of Scottish banks.
It is 85 per cent owned by its directors and employees, who launched a
management buy-out from its parent, Scandinavian Bank, in April 1992.
Baronsmead and 3i Group are also shareholders. It is believed the buy-out
valued the group at about Pounds 4m, which suggests substantial rewards for
the backers.
Mr Hall said that the vast majority of employee shareholders would retain
their stakes in the company. The outside institutional shareholders have
also indicated that they would not sell out, he said.
There have been few other flotations of private client brokerages, but Greig
Middleton, one of Brewin Dolphin's main competitors, was purchased recently
by King & Shaxson, the discount house.
Greig Middleton, which has Pounds 2bn of funds under management, achieved
pre-tax profits of Pounds 2.9m in the year to July 1993, and was purchased
for Pounds 18.5m.
The Brewin Dolphin flotation is being sponsored by Charterhouse Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940413

