FT941-4229

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (12): Massive demand for retail
space - In contrast, the market for central Lisbon office space is suffering
from the effects of substantial oversupply / Portugal


   By PETER WISE


A striking new retail and residential centre is rising out of the ashes of
the fire that destroyed the heart of Lisbon's historic Chiado shopping
district in 1988. But it will only go a short way towards meeting the
massive demand for retail space that is currently dominating the Portuguese
property market.
Big international retailers such as Hard Rock Cafe, Virgin Records and
British Home Stores are poised to move into Portugal while established
foreign chains including McDonald's, Pizza Hut and the Spanish fashion store
Zara are expanding aggressively.
The result is that demand for prime retail sites far outstrips supply. New
rents for shops in the central Avenida da Liberdade or Chiado areas have
reached Es15,000 a sq m a month; more than three times the prices paid in
the relatively depressed office market, where supply exceeds demand.
The new Chiado development, conceived by Mr Alvaro Siza Vieira, Portugal's
most respected architect, in a style reminiscent of the original 18th
century buildings, is due to be largely completed by the end of 1995, and
will absorb only a small part of this demand. Many of the original retailers
will be entitled to reoccupy the area, with the result that only a few new
sites will come onto the market.
It will be comprised of 30 per cent office space, 30 per cent retail and 40
per cent residential. The aim in building residential apartments is to bring
new life to the city centre. Almost no one lives there at present and the
area becomes a deserted shell as soon as shops and offices close - a factor
that partly explains why the fire was already out of control before the
alarm was raised.
'Lisbon still lacks quality new shops,' says Mr George Craven, director of
Lisbon-based Sofica Savills. 'Buildings in the Chiado reconstruction are now
being completed but they stand against part-finished structures and work yet
to be begun, leaving retailers who are being asked prime rents nervous about
returning to the area.'
However, three other important developments will relieve the pressure for
retail sites over the next few years. 'The Colombus Centre, a mixed
development in the Benfica suburb of Lisbon, will place 133,000 sq m of
shopping space on the market by 1997,' says Mr Eric van Leuven, managing
director in Portugal of Healey & Baker, 'laying claim to being one of the
biggest shopping centres in Europe.'
El Corte Ingles, the Spanish department store, will take up a 30,000 sq m
anchor store in a development to be built around a new Hilton Hotel
alongside Lisbon's Eduardo VII park by 1997.
An additional 20,000 sq m will be made available for smaller shops. In the
town of Oeiras, a few miles from Lisbon, a 40,000 sq m shopping centre with
its own important catchment area should be ready by early 1996.
In contrast to the buoyant retail sector, the market for central Lisbon
office space is suffering from the effects of substantial oversupply. Rents
have fallen about 35 per cent over the past two years to a current level of
Es4,500 sq m.
Demand is strong, with an annual take-up of some 60,000 sq m that has
remained steady over the past five years. But the vacancy rate is about 6
per cent, with 100,000 sq m of new office space and 50,000 sq m of
secondhand offices unoccupied in Lisbon. This rate compares favourably with
cities such as Madrid, Paris or London but is a symptom of growing
difficulties in Lisbon where there have been no vacancies at all in recent
years.
Another 75,000 sq m of new office space is expected to come onto the Lisbon
market in 1994 and the level of new building is unlikely to diminish over
the next few years. This will push up vacancy rates, increase oversupply and
hold down rents.
Because new rents are falling closer to the level of older rents, many
companies are moving out of dilapidated, inefficient buildings in the centre
of Lisbon into more modern developments. The clear choice of multinationals
is for out-of-town or edge-of-town business parks where new rents are
currently about Es4,100 and conditions including traffic and parking are
more attractive.
'Some companies that took up offices in the late 1980s, when rents were at
their peak, are also keen to move,' says Mr van Leuven. 'Under Portuguese
law, rents rise with inflation. These companies may now be paying Es8,000 sq
m when they could rent new premises for almost half that.'
A crucial factor in stimulating Portugal's underdeveloped investment market
will be the approval of a new commercial lease law. The current law provides
tenants with perpetual security of tenure without any open-market rent
reviews. The new law will provide for fixed-term contracts after which rents
can be renegotiated at market rates. The legislation could be approved
within the next few months - a promise that the authorities have been making
since 1987.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940311

