FT942-12321

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (27): Records
broken, then the market overheats - Investment trusts / Investors should
remember that buying trusts for short-term profit is always a risk


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Investment trusts had an exciting ride in the first quarter of 1994. Records
were broken and rebroken in the space of a few weeks.
Share issues by new and existing trusts raised about Pounds 2bn - more than
during the whole of 1993. Discounts* were at their lowest level for more
than 20 years, and many trusts in fashionable sectors, such as emerging
markets, were at a premium.
But by the end of February, things were starting to look less rosy. The
floods of money pouring into new issues were starting to thin out; discounts
reappeared on trusts which had become accustomed to trading at a premium; a
few planned issues were postponed as marketing managers realised the
overheated climate was chilling rapidly.
New issues
The biggest launches of the first quarter of 1994 were the two European
privatisation funds from Kleinwort Benson and Mercury Asset Management.
Investor demand was overwhelming: the Kleinwort fund raised Pounds 500m, and
was Pounds 360m oversubscribed; the Mercury fund raised Pounds 575m.
With demand so strong, it was assumed that both funds would go to an
immediate premium when the shares started trading. But that was reckoning
without a distinct change in market sentiment in the period between the
launch and the shares actually hitting the market.
In the event, both trusts have slipped fairly rapidly to a discount to their
initial price of 10 per cent or more - not unusual in historical terms for
investment trusts, but much wider than recent norms, and disappointing for
anyone expecting any investment with the word 'privatisation' attached to be
an immediate moneyspinner.
Investors should remember the golden rule that investment trusts are a
long-term investment - buying them with the aim of making short-term profits
is always a risky proposition.
Three other new funds - Fidelity Japanese Values, Edinburgh New Tiger, and
Schroder UK Growth - raised more than Pounds 100m each, while smaller issues
focused on Israel, Taiwan, Latin America, and smaller companies.
C-shares
Existing trusts also rushed to raise new money with conversion share
(C-share) issues. C-shares are so called because the pool of new money is
kept separate until it has been invested, when the C-shares are converted
into ordinary shares with the same asset value as the existing ordinary
shares.
The most successful of the C-share issues early this year was Fleming
Japanese investment trust, which pulled in Pounds 159m with its conversion
share issue. Abtrust's New Dawn trust and the County Smaller Companies trust
raised about Pounds 29m and Pounds 36m respectively.
Discounts narrow - and widen
The main cause of the record level of interest in investment trusts was
simple: low interest rates.
Savers deserted building societies for shares, as they sought better returns
than the 5 or 6 per cent their money was earning on deposit. Investment and
unit trusts, which spread the risk of investing in equities and are packaged
to make them accessible to private investors, reaped the benefit.
Increased demand pushed up the price of shares in existing investment
trusts, squeezing discounts to their narrowest level for two decades. At one
stage in January, the average discount was 4 per cent - compared with 12 per
cent at the start of 1993 - and discounts of 25 or 30 per cent a decade
earlier.
While existing funds are trading at a premium or near asset value, it makes
sense to buy new issues, as they effectively offer a cheaper way to acquire
the same assets. Fund management groups are happy to oblige with a flood of
new trusts, or additional share issues by existing funds - after all, the
more money they manage, the bigger the fees they earn.
However, as soon as discounts reappear on existing funds, it is more logical
to buy cheaper shares in a trust which has a record, if one exists in your
preferred sector. Demand for new issues then drops off dramatically. This
started to happen by the end of February.
The repercussions in world stock markets of a modest rise in US interest
rates in February also reminded investors that what goes up can also come
down, and made them reluctant to commit more money to the markets.
Public offers which have closed within the last few weeks have generally
raised amounts far short of the original targets. Late this month, the offer
periods for a handful of new trusts were still open, but expectations of how
much money they would raise had been scaled down drastically from the first
month or two of the year.
What next?
The investment trust market needs a little time to digest the huge chunk of
new money it has gobbled up in the past few months. New issues will probably
continue to appear, but as a trickle rather than a flood, and mostly in
specialised areas where there is currently a lack of supply.
The big question now for investment trust companies is how to keep all their
new investors happy. If first-time buyers of trusts see the price of their
shares slumping in the first few months, they may be tempted to cut their
losses and head back to the building society.
The best method investment trusts have found so far for keeping discounts
small and steady (and therefore investors happy) is by establishing savings
schemes, to attract a steady flow of money, providing a constant background
demand for shares. Savings schemes were introduced 10 years ago, and are
increasingly popular among small investors.
Several industry analysts now say that the key to its future lies in
providing more packaged investment products, such as pensions and mortgage
repayment schemes, in direct competition with the traditional life assurance
and pensions industry. This is already starting to happen: Foreign &
Colonial, one of the investment trust giants, recently launched a pension
plan attached to its funds. How soon, and in what way, other providers will
follow remains to be seen.
*An investment trust is said to be trading at a discount when its share
price is lower than the value of assets attributable to each share. A large
discount indicates lack of demand for a share.  Premiums arise when
investors are willing to pay more for a share than its assets are worth.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940429

