FT942-14274

FT  21 APR 94 / Adviser to dead Kuwaiti urged to come forward


   By JIMMY BURNS


Police last night appealed for the financial adviser to the murdered member
of one of Kuwait's wealthiest business families to help them with their
inquiries. The adviser is thought to be a London stockbroker but his
identity is not known.
The victim - whose decapitated and burnt body was found in Manchester in
December - was yesterday identified as Mr Adnan Abdul Hameed Al-Sane.
His family business interests are thought to include several businesses and
private holdings in the Middle East, properties in Europe and offshore bank
accounts.
Police said Mr Al-Sane was the youngest member of a family of 11 and the
only one not living in Kuwait. Banking sources said he is understood to have
left his country with a large debt after a local stock market crash. He is
believed to have settled in London in 1986 after living for a period in
Bahrain.
Det Supt Bernard Rees of Manchester police, who is leading the
investigation, said that he wanted to interview an individual who is
believed to have advised Mr Al-Sane on his extensive interests. There is no
suggestion that the individual was in any way involved with the murder.
Police who searched Mr Al-Sane's apartment in Maida Vale, north London,
discovered papers relating to his financial dealings missing from boxes of
files. They have been told by close relatives that the files contained
details of properties held in Switzerland, France, Jordan and the Cayman
Islands, Swiss bank accounts and share certificates.
According to the police, Mr Al-Sane's severed and mutilated head was found
in Staffordshire seven weeks after the discovery of his torso near a
Manchester railway station. The victim was identified by his solicitor after
a photograph of a model of his head was circulated by police.
The mystery surrounding Mr Al-Sane's macabre murder deepened yesterday when
it emerged that a Jordanian citizen wounded with his girlfriend in a
shooting incident in London at the weekend had been involved in a civil
legal action involving Mr Al-Sane.
The Jordanian, who is recovering in a London hospital, was being sued in
connection with Pounds 600,000 that Mr Al-Sane claimed was owed to him.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940421

