FT944-10964

FT  08 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Middle way urged for EU
agricultural policy


   By ALISON MAITLAND


Farming without subsidies can lead to rural decline, a neglected countryside
and volatile incomes for farmers. It can also mean more opportunities for
new entrants, innovative marketing of produce and less bureaucracy.
Mr Graham McConnell, a New Zealander who recently took over as principal of
Harper Adams, a leading British agricultural college, believes European
agriculture should find a middle way between the extremes of hefty subsidies
and free markets.
Some 10 per cent of total farm income in Australia and 5 per cent in New
Zealand is derived from subsidies, compared with 38 per cent in the European
Union.
Mr McConnell, who taught farm management in Australia for 16 years before
moving to the UK, told a recent conference organised by the Country
Landowners' Association:
'An undeniable consequence of free market farming is frequent periods of low
profitability and consequential decline of rural communities and services.'
Farming at world prices means uncertainty is greater and farmers are less
willing and able to borrow to expand, said Mr McConnell. Some farms are
run-down, and farmers employ as few staff as possible, adopting a
conservative approach of 'low debt, low stocking rates and low risk.'
He added: 'Rural depopulation is a serious consequence of low farmer incomes
 .There are many semi-ghost towns with no industry and surrounded by an
impoverished farming community'.
On the other hand, volatile land and stock values in Australia and New
Zealand provided regular opportunities to buy at a discount. 'In both
countries, there are still opportunities for a keen young person. . . to go
farming in his own right. This is usually achieved by leasing land initially
or share milking.'
Mr McConnell said it was impossible to back one or other system completely,
especially in a European Union of 350m people, compared with Australia's 18m
and New Zealand's 3.5m. 'It is illogical to believe that the EU and Britain
must choose one or the other, with no middle ground.'

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941108

