FT942-16399

FT  11 APR 94 / Speculation on Major is over says Fowler


   By ROLAND RUDD


Sir Norman Fowler, Tory party chairman, insisted yesterday that the
speculation about the prime minister's future had 'faded away'.
As MPs prepared to return to the Commons tomorrow after the Easter recess
Sir Norman tried to damp talk of a leadership challenge which had been
fuelled by calls from backbenchers for Mr John Major to resign.
The prime minister gave a robust defence of his leadership in an interview
with the Mail on Sunday. He said: 'Some people equate what they call strong
leadership with not consulting your colleagues, not listening to other
people and sometimes with noise rather than substance. I do not.'
Mr Major went on to warn that he would not change his policy, style or
objectives to appease his critics. He stressed that he was not 'overly
concerned' with his own position.
Sir Norman said on BBC television's Breakfast With Frost programme that he
was happy with the prime minister's position. He said: 'I think what the
Conservative party wants is to get behind the prime minister. I think that
all the stuff about leadership has faded away and what we want to do is to
get into the election and get into the real issues of the election itself.'
He dismissed talk of a leadership challenge.
Sir Norman was criticised privately by some backbenchers for predicting that
the Tories would gain seats in the local government elections on May 5. A
survey in yesterday's Sunday Times predicted the Tories could lose up to 329
seats in the council elections.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow environment secretary, denied that speculation over Mr
Major's leadership had faded away.
But he played down Labour's chances of success at the local elections. 'We
expect to do well in terms of the share of the vote, but it is an
arithmetical fact that it is extremely difficult for us to win more seats in
some areas,' he said.
Mr Charles Kennedy, Liberal Democrat president, said his party was 'very
cautious' about its prospects for the elections, but because it did badly in
1990 it would expect 'modest improvements'.
Samuel Brittan, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940411

