FT941-12885

FT  28 JAN 94 / Turkey tightens monetary policy


   By JOHN MURRAY-BROWN


Turkey yesterday unveiled measures to bolster faltering confidence in the
lira in the wake of a 11.97 per cent devaluation of the currency.
The changes, announced by the central bank governor, Mr Bulent Gultekin,
represent a tightening in monetary policy. The move is likely to create
further upward pressure on interest rates, as banking authorities seek to
soak up the lira liquidity to support the currency.
Turkey's leading retail banks yesterday introduced new rates, with one-year
deposits now earning around 88 per cent. Overnight rates have been pushed as
high as 180 per cent in the wake of the currency crisis.
Under the reforms, the central bank redefines its reserve requirement to
reflect a bank's total liabilities, not just the volume of time deposits as
before. The measures, which appeared to have slowed the fall of the lira
yesterday, were broadly welcomed by Turkish bankers. However, they penalise
wholesale non-deposit banks, particularly foreign banks.
The moves aim to restore currency stability around the central bank's newly
announced rate of 17,250 to the dollar. The changes will add considerably to
the costs to banks of raising funds, but they will help the government
finance the budget deficit as banks move to meet the new reserve
requirement.
After hectic trading yesterday, the Istanbul stock exchange closed at
19,581, down around 7 per cent in lira terms. In dollars terms the market
has lost close to 35 per cent since the run on the lira started 13 days ago.
There was reported heavy selling of most bank shares.
Mrs Tansu Ciller, the prime minister, said the measures were 'in line with
the rules of the free market'. The moves nonetheless mark a significant
reversal of policy, with Mrs Ciller forced to raise interest rates, adding
to budget costs, through increased interest payments on government debt, and
raising the working capital costs of private industry.
The lira realignment was initially triggered by the announcement of US
rating agencies Moody's and Standard & Poor's that Turkish credit rating had
been downgraded.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940128

