FT942-16279

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (10): Rich in natural
resources - Bolivia


   By WINSTON MOORE


Bolivia stands at the heart of South America and is a country rich in
natural resources, yet little is known save for a mistaken image abroad that
it continues to languish amid high inflation and political problems.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Bolivia implemented a landmark
structural adjustment plan in 1985 which reduced 20,000 per cent inflation
to single figures in under a year.
Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, the planning minister who masterminded Bolivia's
anti-inflation programme, returned to public office last August as president
with a bold programme to capitalise six of Bolivia's leading state
enterprises. This will involve handing over the administration of the state
companies - in the areas of telecommunications, oil and gas, rail and air
transport, smelting and electricity - to foreign investors as well as the
free distribution of 50 per cent of public sector company shares among
voting age Bolivians. The government reckons the scheme will attract
USDollars 8bn in foreign investment over the next four years and result in a
7-8 per cent rate of GDP growth by 1997.
One project that has caught the eye of foreign investors is the construction
of a gas pipeline from Bolivia across the Matto Grosso to the industrial
city of Sao Paulo in Brazil. The Brazilian government's decision to end the
monopoly of Petrobras in Brazil - a condition set by the World Bank - paves
the way for the signing of this gas contract with Bolivia. The deal will
ensure Sao Paolo receives 8m cu m of Bolivian natural gas a day to power six
hydroelectric turbines which will meet 30 per cent of the city's energy
needs.
Bolivia's state oil and gas producer YPFB hopes to complete the USDollars
2bn funding for the pipeline by August, when the project will be put up for
international tender. Besides selling gas to Argentina and Brazil, Bolivia
is looking to sell 14.5m cu ft of gas a day to Paraguay for industrial and
domestic use.
Carlos Miranda, Bolivia secretary for hydrocarbons, says the value of YPFB,
which is one of the state monopolies up for capitalisation, ranges from
USDollars 1.5bn to USDollars 2bn, but this figure could rise once the
project to export gas to Brazil gets closer to coming on stream in 1997.
YPFB currently accounts for half of the Bolivian state revenues. Several
foreign companies involved in the gas industry including BHP, Tenneco,
British Gas, Enron and Total have expressed interest in the project.
Mining sector investment in 1994 will be between USDollars 40m and USDollars
50 according to Jaime Villalobos, the national secretary of mining.
Investment in the sector virtually ground to a halt until the Inti Raymi
gold mining corporation ploughed USDollars 150m into its operations in 1992.
Mining sector investments totalled USDollars 45.8m in 1993. Investor
interest declined due to depressed world market prices and a failed contract
involving FMC Lithium Division.
Mr Villalobos has now devised a medium-term plan to invest USDollars 350M in
Comibol's mines through a series of 'joint ventures'. Comibol will move out
of production to oversee the administration of joint ventures contracts.
These contracts will serve to attract investment, technology, create new
jobs, and raise tax revenues.
In a country still sensitive about privatisation, Mr Villalobos defined
'joint venture' as 'the participation of the private sector in an area of
production from which the state is pulling out'. Comibol is seeking foreign
and domestic companies to exploit rich untapped reserves at Huanuni, using
open cast mining methods.
Until these projects bear fruit, Comibol will continue to operate and
produce at its only profitable mines: Colquiri, Huanuni and Caracoles.
Mining exports have throughout Bolivian history set the pattern of the
country's external trade, first with silver, then tin and more recently with
a range of mining products. Non traditional exports appeared from nowhere in
the 1980s and their rise to the top of the list of exports will herald a new
phase in foreign trade.
Non-traditional exports totalled USDollars 270m in 1993 - but unofficial
figures say the figure could be as high as USDollars 300m. Bolivia exported
minerals worth USDollars 366m in 1993, although this figure has been revised
to around USDollars 335m by the Central Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940411

