FT942-15844

FT  13 APR 94 / UK Company News: DRS coming to market with expected Pounds
40m tag


   By PAUL TAYLOR


DRS, the scanning equipment manufacturer, is coming to market through a
placing with institutional investors.
The placing is likely to value the Milton Keynes-based group, which has
grown quickly in the last three years, at about Pounds 40m and raise between
Pounds 10m and Pounds 15m of new money.
Mr Malcolm Brighton, managing director who founded DRS 25 years ago, said
the proceeds would be used mainly to further expand overseas sales and fund
new product developments.
'We want to do in other countries and other sectors what we have done in the
UK,' he said.
The company supplies the fast-growing market for scanners which can capture
hand-written data, such as ticks on multiple-choice forms, for processing by
computers.
DRS began as a computer bureau in-putting computer data on behalf of
customers. More recently the group developed specialist optical mark reading
and optical character reading equipment.
The group now manufactures OMR and OCR hardware and develops software to
link these devices to personal computers and main frames. It also designs
and prints forms for customers collecting large amounts of data, such as
education authorities and the British Market Research Bureau, and operates a
bureau service for analysing the results.
Sales and profits have grown rapidly since the group began its own
manufacturing operations at the end of the 1980s. Last year pre-tax profits
increased from Pounds 1.69m to Pounds 2.96m on turnover ahead by 48 per cent
to Pounds 11.6m (Pounds 7.81m) fuelled by expanding sales to education and
health establishments in particular. The group has no debt.
DRS exports to about 15 countries, but would like to expand into other
markets, including the US. It is also considering expansion into other image
processing markets.
The markets for its services and equipment have been growing rapidly as
organisations in both the private and public sectors increase the amount of
data and information they collect but are struggling to cut time and costs
from the data processing chain.
About 30 per cent of the enlarged capital is expected to be placed with
institutional investors. The executive directors, who currently hold about
72 per cent of the shares, will still hold a majority stake after flotation.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940413

