FT941-4112

FT  12 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE 3,200 lost as bond weakness
hits shares - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


An unexpected setback in UK government bonds undermined the stock market
yesterday, driving the FT-SE Index down 42 points as it abandoned the 3,200
mark in equity trading described as brisk, but by no means heavy. London
suffered more seriously than other European markets from the backwash of
Thursday's setback in US bonds.
A weakening in sterling against the German mark, attributed both to
disappointment with the widening of the UK trade deficit in December, and
with the cross current from the dollar's fall, posed a threat to the stock
market's hopes for a base rate cut. Equity strategists read the trade
figures as indicating that export growth might be faltering, although some
perceived this as a buttress to interest rate optimism.
Equities opened lower and gave further ground as selling of stock index
futures developed ahead of the expiry next week of the March contract on the
FT-SE Index. The pace of the setback increased sharply in late afternoon,
when the equity trading account drew to its close. Although both Wall Street
and the New York bond market performed steadily following publication of the
US retail sales data for last month, UK gilts plunged through important
support levels.
The final reading showed the FT-SE Index at 3,191.9, with virtually no sign
of recovery. The Index has fallen by 86.1 points this week for a total loss
of 2.7 per cent over the two week trading account.
Share prices had tried at the beginning of the week to disengage from the
slide in bonds but yesterday's performance indicates that bond markets
continue to rule equities. The big pension funds, and similar income seeking
institutional investors, are still restructuring portfolios in the light of
the rise in bond yields over the past three weeks.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index fell 51 points to 3,857.4, although traders said
that prices for these second line stocks had simply been marked down with
the blue chips, and had seen little selling.
Seaq trading volume of 776.3m shares was well short of the previous session.
Thursday's 901.9m shares returned a retail worth of Pounds 2.12bn, at the
top end of this year's daily averages.
The setback in share prices was evenly spread, with hardly any sectors
escaping the pressure. Some banking stocks were hit hard, in spite of the
market's favourable response to the sector's dividend prospects. But so also
were many of the leading industrial stocks.
However, analysts sounded relatively undismayed by the sudden downturn.
Longer term views remained faily sanguine with higher dividends and earnings
expected to continue helping a market where interest rate hopes have become
more subdued. This week has brought a number of good profits and dividend
statements, with BTR and Rolls-Royce standing out well.
But there was disappointment with the reaction by UK equities and bonds to a
fairly mild day for economic news. Next week brings more serious tests for
investor sentiment in the form of producer prices, retail sales and public
sector borrowing data on the UK economy.
With global markets still highly sensitive to the chances of a tightening in
credit policy by the US Federal Reserve, markets will also be challenged
next week by producer and consumer pricing statistics from Washington.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940312

