FT942-15546

FT  14 APR 94 / International Company News: United Airlines workers agree to
pay cuts


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Employees of United Airlines, the world's biggest airline, have agreed to
take pay-cuts of up to 23 per cent in return for shares that will give them
a controlling stake in the company, it emerged yesterday.
They have also agreed to forgo wage increases for the next three years, take
cuts in fringe benefits and accept changes to working practices that will
together save the airline Dollars 5.2bn over the next 12 years, or Dollars
3.3bn in today's money.
In exchange, employees will get stock under an employee share ownership plan
that will give them between 53 per cent and 63 per cent of United's shares,
depending on how the share price performs over the next year.
The intended effect of the transaction - one of the biggest employee
buy-outs - will be to achieve drastic cuts in United's costs and enable it
to fight back against low-cost carriers such as Southwest Airlines, which
have been driving down fares on short-haul routes in the US and grabbing
market share.
Full details of the plan emerged as United Airlines filed its proposals with
the Securities and Exchange Commission. The plan has already been agreed by
labour unions and management but has yet to be approved by shareholders, who
will vote on it in about two months.
The prospectus shows that the biggest pay cuts will fall on pilots. All have
agreed to take a cut in hourly pay rates of 15.7 per cent, and those working
for a new low-cost operation that will take over United's short-haul flights
will take a further reduction of 7.1 per cent.
Maintenance crew and other blue-collar workers have agreed to a pay cut of
9.7 per cent and will also lose the 5 per cent rise they were due to receive
next month.
Like the pilots, they have also agreed to forgo pay rises for three years
except on promotion, and will not get any 'snap-back' to previous pay levels
when the pay freeze ends.
On top of the Dollars 3.3bn resulting from pay cuts and other benefit
reductions, United expects to make other savings as a result of its decision
to set up a low-cost, short-haul airline-within-an-airline dubbed 'U2' - for
example, through more intensive use of its employees and assets. The total
of all savings over the next 12 years is estimated at Dollars 4.9bn in
today's money.
United believes this will enable it to lower operating costs per available
seat mile on short-haul routes by 30 per cent to 7.4 cents - only slightly
above Southwest's 7.2 cents - while continuing to offer frills, such as
assigned seating and first-class accommodation.
In a presentation to analysts yesterday, Mr Gerald Greenwald, the former
Chrysler vice-chairman chosen by United's unions to replace Mr Stephen Wolf
as chairman and chief executive, sought to allay concerns in the investment
community that the airline would be subject to worker control.
He said the unions would nominate two of the board's 12 members and have a
say in the selection of four other independent directors. 'But the company
must be managed in a professional manner, and management is clearly not a
role that they seek.'
Mr Greenwald said the unions would, however, have the power of veto over
asset disposals worth more than Dollars 1bn, over the selection of
'inappropriate or inexperienced' board members, and over big mergers or
non-airline acquisitions.
United's existing shareholders will get a basket of Dollars 25.80 in cash,
Dollars 31.10 in debentures and Dollars 31.10 in preferred stock for every
share they hold, together with half a share in the recapitalised company.
The existing shares closed down Dollars 7/8 at Dollars 126 7/8.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940414

