FT944-2689

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (11): Asia fills the sales vacuum - Steel
exporter replaces its old Soviet market


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


When communist central planners decided to build an integrated steel plant
in eastern Slovakia 30 years ago they chose a site more than 1,000km. from
its future iron supply in the Ukraine and more than 500km. from the Ostrava
coal basin in the Czech republic.
These logistical fundamentals, typical of Soviet-style central planning,
remain in force. But the East Slovakian steel complex, VSZ, no longer sends
a large part of its output to customers in the former Soviet Union.
Instead it sells nearly 30 per cent of its steel coils and sheets to far
eastern markets such as Thailand and China, although the biggest share of
output is still absorbed by the industries of close neighbours in the Czech
Republic, Hungary and Poland.
The company, which employs more than 25,000 people, dominates the economy of
eastern Slovakia and the steel maker, together with a host of privatised
spin-off service and manufacturing companies, is by far the largest employer
and source of finance for Kosice, the regional capital.
Throughout the world-wide recession VSZ managed to trade profitably, aided
by relatively low input and wage costs. Now that the recession has lifted,
however, profits are rising fast while costs remain constrained by low local
wage levels, higher productivity and still relatively cheap raw materials.
Mr Peter Hrinko, who took over as chairman last December after a purge of
the former management headed by Mr Zoltan Berghauer, says that profits this
year are expected to triple to more than SKK1bn in 1995. The 1993 accounts
show net profits of SKK490m, although this falls to SKK190m if calculated by
conventional western accounting methods, according to Mr Hrinko.
Over the last two years, the company has been privatised. However, the
National Property Fund remains the largest single shareholder, with 37.6 per
cent of the 16.4m shares whose total capitalisation, according to
calculations by Daiwa Research, was SKK5.54bn in November 1994. This makes
VSZ the second largest Slovak company, after Slovnaft, the petro-chemical
and refining group, accounting for 10.9 per cent of the total capitalisation
of shares quoted on the Bratislava stock exchange.
The remainder of the shares are distributed among Slovak investment funds
who hold 22.8 per cent, Czech Investment funds, who hold 9.9 per cent, and
more than 600,000 small investors who mainly bought their shares through the
coupon privatisation scheme.
In preparation for privatisation VSZ was re-organised as a holding company
and many operations were hived off to separate companies. As so often in
former communist Europe, the combination of re-organisation and
privatisation was clouded by allegations of profiteering, theft of state
property and political interference.
A supervisory board was set up to oversee the newly privatised entity. It is
headed by Mr Julius Toth, finance minister in the post-independence Meciar
government and a former finance director of the old state-owned company.
Last December top managers who oversaw the hiving off and privatisation of
both suppliers and sales companies were dismissed, following allegations
that companies at both ends of the parent steel company had been making
profits which rightly belonged to the parent company.
A new sales company, VSZ SOZ, was set up to oversee export sales which make
up 80 per cent of the VSZ group revenues. It tightened financial discipline
and payment terms as well as negotiations with potential foreign investors.
The new management team and supervisory board have a substantial financial
stake in the success of VSZ, which partly explains the drive to re-direct
revenue streams back to the core of the group.
Throughout the recession VSZ continued to invest in raising the quality of
its hot and cold rolled coils and sheets and building new export markets.
Major cost savings have come from replacing an energy-intensive slabbing
mill by modern continuous casting equipment. Last year, the company became
the first former Comecon steel producer to become a member of the
International Iron and Steel Institute. It has also won quality awards which
put it on a par with the best of European producers. The combination of
higher prices and strong export-led demand are factors behind Slovakia's
rising foreign currency reserves and the new-found stability of the Slovak
crown.
The decision to diversify export markets, which was partly forced upon the
company by protectionism in west European markets, has helped to strengthen
the company's overall position.
The ability of West European producers to sabotage the European Commission's
plan to cut surplus capacity in the current EU countries does not worry the
managers of VSZ. For although surplus capacity lies behind the quota
restrictions and anti-dumping levies imposed against eastern Europe and
other low-cost producers VSZ only sold 15 per cent of its output, or 503,000
tonnes, to EU markets in 1993.
According to Mr Vladimir Balanik, vice president in charge of sales, sales
into western Europe are more profitable than into more distant and
competitive markets. But the company has no intention of trying to sell more
into western Europe, although it is anxious to ensure that its existing
sales to neighbouring Austria and the other new EU entrant Scandinavian
states are not cut by new quota and other restrictions.
'Even without quotas we would not increase our sales to existing EU markets
in 1995 because we want to preserve a good long term relationship with EU
customers and keep our share of other markets too,' Mr Hrinko adds. But the
desire not to antagonise the EU also reflects the desire to keep good
relations with the leading steel producers in Western Europe. Some, such as
Hoogovens of Holland and British Steel, have already helped provide the
know-how and equipment needed for modernisation and the down stream move
into high value added coated products such as galvanised sheets and coils
and tinned coils for the canning industry.
Meanwhile the acceptance of 'voluntary' restraint in the west European
market has led to determined efforts to retain traditional markets in
central Europe. Sales to the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary and former
Yugoslavia last year amounted to 1.27m tonnes, 39 per cent of total exports
of 3.29m tonnes.
The Czech Republic, which counted as part of the domestic market before the
demise of Czechoslovakia, is the biggest single market. But the greatest
success has been been in Asia, especially Thailand and China, which
accounted for 26 per cent of total sales last year. The Middle East absorbed
a further seven per cent while sales to the former Soviet Union accounted
for a mere two per cent, underlining the change in Slovakia's export trade
in the five years since the collapse of the Soviet bloc.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941216

