FT944-5823

FT  01 DEC 94 / London Stock Exchange: Programme trade activity boosts
equity market - Market Report


   By STEVE THOMPSON


A burst of strong overseas buying, via a series of heavyweight programme
trades, put the final touches to an unexpectedly buoyant trading session in
London's equity market.
The rash of overseas buying took the market completely by surprise. Earlier
in the session share prices had wilted in the face of a general stand-off by
the big institutions to what was almost universally described as a
disappointing and uninspiring Budget.
The FT-SE 100 Index closed at the day's best level, up 20.3 at 3,081.4, with
many dealers adopting the view that this morning could well see an extension
of yesterday's excellent late performance.
The flurry of demand was not confined to the market leaders, with the
second-liners sharing in the late upsurge, albeit on a slightly smaller
scale. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index finished 8.1 higher at 3,497.3. Helping to
fuel the market advance was a strong opening by US Treasury bonds and Wall
Street, a move which took many market observers by surprise.
The Dow Industrial Average raced higher in early trading, adding more than
20 points, in spite of more economic data pointing to continuing
inflationary pressures in the US economy. These included a higher than
expected upward revision of third-quarter gross domestic product and a sharp
increase in the Chicago Purchasing Management Index.
Dealers expected such inflationary indicators to depress US markets, coming
so soon after the startling increase in the consumer confidence index
announced late on Tuesday.
The big programme trade activity gave a strong boost to turnover levels,
which earlier in the day had looked like producing no more than a routine
session's business. Volume reached a respectable 682.8m shares, of which
non-Footsie stocks accounted for 59 per cent of the total. But levels of
customer business remained disappointing. On Budget Day retail business only
just topped the Pounds 1bn mark.
The trading session began very quietly, with share prices marked down at the
outset after the generally restrained press response to the Budget. The
FT-SE 100 opened around three points easier but gradually began to creep
higher within the hour, with dealers noting minor bouts of support in
selective areas.
Among these were the electricity stocks, which built on Tuesday's late gains
in the absence of the much-feared windfall profits tax or any moves to block
special dividends or share buy-backs. Buying interest faltered in
mid-morning, however, and the Footsie retreated over the lunchtime period
and early afternoon before staging a strong run in the last hour of trading
as the programme trades were said to have been activated.
Goldman Sachs, the influential US investment bank, was said to have executed
the largest of three big programmes, a balance trade worth Pounds 150m each
way, while NatWest Securities and SG Warburg were also said to have executed
large programmes.
A leading marketmaker at one of the integrated UK securities houses said
demand triggered by the programmes would probably boost London at the outset
today, although he stressed that Wall Street's performance would be crucial.
Around the various sectors, bank shares were in the forefront of the
market's advance, but food retailers came under sustained selling pressure
as Argyll Group upset the market in revealing a decline in like-for-like
sales in the first six months of its financial year. Other supermarket
groups, including market giants such as J. Sainsbury and Tesco, also lost
ground. Glaxo was one of the day's big casualties, the shares falling
sharply in the wake of the resignation of one of its highly regarded
directors and on talk of increased competition.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

941201

