FT941-4059

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Bolted together in totemic splendour - Anthony Caro


   By WILLIAM PACKER


Last week, within a day of each other, our be-knighted sculptors, Anthony
Caro and Eduardo Paolozzi, achieved their 70th birthdays, and I am delighted
to take this chance of wishing them well. But the temptation of pointing to
the differences between them should be resisted except in the most general
way.
Caro has two exhibitions current, and is the subject of this review;
Paolozzi hasn't, and isn't. Those two shows are distinct in themselves, yet
to take the one without the other is to miss a great deal, for they
complement each other to a remarkable degree. The one at Annely Juda is
beautifully chosen and succinct, setting the retrospective context; and the
one at Kenwood celebrates the latest and continuing creative engagement.
Taken together, the surprise they offer is the realisation that Caro is
rather less the unrepentant formalist and radical influence than we might
have supposed.
It remains true that through his association with the the American, David
Smith, in the years around 1960, he alone of his generation brought to
England, and indeed to Europe, a formal abstraction that was consciously
empty of human reference or association. Here were elements presented just
for themselves: cut, bolted and welded together in well-judged arrangements,
the space clear and open, the form self-evident, the human contact only that
which we have with physical objects in the everyday world.
The raw physical presence of these things as they appeared in the early
1960s, and the stringency of their presentation, were wonderfully new,
stimulating and refreshing. If it now seems somewhat ironic that it should
have been this phase in his work that shot Caro into international stardom,
the irony, as we may now see at Anneley Juda, lies only in the fact that
that phase was so short-lived. What we see so clearly is that Caro has been
working his way back to the figure, or at least to the anthropomorphic
inference of the figure, ever since.
The work of the 1950s, with which the Juda show begins, is directly
figurative, albeit the consciously simple and primitive figuration of such
earth-mother fetishes as the Willendorf Venus - Caro had but lately been
assistant to Henry Moore, a distinguished club that in it its time has
included Bernard Meadows and Phillip King. To move on to the Kenwood show is
to turn if not full circle, at least to spiral back close to the spirit of
those early years, and not just in the open reference to ancient gods and
heroes, but in formal terms.
Here in the Orangery at Kenwood, on their symbolic pedestals and thrones,
sit the totemic presences of Gods, Greeks and Trojans, and we are at once
back to the sculpture of the younger generation of the 1940s and '50s, to
the welded and symbolic totems of Reg Butler and, in particular, to the
precarious monoliths and stele of William Turnbull and, of course, the
fiercer presences of Eduardo Paolozzi. Caro, in propria persona, stands with
his peers once more.
He has lost none of his technical panache. He was ever a consummate
collagist in three dimensions, a bringer-together of disparate elements into
a lively and coherent order. To see these new modelled elements of
terracotta, which supply the symbolic character of the heroic protagonists,
set into or on their matrices of steel and wood, is to discover Caro happily
and unselfconsciously playing the same formal games that engaged him totally
30 years ago, but now subsumed within the narrative whole. The working of
the clay itself takes him back full 40 years, to the modelled figures of the
1950s.
The Homeric narrative is given by John Spurling in the excellent catalogue,
who takes us through the roster of the Olympian and Older Gods, charting
their allegiances and interventions in the affairs of the mortal heroes, the
Trojans and Achaians, and telling us again just who they were and what they
did - Achilles sulking in his tent, Hector un-nerved and doomed. Here they
all are, crammed together beneath Mount Ida, embattled, a wonderful sight.
The Trojan War Sculptures: Kenwood House, Hampstead Lane NW3, until April 6,
then to the Yorkshire Sculpture Park in November. Anthony Caro - Sculpture
through Five Decades: Annely Juda Fine Art, 23 Dering Street W1, until May
7.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

940312

