FT944-11157

FT  08 NOV 94 / Uruguay elections marked by factionalism: David Pilling
previews what amounts to a poll on the reforms of the past five years


   By DAVID PILLING


In Uruguay, elections come only once every five years, but when they do they
all come together. On November 27, 2.8m Uruguayan voters will elect a new
president, 90 deputies and 30 senators (the entire congress) and 19
governors.
As if this were not enough, the electoral system, described as 'crazy' even
by government ministers, combines party primaries with national elections,
leading to fierce factionalism.
Three competing candidates for president have emerged from the governing
National party, or Blancos, while the opposition Colorado party, not to be
outdone, has three of its own. Altogether there are 21 hopefuls for
president.
Elections have transformed Uruguay - normally a tranquil, relatively
prosperous backwater wedged between Argentina and Brazil - into a frenzy of
music-blaring campaign buses and party pamphlets littering the cobbled
streets.
At issue, in essence, is whether Uruguayans support or reject the
neo-liberal reforms that have been tentatively ushered in by the current
Blanco president, Mr Luis Alberto Lacalle. Mr Lacalle has tried to re-impose
fiscal discipline, has halved annual inflation to about 40 per cent and
opened the economy to foreign competition. He has been less successful in
attempts to slim the huge state bureaucracy, to privatise state enterprises
or to reform the bankrupt pay-as-you-go state pension scheme.
Elected with only a 22 per cent mandate, Mr Lacalle saw much of his attempts
at structural reform beaten back by parliament. He has also faced hostility
from a public accustomed to the benefits of Latin America's most developed
welfare state. Uruguayans - whose ageing population is being supported by a
diminishing tax-paying workforce - are suspicious of all attempts to
overhaul the social security system.
A few months ago it seemed that public distaste for Mr Lacalle's policies
was certain to return power to the Colorados, led by former President Julio
Sanguinetti. Last May, the Colorados were 15 points ahead of the
third-placed Blancos in poll ratings, but by November the Blancos had drawn
level on 30 points.
'This trend now makes the Blancos the most likely winners . . . although the
opinion polls do not allow one to predict with certainty,' says Mr Michele
Santo, contributor to the Busqueda weekly.
According to Mr Augustin Canzani, director of Equipos polling and research
consultancy, that turnaround reflects 'lagging' recognition of economic
progress during the Lacalle term, including accumulated economic growth over
the five years of about 19 per cent.
Mr Canzani believes the government, though unpopular for much of its
duration, has won an 'ideological victory' by persuading the public of the
need for responsible economic policies. 'Because we never had hyperinflation
we never worried much as long as (inflation) stayed below three digits - now
we do,' he says.
Of the four serious presidential contenders, two Blanco candidates represent
a continuation of Mr Lacalle's programme. Mr Juan Ramrez, Lacalle's
handpicked successor, and Mr Alberto Volonte, a lawyer and 'non-politician',
are distinguishable more by their styles than by any ideological difference.
Both would seek to bring down inflation further, cut state jobs and push
through a repackaged version of privatisation.
Mr Sanguinetti, who offers a social democratic alternative, is campaigning
on the issues of unemployment (now more than 8 per cent), a depressed
manufacturing sector and the large trade deficit, expected to reach about
Dollars 900m this year. He recently backed away from suggestions of an
export-boosting peso devaluation, but has hinted that he would like to
renegotiate some aspects of the Mercosur customs union with Argentina,
Brazil and Paraguay.
Mr Tabare Vazquez, the left-wing mayor of Montevideo, heads the Encuentro
Progresista, a broad coalition that advocates an uncertain mix of
redistributive and market-oriented policies. Mr Vazquez, who is hugely
popular in Montevideo, has so far been unable to build adequate support in
the more conservative interior and by November was trailing the Blancos and
Colorados by 6 percentage points.
Latest polls show Mr Sanguinetti with 19 per cent, against 11 and 9 per cent
for the two Blanco candidates, Mr Volonte and Mr Ramirez respectively.
However, because of the peculiarities of the electoral system, such a lead
by no means assures Mr Sanguinetti of victory. The president must come from
the winning party, so if the Colorados fail to win at party level Mr
Sanguinetti would not become president even if he collected the most votes.
Victory may be only the first hurdle. 'Whoever wins will probably have even
less congressional support than Lacalle,' says Mr Canzani.
'The political system functions in a way that encourages factions,' says a
diplomat, 'which makes it difficult to create and maintain a coherent policy
course over five years.'
Such an analysis augurs badly for those in the government who believe that
Uruguay must adapt to the changing times. In order to untap the 'colossal
potential' of Mercosur's huge market, the country must learn to compete,
says Mr Ignacio de Posadas, the foreign minister. Those who believe it can
continue to muddle through, ignoring the sweeping changes throughout the
continent, are deluding themselves, he says. 'That kind of thinking could
become very dangerous.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941108

