FT942-12574

FT  29 APR 94 / Italy's political novice reaches the top


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and REUTER


   ROME, MILAN


Media magnate Silvio Berlusconi yesterday crowned his four-month career in
politics by being asked to form Italy's 53rd post-war government which he
pledged would carry out a big liberalisation of the economy, introduce a
more federal constitution and shake-up the inefficient public
administration.
'I promise to introduce a new way of doing things in Italy,' he said in a
sombre statement after meeting President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro.
Recognising the enormity of the task ahead of him, he refused to be drawn
into when he would announce his cabinet. But he is unlikely to be sworn in
before the end next week and he will then have to obtain votes of confidence
in both houses of parliament, which are virtually assured.
The ministerial team will be formed from the four-party Freedom Alliance
that won a landslide victory in the March 27/28 general elections.
Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia movement, the populist Northern League of Mr
Umberto Bossi and the neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance are all new to
government. Only the small Christian Democratic Centre, formed from the rump
of the old Christian Democrat party, have had experience in office.
Mr Berlusconi's political rise represents the most rapid in recent Italian
history. It is also the first time in a modern democracy that a man with a
significant business empire, present in sensitive areas of national life
like television, has been nominated prime minister.
The 57 year-old proprietor of Fininvest group, Italy's second largest
business employing 33,000 people, was summoned to the presidential palace
yesterday afternoon to be formally told of his investiture only after the
final issues surrounding the conflict of interest had been resolved.
It was agreed that a three-man watchdog body be formed to guarantee that Mr
Berlusconi retains a proper distance as prime minister from his Fininvest
empire. Mr Berlusconi said the committee would consist of three prominent
jurists drawn from the constitutional court, the council of state and the
academic world. They would be responsible for checking existing legislation
and proposing new safeguard laws.
Mr Berlusconi also said he thought the existing anti-trust laws, if properly
applied, would help to ensure there was no conflict of interest. President
Scalfaro also pledged his help, in his role as guarantor of the
constitution.
President Scalfaro had been obliged to postpone the call to Mr Berlusconi on
Wednesday because of serious differences over how best to avoid a conflict
of interest.
When Mr Berlusconi entered politics in January at the head of his new Forza
Italia movement, he made no attempt to confront the issue and has only begun
to tackle it in earnest during the past 10 days.
The financier who channelled bribes from Italy's Ferruzzi group to
politicians was sentenced to eight years' jail and ordered to pay damages at
the end of a corruption trial last night, Reuter reports from Milan. L150bn
(Pounds 62.3m) from the foods-to-chemicals group for use as bribes.
He will have to pay over L168bn in damages to two Ferruzzi companies, court
costs and a fine of L16m. He will serve the jail sentence only if it is
confirmed by a higher court.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940429

