FT943-12778

FT  22 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Price surges lift LCE into
profit for first time since 1987


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


The London Commodity Exchange made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 1m in its last
financial year, which ended in March, after soaring coffee and cocoa futures
prices led to a 22 per cent upturn in trading activity.
The rise in business after two years of declining or static volumes led to
the first operating surplus at the exchange since 1987. This was paid out to
members as a rebate.
In the 1992-1993 financial year, the exchange made a small profit of Pounds
218,000, after recovering from the debacle in property futures which cost it
Pounds 1m in lawyers and accountants fees.
'When I got to the exchange, it was in survival mode because so many members
were going out of business and the exchange had overstretched itself with
high overheads,' said Mr Robin Woodhead, chief executive, who joined the LCE
18 months ago.
Six new members have joined this year, however, all of which are financial
institutions or their subsidiaries, reflecting the growing interest in
commodities among the banking community.
The end of the world recession and worries about the resurgence of
inflationary pressures have revived investment interest in commodity
markets. At the same time, frosts in Brazil, which damaged the coffee crop,
and a growing structural deficit of cocoa have underpinned price rises.
Coffee prices have more than doubled this year and reached their highest
level for eight years. The cocoa market has touched a 6 1/2 -year peak.
At the LCE, this has turned into a year of record volumes: in the last
financial year the exchange traded the highest number of contracts ever.
Mr Woodhead says the exchange's balance sheet is the strongest it has ever
been. It has reduced its overheads by a third to Pounds 8m a year, cut staff
levels by a third and pared back the number of contracts it trades from 27
to 13.
'We've decided to focus on our core products of coffee, sugar and cocoa and
direct our resources so that we provide as much benefit to those markets as
possible.' Mr Woodhead stresses he is not going to get carried away with
developing new products without the support of his members.
'Our history of new contracts is not very good, so we've reversed that:
we've got rid of soya, lamb, pigs, a redundant sugar contract.'
Instead of the razzamatazz often associated with the exchange when it was
called London Fox (standing for Futures and Options Exchange), Mr Woodhead
is concentrating on building a fully comprehensive statistics database at
the request of some members.
At the same time, the exchange has to demonstrate that it can operate
profitably in all market conditions. Its finances have been helped by the
upturn in its core markets, but it needs to break-even at much lower
volumes. The restructuring programme means the exchange now needs to trade
13,000 contracts a day to break-even, compared with 20,000 three years ago.
Mr Woodhead believes that the trading environment in the wake of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade settlement will increasingly free up prices
for agricultural commodities, giving opportunities for futures contracts.
But this could be a long time coming.
In the meantime, he is looking to upgrade the LCE's electronic trading
system to boost its capacity and is working with other London futures
exchanges to upgrade their common clearing system.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940722

