FT943-983

FT  27 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Yeltsin's link to capitalism


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


When Russian President Boris Yeltsin begins his Washington engagements
today, he will see Mrs Ruth Harkin, president of the Overseas Private
Investment Corporation (Opic), almost everywhere he goes. They will meet at
the White House today for lunch with President Bill Clinton and leading
businessmen; at the White House state dinner tonight; at the Russian embassy
dinner tomorrow night; and Mrs Harkin will accompany Mr Yeltsin to Seattle
on Thursday.
Mrs Harkin's high profile role owes much to timing. The US no longer has the
dollars needed by new democracies to satisfy the demands of their liberated
electorates. But it does have credit and a flourishing private sector. With
its loans, guarantees and political risk insurance, Opic can be the key to
packaging financing for private sector development.
Congress has been impressed that Opic stretches a dollar as few
bureaucracies have done before. It has raised Opic's comparatively small
budget allotment from Dollars 50m in 1994 to Dollars 105m in 1995 for
project finance funding. Most of that is to go to the newly independent
republics of the former Soviet Union. Using its guarantees and insurance,
Opic attracts private investors and bond holders to risky but promising
projects. It can take Dollars 40m in loan guarantees and leverage this into
Dollars 1bn in investment. In less risky regions, it takes only Dollars 25m
to raise Dollars 1bn in backing. Opic's guarantees make only project finance
available. This means investors get the project as collateral and are repaid
from the profits.
The White House is equally pleased with Opic as the leading agency on
foreign policy initiatives. It is financing laundries and dry cleaners in
South Africa, supermarkets in the Russian Far East, and hotels in Gaza and
on the West Bank. Next month it will lead an investment mission to Hungary
to assist in the modernisation of its energy sector.
During this week alone, it is committing Dollars 1bn in financing and
political risk insurance for eight projects worth Dollars 2.3bn. These
include:
A consortium of western investors led by Texaco, backed by Dollars 400m in
Opic financing, to explore and develop the Timan Pechora Basin of Artic
Russia.
Dollars 250m in insurance and guarantees for an engine design project with
US, German and Russian partners.
A Dollars 60m loan guarantee for a project to improve phone services in 40
former Soviet cities and expand the number of international lines to Moscow.
Mrs Harkin wants to help develop Russia's pharmaceutical and agribusiness
sectors, where she sees 'enormous changes underway' in the food chain. She
plans investment in flour mills, grain storage facilities, seafood canning
and freezing facilities.
The impact of Opic's political risk insurance - covering political violence,
currency convertibility and expropriation - is rarely noted. With about
Dollars 100,000 in Opic insurance, a US munitions company, Alliant Tech
Systems, has embarked on a joint venture in Belarus, melting down old Soviet
munitions and selling it for scrap steel. A second project will be launched
in the Ukraine.
Around the world, Opic has 10 investment funds operating or in the process
of being launched.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940927

