FT942-16347

FT  11 APR 94 / Japanese leadership deadlock may force election


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Japan's seven-party coalition government was yesterday close to breaking up,
as it failed to resolve a bitter power struggle over the successor to prime
minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
The impasse, over the policies and composition of the next government,
increases the likelihood of another general election. This would paralyse
the government as trade disputes with the US approach a critical juncture
and as it struggles to implement an economic stimulus package, which is
needed to pull Japan out of its worst recession since the second world war.
Mr Hosokawa will stay on as a caretaker leader until a successor can be
found. Coalition leaders did agree to try to form a new cabinet by mid-week,
allowing the new prime minister to deliver a policy speech to parliament
before the weekend. But a senior official of one party warned that any such
administration would be transitional.
Mr Hosokawa's decision to quit, announced on Friday, unleashed a new
struggle among Japanese political parties, thrown into flux by last summer's
defeat of the Liberal Democratic party. It has intensified the growing split
between the coalition's right and left wings.
Mr Tsutomu Hata, the conservative foreign minister, remained the most likely
successor, with the apparent backing of Mr Hosokawa and three conservative
parties giving a majority within the coalition.
Leftwing coalition members voiced fears that Mr Hata would be the puppet of
his powerful colleague Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the government's backroom
strategist. Mr Ozawa's dominance over Mr Hosokawa enraged the Social
Democratic party, the alliance's largest member.
Mr Ozawa and Mr Hata jointly lead the Japan Renewal party, or Shinseito, the
second-largest coalition member, which has dominated foreign, trade, and
economic policy, despite Socialist opposition. 'There is a lot of resistance
to the idea of Shinseito taking control . . . If we are unable to form a
strong government, then we let the people decide,' said Mr Tomiichi
Murayama, chairman of the SDP.
Mr Hosokawa started the political realignment, after announcing his
resignation, by confirming the end of his own Japan New party's plans to
merge with another coalition member, the New Harbinger party.
He launched, instead, a new JNP-led group, called Reform, which was over the
weekend positioning itself as the heart of a new rightwing alliance, to
embrace Mr Ozawa's JRP and the Buddhist-backed Komeito clean government
party.
Skeleton in cupboard, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940411

