FT942-16189

FT  12 APR 94 / UK Elections - Major's Campaign: A matter of survival or
oblivion - The next eight weeks will see voters deliver a comprehensive
mid-term judgement on John Major's embattled Conservative government. As
campaigns get under way in local and European polls and in five
parliamentary by-elections. FT writers survey the electoral battlegrounds


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


For Mr John Major it may well be political life or death. The next eight
weeks, starting with council elections on May 5 and culminating in the
European elections on June 9, will provide the most comprehensive test of
the national mood since his 1992 general election victory. Five
parliamentary by-elections - the most important in Conservative-held
Eastleigh - will complete the picture.
There is little doubt that the Conservatives will do badly. The voters have
not forgiven Mr Major for the recession that he had promised would end the
day after he returned to Downing Street in April 1992.
The electorate has watched the Conservative party tear itself apart over
Europe and has looked on despairingly as a lacklustre administration has
failed each time it has tried to establish for itself a sense of strategic
direction.
So the issue is not whether the prime minister will emerge the loser from
the local, European and by-elections. His future will depend on whether the
results are merely tolerably bad or fatally catastrophic.
There are important tests also for Mr John Smith's Labour party and for Mr
Paddy Ashdown's Liberal Democrats.
Mr Smith has profited greatly from the Tory disarray. But there are many,
even in his own party, who have yet to be convinced that he has crafted a
credible programme for an alternative government.
The voters who now profess support for Labour show little real enthusiasm
for the party's agenda. For many, a protest vote against the Conservatives
this summer will not stop them returning to the Tory fold at the next
general election.
For his part Mr Ashdown cannot claim that the rise in support for the
Liberal Democrats since 1992 represents much more than the traditional
mid-term influx of disaffected Tories.
The Liberal Democrats remain a local (and in some areas a regional) rather
than a national party. They will do well in the forthcoming elections but
rebuilding the belief that British politics has room for a powerful third
force will require much more than simply good results.
In the short term the opposition parties' tactics are straightforward: to
maximise mid-term discontent with higher taxes, rising crime, poor public
services and irresolute leadership.
The opinion polls are on their side. Labour is 20 to 25 points ahead. Mr
Major's personal standing is lower than that of any modern political leader.
On nearly every issue - from the economy to law and order, health and
education - his government is judged incompetent.
In short, Mr Major's position is worse than the one in which Baroness
Thatcher found herself during the months before her demise in November 1990.
About 90 Tory backbenchers would lose their seats at a general election if
there were a modest 5 per cent swing against the Conservatives. At last
autumn's Christchurch by-election there was a swing of 35 per cent. It
should be no surprise, then, that Conservative MPs are promoting Mr Michael
Heseltine and Mr Kenneth Clarke as alternative leadership candidates.
Nor, after his decision to play a high-profile personal role in both the
local and European campaigns, can the prime minister credibly deflect
opposition attempts to frame the elections as a referendum on his
leadership.
But one of the few things on Mr Major's side are expectations. With most
Tory MPs at Westminster discounting abysmal results, an outcome that was
merely bad might yet be projected as a relative triumph.
The local elections were last fought in 1990, at the height of the poll tax
revolt. The Conservatives were trounced. So it is perfectly possible that
the losses this time will be relatively small.
Labour has still to prove that it has shaken off its 'loony left' reputation
sufficiently to regain the confidence of voters in the south-east and win
pivotal councils in the London suburbs. The Liberal Democrats could well
dent support for Labour in the north.
The Eastleigh by-election and the European elections will provide much the
tougher test for Mr Major. Tory strategists believe Eastleigh is all but
lost to the Liberal Democrats.
The European elections evoke the nightmare of renewed infighting between
those who cling to the Conservatives' public commitment to a positive role
in the European Union and those who want the party to retreat to a
nationalist redoubt.
Nor is there any comfort for Mr Major in the likelihood that the June 9 poll
outcome will be decided on national issues rather than on European ones.
Elections to the European Parliament provide the ideal vehicle for
disgruntled Conservatives to register a mid-term protest. Few voters care
who represents them in Strasbourg. On current projections anything between
10 and 20 of the Tories' 32 seats in the Assembly are vulnerable - mainly to
the Liberal Democrats.
If the actual losses are at the more optimistic end of that spectrum Mr
Major's battered premiership may survive the shock waves. But a result at
the pessimistic end of the scale could well see an irresistible challenge to
his leadership.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940412

