FT941-17070

FT  06 JAN 94 / Struggle to square the Arctic circle: The chilly reception
in northern Scandinavia for potential European Union membership


   By HUGH CARNEGY


Descending in a clatter of helicopters and attended by a pack of
journalists, Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, paid a
visit to Irene and Ulf Johansson's dairy farm to see what agricultural life
is like close to the Arctic Circle.
'He asked us about the subsidies we get and he visited the cow shed,'
recalled Irene. 'He said farmers in the French mountains also have
problems.' She paused for a moment. 'But I don't think it is as hard as it
is here.'
She is surely right. When Mr Delors visited last spring, the ground at
Lillkorstrask, in Sweden's northernmost county of Norrbotten, was still
thick with snow. The little rough barley the Johanssons grow for cattle feed
cannot be sown until the end of May. The growing season is about 130 days,
half its length in southern Sweden or Denmark. By midwinter, when there are
fewer than four hours of light a day, the temperature can fall below minus
20'C.
What keeps farmers like the Johanssons going are government subsidies, in
their case for milk, accounting for about one-third of the farm's income.
Despite Mr Delors' visit, Irene and Ulf are suspicious that Swedish
membership of the European Union would mean a cut in subsidies and would
undermine the support Stockholm has traditionally pumped into Sweden's
remote northern regions.
As 1994 opens, the worries of people like the Johanssons loom large in the
minds of ministers in Stockholm, Oslo and Helsinki. Along with Austria, a
fellow member of the European Free Trade Area, the governments of Sweden,
Norway and Finland must persuade their sceptical electorates to vote for
entry to the EU in referendums if their applications for membership are to
succeed. The aim is to join by January 1 1995 if possible - and if not, at
least in time to participate in the EU's next intergovernmental conference
on the future shape of the Union in 1996.
The EU has set March 1 as the deadline for completing accession agreements
now being negotiated with the four Efta applicants. If the timetable is
adhered to, the four will schedule referendums for later in the year.
Pulling off this latest round of enlargement, as the process is called, is
scarcely less important to the EU itself than to the individual applicants.
The 12 existing members have committed themselves at successive summits to
bringing the Efta four into the Union.
Among the applicants, the issues of contention vary from country to country
 -and extend far beyond the question of support for Alpine, Arctic and
sub-Arctic farmers. But as far as Sweden is concerned, Norrbotten offers a
distillation of the opposition to membership. The latest opinion polls in
the country's northernmost county show just 13 per cent in favour of
membership, with 55 per cent against. This compares with national figures of
between 25 and 30 per cent for membership and 45 to 48 per cent against.
If Swedes as a whole tend to feel at one remove, geographically and
philosophically, from the rest of Europe, the 264,000 people who live in
Norrbotten, 700km north of Stockholm, feel even more so.
The EU is prepared to put Norrbotten in its highest category of
qualification for regional aid, because of unemployment above the national
average of 14 per cent, the climate and the structural disadvantage of the
long distances within the region and from the rest of the Union. But this
has apparently made little impression in the county. As in the rest of the
country, there is a feeling that Union membership will further erode
traditional Swedish egalitarian policies towards disadvantaged groups and
regions, already squeezed by three years of hard recession.
'We in the north of Sweden are going to be forgotten,' says Morten Eriksson,
a final-year high-school student at Hermelinsskolan in Lulea, the county
capital. 'We won't mean much to the European Union.' A show of hands among
22 of Morten's classmates - who will be eligible to vote in the referendum -
revealed none in favour and eight against. If any of the remaining 14 were
leaning towards a 'Yes' vote, they were not prepared to admit it.
'No' and 'Yes' campaigners alike say that a feeling that the Swedish way of
life is threatened by Union membership underlies much of the opposition
across the country. Ursula Berge, political editor of Norrlandska
Socialdemocraten, the opposition Social Democratic party's newspaper in the
region, says: 'Opposition to the EU is about Swedish neutrality and our
independent foreign policy, it is about equality between men and women, it
is about unemployment, about regional questions and it is about Swedish
sovereignty.' The newspaper opposes the SDP's pro-EU stance.
In the minds of many, Ms Berge says, the recession and the unprecedented
levels of unemployment are at least partially caused by the country's
market-oriented policies which are designed to harmonise the economy with
the Union. 'We had very low unemployment for years - because of our
economic, social and employment policies. It worked and people still think
that it is possible to make it work again.'
Just before Christmas, the right-centre government of Prime Minister Carl
Bildt - as well as the opposition Social Democratic leadership - claimed a
big victory in the accession agreement negotiations with Brussels. Sweden
was allowed to keep its tough environmental regulations and its state
monopoly on the sale of alcohol, and to escape an EU ban on the sale of
'snus', the orally-taken wet snuff popular among Swedes.
These concessions were presented by the government and the Social Democratic
leaders as evidence that the Union was not intent on remoulding Swedish
society. If similarly favourable agreements are struck in the coming months
on support for farmers and the regions, then the political establishment in
Stockholm may find opinion easier to swing in favour of membership.
Farmers Irene and Ulf Johansson, for example, say their initial
determination to vote 'No' has been softened by concern that Sweden could be
left isolated, especially if Finland or Norway decides to join the Union.
'The level of subsidies will be the decisive issue for us,' says Irene.
But a handicap for the 'Yes' campaign is the lack of concrete advantages it
can hold out for membership. Neither government nor industry, which is
overwhelmingly in favour, pretends membership will suddenly boost the
economy - especially as Sweden already enjoys most of the economic fruits of
the Union through its membership of the European Economic Area.
The gist of the 'Yes' campaign is the rather defensive line that Sweden
would be better off inside the Union, where it can wield some influence on
policy, than outside, where it has no influence and where it may lose out on
investment.
At least until there is a significant economic upturn, Swedes are reluctant
to embrace grand new schemes which lead away from the certainties of the
past, even if those certainties have been shaken. Examples of such feeling
include the rebellion against car and truckmaker Volvo's plan to merge with
France's Renault - fuelled to a significant degree by reluctance to see the
symbol of Swedish manufacturing fall under foreign control - and nagging
opposition to building a road and rail bridge to Denmark, the first fixed
link between Sweden and the European mainland.
'After what has happened in Sweden over the last few years, people are
inclined to say 'No' to everything,' says Mr Jan-Erik Bergmark, a senior
executive at SSAB, the steel company with a big mill in Lulea. 'The economy,
employment - these are not going up yet. People are tired and when you are
tired you tend to say 'No' to new things.'
It may be that the mood can be swung around. An economic recovery,
anticipated this year, might make Swedes confident that their country would
be strong enough to make its voice heard in a Union of 16. An accession
agreement largely meeting Swedish concerns would help reverse the bleak
image the EU has at present. EU supporters point out that opinion polls
showed a majority in favour of membership less than two years ago. But in
the dead of dark winter in Norrbotten, the heartland of opposition, signs of
a thaw in opinion are hard to find.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940106

