FT941-5659

FT  05 MAR 94 / Radical MPs held in Turkey


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ANKARA


Five Turkish MPs representing the radical Kurdish-based Democracy party were
arrested yesterday as they left Turkey's National Assembly after a vote on
Wednesday stripped them of their parliamentary immunity.
They face the death penalty for espousing the Kurdish cause.
With rebels of the Kurdish Workers' party (PKK) fighting an increasingly
bloody war of independence in south-east Turkey, legal moves in Ankara
against the region's MPs will further alienate the Kurdish community.
Parliament's decision, expected for some months, followed a motion submitted
by the True Path party of Prime Minister Tansu Ciller. However, the timing
was clearly to coincide with local elections on March 27, where a hardline
stance towards the Kurds is expected to be a vote winner.
According to the public prosecutor's submission to parliament, seven Kurdish
deputies - two were arrested on Wednesday - have been charged with making
separatist propaganda in speeches in Turkey and abroad. One deputy also
faces charges of harbouring an alleged Kurdish guerrilla, although the case
against the guerrilla has been dropped through lack of evidence.
Parliament has also voted to remove the immunity of a deputy of the
Moslem-backed Refah party for slandering Turkey's founder, Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk, and threatening the secular nature of the state.
Last night two of the MPs were released; the others had still not been
formally charged. Appeals were lodged with the Constitutional Court, which
has 15 days to decide on the legality of parliament's action.
To many observers the deputies' seizure by anti-terrorist police, after they
had taking refuge for two nights in the assembly's corridors, provide a
reminder of state powers to curb the freedom of speech in Turkey, which is
seeking membership of the European Union.
European governments are unlikely to issue a formal protest until the
appeals process had been exhausted.
When elected to parliament on the Social Democratic ticket in 1991, the
Kurdish deputies, originally 18 in number, were seen as a potential informal
channel between the government and the rebels. But the party was quickly
branded as a PKK mouthpiece and since then DEP members have faced widespread
intimidation. One MP was killed last year, and a number of local party
officials have been killed in the region.
With municipal elections approaching, a stand off is developing between
Turkey's two main communities. Last week the DEP announced it would not
field candidates for the elections, after bomb attacks on their offices. The
PKK has also threatened to target all candidates and voters.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940305

