FT942-12856

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Hong Kong (13): Dragon bonds in demand - The debt
market


   By LOUISE LUCAS


For an economy which appears to have scant need of debt financing - the
government budget this year produced a HKDollars 15bn surplus and big
corporates maintain exceptionally conservative gearing levels - Hong Kong
made something of a splash on the debt markets scene last year, raising
USDollars 6.5bn in international issues, writes Louise Lucas.
These issues were largely opportunistic - money was cheap and overseas
investors were hungry for anything with an Asian flavour - but the
investment profile of Hong Kong companies means they are unlikely to prove
fairweather friends to the debt markets at home or overseas.
Investment in China, both on property development and big-ticket
infrastructure projects where earnings are slow to come in will ensure a
continued focus on debt raising, a trend underscored by the scramble among
the colony's key corporate players for credit agencies' ratings.
Last month Wharf Holdings became the first big company to receive a publicly
declared long-term debt rating, securing an implied senior rating of A from
Standard & Poor's - the best possible as it matches that assigned to the
Hong Kong government. Swire Pacific is expected to follow suit shortly.
Wharf, whose interests span property, infrastructure and media, sought a
rating with an eye to future calls on the debt markets to fund expansion in
cable TV, telecommunications and China.
The stock exchange is also looking to carve a role for itself in the market.
Debt securities totalling HKDollars 191.75bn were listed on the Hong Kong
market in 1993, compared with just HKDollars 4.6bn the previous year, and a
working party is drafting plans for a more active debt market. Investment
banks such as Morgan Stanley are keen to promote a secondary market on bond
transactions.
The government, after a modest start only four years ago, plans to issue
five-year paper later this year. Its programme for exchange fund bills - the
equivalent of treasury bills - began in March 1990 with the issue of
HKDollars 300m of 91-day bills; it now issues a range of notes with maturity
terms of up to three years. The total of all bills, bonds and notes
outstanding is HKDollars 39bn.
This has helped promote a significant market for fixed rate paper
denominated in Hong Kong dollars, which last year was worth HKDollars
16.5bn. In the first 3 1/2 months of this year, issuers had already raised
some HKDollars 6bn, according to Oakreed Financial Services, a local bond
boutique.
The Mass Transit Railway Corporation, traditionally among the biggest
players on the local and foreign debt markets, earlier this month launched a
HKDollars 1.6bn revolving transferable loan facility, its biggest in five
years. The MTRC has commercial paper facilities in New York, London and
Tokyo as well as the colony, but proceeds are swapped into Hong Kong dollars
to avoid currency exposure.
Earlier this year, Hong Kong launched its first central clearing system for
locally denominated debt - the Central Moneymarkets Unit Service - and the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority secured Beijing's agreement to run exchange
fund debt programmes on a continuous basis where the repayment terms
straddle 1997.
Beyond the colony, the creation of dragon bonds - the suitably oriental name
for issues emanating from south-east Asia - has met demand among
institutional investors overseas by providing a final piece to the world's
debt jigsaw. A total USDollars 4.6bn has been raised through the instruments
since November 1991, according to Euromoney Bondware.
To Hong Kong's investment bankers the debt market represents an important
part of the corporate finance mix as well as a source of income. Peregrine
Investments, the pan-Asian corporate finance and securities house, last
month poached the fixed income team from Lehman Brothers in a bid to capture
a share of the Asian debt market.
Mr Francis Leung, the managing director, said the switch allowed Peregrine
to tap into the Lehman team's government contacts while introducing a fixed
income and distribution capability to its own customer bank. Peregrine has a
keen eye turned on the China market when it talks of the potential for debt
issuers.
'Although it's now relatively easy to raise equity for infrastructure
through a listing on the stock exchange, a lot of projects have to be
financed by debt. There is a limit to how much commercial banks can finance
these infrastructure projects, so you need to come up with a good solution,
and one is to securitise the debts.
'Though the bond market in China is not open to foreigners yet, when the
renminbi becomes fully convertible foreigners will be able to participate in
the China bond market and that may be as big as the US bond market. In
particular, China will rely more on the bond market to finance its budget
deficit, rather than print money,' says Mr Leung.
With the US Fed embarked on an era of tightening interest rates, the bond
market in Hong Kong has been hit in recent months - global concerns
exacerbated in the colony by its peg to the US dollar.
Mr Chris Nicholas, senior vice president with Lehman Brothers - the US house
which has been at the forefront of the dragon bond market - believes many
bankers are sitting with mandates to issue bonds in their desk drawers,
awaiting better times.
He says: 'We have hit a temporary pause, because there is no point in
surging ahead when you know investors are not buying.
'I see the market continuing to grow. It is a minor setback. The Eurobond
market is down, and the same is probably true for the dragon bond market.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

940427

