FT942-15754

FT  14 APR 94 / Pasok rivals jockey to succeed Papandreou


   By KERIN HOPE


   ATHENS


So many prominent Greek socialists have stressed the importance of party
unity ahead of today's conference of the ruling Panhellenic Socialist
Movement that ordinary delegates are arriving in Athens fearful that Pasok
unity might actually be under threat.
The tension has to do with Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou. He is 75 years
old and suffers from heart problems but in the six months since the
socialists' triumphant return to power, he has given no hint of who might
succeed him as party leader.
Though the leadership question will not be raised officially, according to
congress organisers, cracks are almost bound to appear in Pasok's facade of
consensus. Debate in the corridors will be sharp, with potential contenders
vying for support among the 2,000 delegates for a contest expected next
spring, at the latest.
That is when 88-year-old President Constantine Karamanlis, who is even more
frail than the prime minister, is due to step down. Though Mr Papandreou
professes reluctance to become head of state, a ceremonial post, his young
wife Dimitra, now becoming more active in politics, could persuade him to
take the job.
However, the party is so closely identified with Mr Papandreou, its founder,
that potential successors are anxious to avoid provoking a confrontation in
the mean-time.
The leading candidate, Mr Akis Tsochatzopoulos, the central committee
secretary, bases his claim on little more than unswerving loyalty to the
prime minister.
Two other frontrunners with sounder political credentials, the defence
minister Mr Gerasimos Arsenis and industry minister Mr Costas Simitis, are
both tainted by having criticised Mr Papandreou publicly in the past.
Yet without a clear signal of support from Mr Papandreou, none of the
half-dozen contenders can hope to rally the party's diverse factions,
ranging from purist marxists to 'populists', 'modernisers', and
'pro-Europeans'.
With two polls in the offing - European elections in June and local
government elections in October - the conference must repair divisions over
government policies on reducing the public sector deficit and introducing
fiscal reforms.
The finance ministry's latest bill, which attempts to broaden the tax base
and crack down on tax evasion, is already being modified to meet demands
from different interest groups. It will be more difficult to head off an
attack by delegates representing militant public sector trade unions, who
oppose the socialists' plans for partial privatisation of utilities.
Since its last congress in 1990, Pasok has managed to transform itself, with
a fair amount of success, from a radical movement based on marxist
principles to a social democrat party on the western European model.
Mr Papandreou's anti-American rhetoric and vociferous support for radical
regimes like Iraq and Libya, both calculated to annoy Greece's western
partners, have disappeared.
So has much other ideological baggage carted along the 'third road to
socialism,' which Mr Papandreou mapped out when he returned in 1974 from
exile following the collapse of the colonels' dictatorship and launched
Pasok.
Yet Mr Papandreou has been careful to balance improved ties with the US,
where he will make an official visit next week, with concessions towards the
old hardliners.
A new law stripping deposed King Constantine of his remaining property in
Greece - a palace on the island of Corfu and a forest near Mount Olympus -
as well as of his Greek passport, was passed by the Greek parliament on the
eve of the socialists' conference.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940414

