FT942-14493

FT  20 APR 94 / Overworked and over here


In the days before Big Bang, before US investment banks launched their
assault on London, a contemporary joke went like this:
Question: Why does a stockbroker never hold meetings on Wednesdays?
Answer: Because that would ruin two weekends.
British bankers say the joke would fall flat today - when the Americans
arrived they brought a work ethic that quickly ended three-hour lunches with
wine, and a work day lasting from 10am to 5pm.
Mr Bob Gibson, chief executive of ESN Pension Scheme, the UK's second
largest scheme, says US investment banks have no such thing as a social
lunch. 'It could be a five-course lunch, but they are continually handing
you documents while you get cabbage all over them,' Mr Gibson says.
British clients of the US banks have now adopted some of their more ascetic
and businesslike customs. 'We were told you had to offer alcohol to the
Brits,' said one American investment banker. 'But now we find that they also
don't drink it.'
The change in ethos has been under way since the late 1980s, but it is now
solidly entrenched in City custom. Beyond the visible trappings of corporate
behaviour - the mineral water, the fascination with squash courts - London
bankers say they have had to adopt the robust American approach to
competition and conducting business.
For instance, unlike some European counterparts, US investment banks do not
think it unseemly to say how keenly they are seeking business, and are adept
at aggressive sales pitches to investors.
Calpers, the California state employees retirement fund which is the largest
US public sector pension scheme, gives prospective fund managers only 15
minutes for a sales pitch. 'After that, it's like the old-fashioned
burlesque shows - a big sack comes down and you're out,' one fund manager
says.
The importing of US business culture has had other effects. The Wall Street
practice of taping telephone conversations on trading desks - useful in a
dispute about what deal was struck - has now been adopted by most London
houses.
And while some US firms have been aware their style can grate on clients and
competitors, most have taken pains to preserve elements of their corporate
culture.
'When we came here we didn't want to be the Ugly American,' said a Goldman
Sachs partner. 'But every European we hire we send to the States for between
three and nine months. We want them to be Goldman Sachs employees.' A major
aspect of this staff management is to develop a team ethos, integrating
various specialities.
Mr Walter Gubert, head of Europe for JP Morgan, says US firms venturing
abroad must learn to mix their approach to markets with an understanding of
local culture.
'Over time, the firms that will win are those that do not just import
techniques, but adapt them to the local culture,' he says. 'Banks need a
multi-cultural group of people. The management challenge is to motivate them
and make them work together even though they are English, Italian and German
and sit in different offices.'
But most banks do not allow such bows in the direction of cultural
sensitivity to undermine the aggressive pursuit of business.
Mr Alan Gillespie, Goldman Sachs managing director for UK investment banking
services, says: 'We do a lot of initiating of ideas, whereas if a chief
executive wants advice from his merchant bank, he often has to ask them to
come round'.
US investment bankers can also be less willing to take no for an answer.
'The European attitude if you do not get a piece of business is, 'I'm
terribly sorry. How could we have done better?' The Americans often send
another Concorde load over from New York to argue,' says one European
banker.
Perhaps, some bankers argue, the nature of the marketplace in London has
changed significantly since Big Bang, and US investment bankers are better
suited to thrive in it. Mr Richard Sharp, Goldman Sachs chief operating
officer for investment banking services in Europe, says US firms have an
advantage because they have years of experience in similar conditions.
Since Big Bang and the arrival of integrated securities firms, investment
bankers have had to think not only about making a specific sale but whether
that sale could also lead to business in other parts of the bank. US
investment banks' longstanding team approach gave them a head start over
those still viewing the markets in a fragmented fashion.
'It is not to do with being American, but with a culture of trading and risk
taking,' Mr Sharp says. 'The liquidity of the US markets gives us the
experience and self-confidence to build businesses here. We know the profits
that can be made'

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940420

