FT941-5697

FT  04 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Ladbroke fails to please


   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE, JOEL KIBAZO and STEVE THOMPSON


A slashed dividend, hefty provisions, a rising tax charge and big
write-downs from Ladbroke came at the bottom end of pessimistic market
expectations and the shares fell 10 to 199p, with turnover hitting a very
heavy 27m.
The dividend cut, a surprisingly large 46 per cent, was the first in the
company's history, as the new management moved to spruce up the group's
image among the investment community. Most agreed they achieved this, and
analysts welcomed the company's new visibility, with financial and strategic
details forthcoming as never before.
However, some of the old trading worries remained. Texas, the company's home
improvement division, produced a fall in profits and prompted a large
provision. Some analysts expressed concern that the troubled sector would
continue to drag on the group's finances.
There were fresh worries over the impact of the National Lottery on
Ladbroke's betting business. Write-downs hit the property and hotel arms,
with questions also being asked about the future of the UK hotel division.
Ms Julie Farrar at Credit Lyonnais Laing said: 'What the new management has
revealed is that the recovery is going to be longer than expected. The stock
is fully valued at these levels.' Others disagreed, pointing out that the
stock has been one of the FT-SE's best performers in 1994, and that with all
the bad news now out of the way the shares are well placed for the longer
term.
Results in line with expectations saw Zeneca trade sideways before
succumbing to the market trend and the shares slipped 3 to 763p. Profits
rose 42 per cent to Pounds 627m, which was underpinned by good volume
growth.
Mr Peter Laing at Salomon Brothers said that, in spite of relatively slow
earnings growth, the group should benefit from new drugs due to come into
the market over the next three years. 'It is not a stock to sell at this
price,' he added.
The paper and packaging area of the market provided two outstanding
performers in Bunzl and David S. Smith, both of which responded to strong
buy recommendations published by stockbrokers Credit Lyonnais Laing and
Gerrard Vivian Grey.
Credit Lyonnais pinpointed both stocks as its best buys in the sector,
saying that the recovery in the paper cycle could continue for five years.
CLL focused on a favourable outlook for costs and said the earnings recovery
potential of companies directly exposed to fluctuations in pulp and paper
prices is far greater than for raw material converters.
News of the US acquisitions also helped Bunzl shares, which settled 4 ahead
at 171p after turnover of 2.8m. David S. Smith closed 7 better at 499p.
Financial sectors of the market continued to reflect concerns that some of
the big international trading houses have suffered substantial losses via
the bond and equity markets in recent weeks.
The UK merchant banks remained under heavy pressure throughout the trading
session, with SG Warburg, widely regarded as the UK's premier securities
house, again roughly handled by marketmakers and finally a further 27 lower
at 827p, after 823p. Over the last two trading sessions Warburg shares have
fallen 61p, or 6.9 per cent.
Schroders non-voting shares gave up 23 more to 1090p, still unsettled by
fears that the merchant bank may drop out of the FT-SE 100 Index foll-owing
next week's meeting of the FT-SE 100 steering comm-ittee.
Among other merchant banks, Close Brothers, badly affected by the recent
steep slide in markets, fell 17 more to 438p. Kleinwort Benson, regarded as
one of the most successful trading houses during the upsurge in markets late
last year, retreated 12 to 538p and Hambros lost 8 to 370p. Smith New Court,
the big marketmaking firm, dipped 8 more to 394p.
The big UK clearing banks endured another tough trading session, but closed
above the day's lowest levels. TSB was the sector's best performer, ending 3
1/2 higher at 243p. Abbey National finished unchanged at 490p, sustained by
the news that UK house prices rose by 2.2 per cent during February, the
biggest monthly gain since 1988, according to the Halifax Building Society.
Barclays dropped 11 to 518p, Lloyds 7 to 576p and National Westminster 6 to
483p.
Shares in Serco, which reported bumper profits earlier this week, put on
another 20 at 1470p as the market continued to appreciate the figures.
Smiths Industries advanced 8 to 489p after SG Warburg recommended the stock,
while engineering group Siebe bounced 12 to 607p ahead of today's
presentation to both analysts and institutions at SG Warburg. Further
reflection on GKN's figures reported on Wednesday saw the shares jump 11 to
547p.
The Pounds 25m disposal of assets and businesses in BBA's industrial
materials activities helped the shares close 2 ahead at 216p. One market
watcher said: 'The group is highly geared and any reduction of gearing is to
be welcomed.'
Shares in photocopier leasing group Southern Business retreated 3 to 95p
after Danka Business denied recent market speculation that it was in talks
to acquire Southern. The latter's shares bounced 7 to 369p on the statement.
A trade press report that J. Sainsbury was restructuring its middle
management concurred with analysts' growing belief that the leading
supermarket groups are knuckling down to cutting costs in the face of
continuing margin pressure. The shares moved forward 5 to 367p. Tesco was
steady at 226p and Kwik Save added 12 at 604p.
In a firm drinks sector, domestic brewers were led by Wolverhampton &
Dudley, which forged ahead 23 to 517p, inspired by a director's share
purchase the day before. There was further takeover talk surrounding
Merrydown, the cider group, the shares appreciating 5 to 155p.
British Petroleum managed a net gain of 3 1/2 at 356p after volume of 9.2m
shares. The exploration and production stocks were good performers all day,
with Enterprise Oil finishing 6 better at 437p and Lasmo 2 1/2 higher at
129p.
Shares in British Airways moved 3 ahead to 440p after cargo traffic figures
for the month of February showed a 10.5 per cent year-on-year increase.
After a strong advance in recent sessions, BAA succumbed to profit-taking
and the shares lost 13 to 1002p in active trade of 2m.
Epwin Group, which produces PVC windows and doors, was one of the strongest
performers among the second liners after announcing a 51 per cent rise in
preliminary profits and a good increase in the dividend. At the close the
shares were 17 higher at 317p.
The story that house prices had risen sharply during February prompted early
strength in housebuilders, but this quickly petered out as the market came
under pressure.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

940304

