FT941-17034

FT  06 JAN 94 / International Company News: Borden unveils plans for
shake-up and sale of units


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Borden, the troubled US food and wallpaper group that last month sacked its
chairman and chief executive, yesterday unveiled long-awaited plans for a
restructuring aimed at reversing a slump in sales and profits.
Its loss-making salty snacks business - the second biggest in the US with
sales of Dollars 750m last year - is to be put up for sale, along with its
seafood, jam and jelly businesses with turnover of Dollars 500m.
The pasta, dairy, and other grocery businesses will be kept, as will the
company's wall-covering and adhesive businesses. Borden will seek to restore
profits growth to the retained businesses by increasing sales and cutting
Dollars 100m to Dollars 125m a year from costs.
Mr Frank Tasco, who replaced Mr Anthony D'Amato as chairman in December,
said: 'The goal of this programme is to build shareholder value by focusing
on and revitalising our best businesses.'
However, the restructuring will hurt in the short term. Borden will take
charges of Dollars 650m to after-tax profits in the fourth quarter of 1993,
mainly because the loss-making businesses will have to be sold at a price
below their book value.
The result will be an after-tax loss of Dollars 590m to Dollars 600m for
1993, or Dollars 4.18 to Dollars 4.26 a share. The previous year Borden
recorded net losses of Dollars 439.6m after charges for an earlier
restructuring.
The restructuring plan envisages the annual dividend being halved to 30
cents a share in the year just begun, reflecting the likelihood of a modest
recovery in earnings to a level 'at the upper end of the 75 cents to Dollars
1 a share range' of analysts' estimates.
The shares shed Dollars 2 to Dollars 16 1/4 .
Mr Ervin Shames, Borden's chief executive, said the North American salty
snack business, comprising seven large regional operations, could be sold in
total or in parts. The aim would be to complete all sales by the end of this
year.
Mr John McMillin, an analyst at Prudential Securities, said possible buyers
of the salty snack business might include other snack manufacturers, such as
Nabisco of the US or United Biscuits of the UK, but the main interest was
likely to be in the store distribution networks rather than the loss-making
snacks themselves.
He predicted piecemeal sales totalling Dollars 250m to Dollars 300m, with
the seafood, jam and jelly businesses fetching considerably less.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940106

