FT941-17008

FT  06 JAN 94 / Markets Report: Bentsen checks Dollars-yen


   By GILLIAN TETT


Officials' statements, rather than government statistics, dominated trading
on money markets yesterday in the absence of significant fresh economic
data, writes Gillian Tett.
A speech from Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury secretary, deploring the yen's
slide, focused market attention around the politically sensitive yen-dollar
rate. But, with the Bundesbank council meeting today, the possibility of
German interest rate cuts continued to undermine the D-Mark's ailing
fortunes.
Following recent rapid dollar gains, the yen staged a small recovery
yesterday after Mr Bentsen's carefully timed intervention. Speaking in
Washington, Mr Bentsen said that 'allowing the yen to slide' was not 'an
acceptable way out of recession for Japan'.
His comments pushed the dollar briefly down to Y112.2, from Tuesday's close
of Y113.2. However, it later rallied, closing in London at Y112.8. In New
York it ended at Y113.02.
The yen's failure to sustain its initial surge against the dollar was not
unexpected, dealers said. The dollar's resilience at Y112.1 suggested that
the US currency remained well supported, they added.
'The yen had a knee jerk reaction, But since then it is looking a bit
softer,' explained Mr Stephen King, deputy chief economist of James Capel.
Since the Japanese trade surplus was already declining, Mr Bentsen's
comments would not have the same impact as his similar intervention last
year, he noted.
But, as Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank, pointed out, the US
and Japanese governments still faced difficult decisions.
Although the appreciation of the yen was central to US policy last year, the
severity of the recession in Japan is likely to demand a further weakening
of the yen - Mr MacKinnon himself, using OECD figures, calculates that
without new fiscal policies the yen will need to depreciate to Y130 against
the dollar in coming months before there could be any 'kickstarting' of the
Japanese economy.
The fact that the market is currently underweight in yen might provide a
small corrective factor. But the Japanese government's failure to implement
any fresh fiscal policies is likely to remain a major source of concern on
the currency markets. The US now appears to be trying to put pressure on
Japan 'to get their act together' on fresh fiscal policies, he said.
Amid market speculation about the likelihood of German rate cuts today, a
comment from Mr Hans-Juergen Koebnick, a member of the Bundesbank central
council, criticising the high level of German rates was a key factor
influencing trade in the dollar against the D-Mark. Speaking on German
radio, Mr Koebnik said a 'significant' fall in German rates was likely this
year.
The comments pushed the dollar up against the D-Mark, cancelling out an
early loss. It ended at DM1.7399, little changed from the previous day. It
finished New York trading at DM1.7400.
With the German economy faltering, the D-Mark is expected to remain weak
irrespective of whether the Bundesbank cuts rates today. Although West
German unemployment figures for December published yesterday were marginally
above expectations, worse than expected industry order data, showing a 0.8
per cent fall in orders in November, again underlined the recessionary state
of the German economy.
Meanwhile, hopes of a German rate cut were boosted slightly yesterday when
two European banks slightly reduced their own rates. The Central Bank of
Denmark shaved  1/4 percentage point off its discount and key deposit rates,
bringing them to 6 per cent, the ninth such cut since August.
The Austrian National Bank cut its GOMEX rate by 10 basis points to 5.5 per
cent, effective Friday, opening up the differential between its own rate and
the equivalent German repo rate to the highest since June.
Dealers suggested that if the Bundesbank lowered rates today the Central
Bank of Denmark might cut further. But in light of today's holiday in some
German states, the market suspicion is that the most likely reduction will
now come in the repo rate next week.
The Bundesbank gave no hint of its intentions by allotting DM97.4bn at its
securities repurchase tender at a fixed rate of 6.00 per cent. This was the
last of a series of fixed rate repos announced in December.
In England, scepticism about the prospect of a UK rate cut is gathering
pace, after a comment from Sir Nicholas Goodison, TSB chairman. Sir Nicholas
said that now the British economy was recovering 'there will be pressure to
reduce interest rates. But this should be resisted.'
His scepticism was echoed on the futures market, where both the March and
June dated short sterling contracts yesterday fell slightly. March closed at
94.72, down from an opening position of 94.76.
The pound held on to most of its gains achieved in recent days, finishing at
DM2.5860, almost a pfennig up from Tuesday's close of DM2.5780.
The Spanish currency slithered yesterday to its lowest level since August
16, closing at Pta83.18 per D-Mark, from the previous day's Pta82.62. The
prospect of a general strike scheduled for the end of the month, coupled
with fears about the rising Spanish inflation, was likely to weaken the
peseta further, dealers said.
 -------------------------------------------
POUND IN NEW YORK
 -------------------------------------------
Jan 5             Close    Prev. close
 -------------------------------------------
Pounds spot      1.4875      1.4860
1 mth            1.4846      1.4830
3 mth            1.4799      1.4787
1 yr             1.4680      1.4675
 -------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940106

