FT944-14540

FT  22 OCT 94 / Lloyd's agents to appeal in Gooda case


   By JIM KELLY


Lloyd's of London agencies facing record claims for compensation from
members after the High Court judgment against them in the Gooda Walker case
are to go to the Court of Appeal.
The decision was immediately attacked by the Gooda Walker action group,
representing 3,096 Names, as a waste of time and money.
Mr Justice Phillips ruled on October 5 that the Gooda Walker agency had
taken 'culpable' and 'unjustified' risks and that the Names, individuals
whose assets have traditionally supported the insurance market, should
receive compensation. The Gooda Walker action group estimated compensation
at Pounds 504m.
Clyde & Co, the solicitors acting for the agencies' errors and omissions
insurers, which cover awards for negligence, said yesterday that the
judgment would be challenged with particular reference to the 'approach
adopted in assessing damages recoverable'.
Mr Michael Deeny, chairman of the Gooda Walker Action Group, said: 'Some
people don't know when they have lost. There is certainly no prospect of our
judgment being reversed on neglig-ence.
'Mr Justice Philips' principles of quantum will give us an estimated 80 per
cent of our losses. In our view the Court of Appeal is most likely to
maintain his principle or alternatively to increase the damages awarded to
us. This is a deplorable waste of the scarce financial resources of Lloyd's
syndicates. Spending further millions on legal fees neither helps the ruined
Names nor the Society of Lloyd's as a whole.'
Mr Deeny said that the decision to go for an appeal showed an 'irresponsible
disregard' for the best interests of the market. He predicted that the
appeal would be heard early next year.
The delay caused by the appeal is likely to increase the pressure from
hard-hit Names for interim payments to be made ahead of a final Court of
Appeal decision.
Yesterday the insurers intervened in the continuing High Court proceedings
over Gooda Walker to seek clarification on whether they were bound to back
agencies asked to make interim payments.
The insurers, out of whose funds any compensation eventually awarded would
be paid, also want to know if, in the light of the judgment, the Gooda
Walker losses arose out of more than one 'originating cause'. This could
affect the amounts paid under each agent's insurance policy.
A spokesman for Clyde & Co said: 'These steps are not undertaken lightly.
Insurers have the benefit of detailed analysis and advice from leading
counsel which has been carefully considered in arriving at their decisions.'
The progress of the Gooda Walker case is being closely watched by other
groups of Names taking legal action against Lloyd's agencies.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941022

