FT941-3448

FT  16 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Better fewer but better


There is growing concern at Westminster over the way that legislation is
drafted and passed. On Monday, Mr Howard Davies, director general of the
Confederation of British Industry, added the voice of the business community
to such worries. In a speech at the European Policy Forum, he called for an
overhaul of the legislative process, with more consultation, better drafting
and improved scrutiny.
The case for reform is strong. The weight of legislation is growing - this
year's Finance Bill, at 471 pages, is the longest in history. Yet an
increasing amount of time is spent on remedying the defects of recent
legislation. Last year's Criminal Justice Act repealed sentencing reforms
introduced in the 1991 Act. A one-clause bill is needed to restore the
powers of transport police, inadvertently watered down in last year's rail
privatisation act.
A telling indicator of the need for change is the growing number of
amendments the government has to table to its own legislation in the Lords.
These have more than doubled during the 1980s according to evidence
submitted by Lord Howe to the Hansard Society commission on the legislative
process which reported last year. The late drafting and tabling of
amendments inevitably makes parliamentary scrutiny less thorough. It also
makes it harder for business and other organisations to make an informed
contribution towards shaping legislation.
Drafting quality
Some of the blame for this has been laid at the door of the parliamentary
counsel who draft legislation. The European Policy Forum has recently
suggested breaking their monopoly to improve the quality of drafting.
Involving outside lawyers in the work would allow departments access to a
larger pool of talent. Contracting-out would also force departments to
define their objectives clearly and devise reasonable timetables that legal
firms could work to.
However, it is not bad drafting which has led to repeated amendments to the
Police and Magistrates Courts Bill currently passing through the Lords. It
is the failure of the home secretary, Mr Michael Howard, to convince peers
of the wisdom of centralising control over the police service. Mr John
Patten, education secretary, has also had to concede amendments to his
Education Bill to address scepticism over his proposals to curb student
unions and to allow schools to control teacher training. Better drafting
could improve the quality of legislation - but ministers have much more to
contribute.
Ministerial machismo
Too much legislation is rushed through parliament too hastily. In some
cases, this is to deal with political crises such as a surge in joy-riding
or a spate of attacks by dangerous dogs. But in most cases, it is
ministerial machismo which sees pushing through radical reforms as the best
way to climb the greasy pole. Frequent ministerial reshuffles encourage this
belief, since ministers move on before the trouble they have created
manifests itself.
A more serious approach to consultation on contentious changes in the law
would help counter such tendencies. Mr Davies says that some departments
consult business in 'an unsatisfactory or perfunctory way'. He cites the
Home Office failure to consult on fire safety regulations, scrapped only
after direct intervention by the CBI. And just three weeks was initially
given for comments on complex proposals to reform pensions law issued in
January. Ministers should give adequate time for consultation and report
more fully on the outcome.
Another useful step would be to limit the number of contentious pieces of
legislation passed in each session. This would allow more time for
legislative 'housekeeping', such as legal reforms drafted by the Law
Commission. Uncontroversial measures needed by business - such as amendments
to the Sale of Goods Act, legislation on the Privity of Contract and a new
Restrictive Practices Bill - have all been ready for years but denied
parliamentary time.
There are other measures that could improve the legislative process, such as
creating two finance bills to separate technical tax changes from more
radical policy changes. But the key to better legislation is have less of
it, and do it better.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940316

