FT941-4034

FT  12 MAR 94 / Sport: The jilted brokers of the big match - Is English
football doomed? Peter Berlin scans another blueprint for the game


   By PETER BERLIN


It is sometimes difficult to recall, in the gloom that has enveloped English
football how narrow the margin of World Cup failure was. If in two similar
positions (Des Walker grabs Marc Overmars' shirt outside England's penalty
area, Overmars falls inside penalty area; Ronald Koeman grabs David Platt's
shirt outside the Dutch penalty area, Platt falls inside penalty area) the
refereeing decisions had been reversed (no penalty to the Netherlands;
penalty to England) things would be different.
England would be heading for the World Cup finals; Terry Venables would
still be out of work; Peter Beardsley, Matthew Le Tissier and Darren
Anderton would not have played for England against Denmark on Wednesday and
Out of Time, Why Football Isn't Working] by Alex Fynn and Lynton Guest would
not be high in the sports best seller list. The book struck a nerve with
despondent English fans.
Fynn and Guest were two of the losers in the money-spinning summer of 1992
when the Premier League broke from the Football League and then negotiated a
Pounds 304m television contract with BSkyB.
Guest, a journalist, was involved with FTC, a small television company,
which was briefly involved in the television bidding process. Fynn, an
executive at Saatchi and Saatchi, the advertising agency, provided the
Football Association with the mouthwatering financial projections it used as
bait to attract the top clubs to its breakaway league. But Saatchi and then
Fynn were spurned as contracts and jobs were handed out. The marketing
strategy he had offered the FA was forgotten.
The core of this book is the two chapters on the creation of the Premier
League and the subsequent television negotiations. Fynn was behind, or just
outside, the locked doors as the deals were done and the boots flew. The
writers offer an account which has not appeared elsewhere, settle a few
scores and point out where football went wrong; that is, where it deviated
from Fynn's blueprint.
The two insist they are not just insiders but fans too - Guest supports
Leicester, Fynn Newcastle. The proof lies in the rest of the book, much of
which reads as if it was largely written on a particularly angry night in
the pub; notably the tedious, second-hand fan-rants against former England
manager Graham Taylor which begin and end the book.
Fynn's blueprint is a marketing man's plan for football. The best way to
sell the sport is to organise a league in which matches are scarce and every
one is an event, a contest between glamorous teams with national profiles.
To do this the FA must shrink the top division to exclude clubs with local
profiles. These must maximise their income by playing in regional divisions
which multiply local derbies.
Fynn argues that a successful national team helps sell the game at all
levels. By happy chance his plan for the league is also good for the
national team: reducing the number of club matches cuts wear and tear on
players.
For Fynn, big clubs are good, smaller clubs are bad. Fynn attacks the TV
arrangements in the UK because in the bulk of satellite-free households
children will be deprived of the chance to support the big, glamorous clubs
and must, instead, become fans of the first division clubs they see on ITV.
The book laments the fall of Liverpool (victims of the system) and praises
AC Milan (owned by Silvio Berlusconi, who Fynn has advised).
Fynn tells how the FA surrendered the initiative on the Premier League in a
clandestine meeting at Goodison Park, Everton's ground, between the FA and
representatives of the biggest clubs, at which Fynn seems to have been
present.
He writes: 'Concluding the meeting Philip Carter (chairman of Everton) said:
'Well gentlemen . . . all that remains to do is elect our chief executive.'
. . . Charles Hughes (the FA's director of coaching) broke in . . . 'We
already have a chief executive there.' He pointed at a rather
uncomfortable-looking Graham Kelly (chief executive of the FA). Kelly said
nothing and the opportunity was gone.'
Rather than keep the league under FA control, Kelly let Rick Parry, an
accountant, become chief executive. With the league granted independence it
fell under the political control of Ken Bates, chairman of Chelsea, champion
of the middle-sized club, and the man who had promoted the return to a
22-club first division.
Bates, says Fynn, does not believe football matches should be scarce. He
believes in 'a marginal costing system'. Since a club's costs are largely
fixed, more games mean more profit. A bigger league and more cup
competitions are, therefore, good things. This view is shared by the
middle-sized clubs who form the bulk of the top English division.
Bates' political objective was to ensure these clubs had equal power in the
Premier League. After the league was set up, Bates crowed: 'David Dein
(vice-chairman of Arsenal) was so over the moon at getting his little
Premier League and couldn't understand why Ken Bates was so supportive. We
got a few things in there . . . He is only now begining to realise what hit
him. One club, one vote, no committees . . . so you have no permanent chance
to be in the corridors of power.'
Bates also set the agenda for the television deal that followed. Fynn thinks
this was a marketing disaster: the football weekend spread over three days,
all the tiddlers guaranteed live matches, the big clubs largely restricted
to satellite. The league, says Fynn, could have negotiated a much better
deal. But the decision to opt for BSkyB was not purely financial. Bates and
his mates were prepared to accept a slightly smaller pie, so long as they
kept their hands on the cake slice.
Bates commands an army of 12 to 14 middle-sized clubs each with one vote in
the 22-team Premier League. I asked Fynn how he could overcome Bates. 'I
intend to persuade him that Chelsea are one of the big clubs,' he said.
But Fynn can hardly perform the same trick with Coventry or Wimbledon. To
persuade them to do as Raith Rovers have done in Scotland and vote for a
smaller Premier League knowing that such a change could bring them
relegation, would test the most resourceful marketing man.
Out of Time: Why football isn't working] Alex Fynn and Lynton Guest, Simon
and Schuster, Pounds 14.99.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940312

