FT941-4011

FT  14 MAR 94 / Clinton wants talks with Scharping


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


The US administration is trying to arrange an early meeting in Washington
between President Bill Clinton and Mr Rudolf Scharping, the German Social
Democratic party leader.
The US approach is being undertaken with the full approval of Chancellor
Helmut Kohl, according to officials in Washington. He is said to accept that
it is perfectly normal for the US president to meet leaders of the
opposition in countries close to the US.
The heavy German election season, beginning yesterday in Lower Saxony and
culminating at the national level in October, presents the US with a tricky
problem of diplomatic niceties.
Mr Clinton and Mr Kohl get on well, as witnessed in their genial last
session in Washington in January. In July the president will go to Germany
after the summit in Naples of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations.
Beyond personal rapport, US-German co-operation over issues such as Bosnia
and Russia has become extremely close, partly because of the effectiveness
of Mr Richard Holbrooke, the US ambassador in Bonn. In general terms, the
Clinton administration is giving as high a priority to Germany in the
European context as did its predecessor.
On the other hand, the US can read German public opinion polls as well as
the next country and is aware that Mr Scharping, whom Mr Clinton has never
met, could be the next chancellor.
Mr Scharping also appears a politician in the Clinton image. US officials
are particularly struck by his tough fiscal and budgetary policy proposals,
which they see as similar to the deficit reduction plan now in effect in the
US.
The SDP leader has had some recent contact with US officials. He met Mr
William Perry, now defence secretary, at a conference in Germany some two
months ago.
Mr Clinton will want to avoid the uncomfortable precedent set, in reverse,
in the 1976 US election, when then Chancellor Helmut Schmidt's public
preference for President Gerald Ford created problems for the bilateral
relationship when Mr Jimmy Carter became president.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940314

