FT943-13154

FT  21 JUL 94 / Government Bonds: US Treasuries nosedive after Greenspan's
testimony


   By FRANK MCGURTY and CONNER MIDDELMANN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US bond prices tumbled yesterday after the Federal Reserve chairman told a
Senate committee that a further tightening of monetary policy was still 'an
open question'.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  27/32 lower
at 84 13/16 , with the yield rising to 7.54 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was down  3/16 at 99 23/32 , to yield 5.998 per cent.
In early activity, bond prices showed modest declines as traders adjusted
their positions ahead of congressional testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, the
Fed chief.
The initial erosion came after several strong sessions in which the market
had anticipated a signal from the central banker that an early move to
higher interest rates was unnecessary in view of a cooling economy.
Instead, Mr Greenspan was non-committal and bonds went into a tailspin as a
result. In his biannual Humphrey-Hawkins briefing, he said he was uncertain
whether the four increases in short-term rates sanctioned by the Fed so far
this year had been sufficient to dispel inflationary pressures in the
economy.
The central banker's comments left no doubt in the minds of bond traders
that the Fed may move to a tighter monetary policy in the run-up to the next
meeting of its policy-making arm on August 16.
That prospect overwhelmed a smattering of favourable economic data released
earlier in the morning.
The Commerce Department said housing starts last month had dropped 9.8 per
cent while building permits had fallen 3.0 per cent.
A welcome drop in commodity prices did not help as the development was
overshadowed by a fresh decline in the value of the dollar against other
leading currencies.
European government bonds ended a volatile session lower across the board.
Traders said the correction would test the durability of the recent rally,
which has seen 10-year bund yields move more than 50 basis points in two
weeks.
'We've had quite a powerful move, so I'm not surprised to see a bit of
profit-taking,' said a Franfurt bund dealer. He expected the retracement to
continue in the short-term, but did not expect prices to return to recent
lows.
Some traders said the largely technical correction could represent an
important test for bond markets.
'Will investors use these cheaper levels to put some cash to work? And will
those who participated in the early stages of the rally be comfortable
holding on to their positions?' asked Mr Stephen Dulake, international bond
strategist at Paine Webber.
German bonds underperformed many of their neighbours and fell by more than
half a point at the long end with DM7.7bn of new 10-year government bonds
weighing on prices. Although yesterday's DM4.7bn auction of the second
tranche of the new 6.75 per cent bund issue was deemed a success, traders
said most of it went on bank's books rather than into firm retail hands.
The Bundesbank's repo rate fell another three basis points to 4.88 per cent,
as expected, giving away little ahead of today's Bundesbank council meeting.
Most market participants said they expected the central bank to leave key
lending rates unchanged.
French bonds tracked bunds lower as dealers took profits after the recent
days' sharp gains.
The French Treasury today is to auction FFr19bn-FFr21bn of new two- and
five-year Btans. According to one dealer, the possibility of another
10-basis-point cut in the Bank of France's intervention rate could underpin
the auction.
Weakness in other markets put pressure on UK gilts, triggering some
stop-loss selling in the futures market. Dealers said most of the activity
took place in the futures pits, and did not report strong selling by cash
investors.
'If anything, many investors would like to see the market work its way a bit
lower so they can buy more cheaply at next week's auction,' a dealer said.
The London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange (Liffe) will
begin trading long gilt futures and options contracts a half hour earlier
starting August 1. The futures contract will open at 0700 GMT and the
options contract at 0702 GMT in line with the cash market.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940721

