FT942-14359

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (26): Airports of the world - So typical
of the Swiss / Zurich


   By IAN RODGER


Zurich's airport is everything you would expect of a Swiss establishment -
quietly efficient, tidy, convenient and expensive.
It is composed of two adjacent terminals, with spacious Terminal A occupied
only by Swissair and its partner airlines; Crossair, Austrian Airlines, SAS
Scandinavian Airlines, Delta Airlines and Singapore Airlines.
All other airlines and charter flights use Terminal B, and it is here that
crowding can often become unpleasant and service drop below acceptable
standards.
The airport is located only 11km north-west of the city centre. It can be
reached in a few minutes by car and very frequent train services from the
city's main railway station to the station underneath Terminal B. Traffic
jams going to the airport are rare, less so going into town.
The second class one way rail fare is SFr4.50, the taxi fare a numbing SFr40
(about Pounds 19).
There are multi-storey car parks connected to each terminal and parking
costs SFr4 an hour, SFr24 for 24 hours and SFr96 per week. For those
accompanying departing passengers or welcoming new arrivals, there are
usually a few parking spaces free at the respective ramps at SFr1 for a
maximum of 10 minutes.
Passenger processing is normally efficient and the terminals are not so big
as to require a half-hour hike to the gates.
Lounges for first class and business passengers have been cramped and smoky,
but Swissair has just opened new, enlarged ones in Terminal A for its
clients. Other airlines make do with what they can get, sometimes even
having to take space in Terminal A.
Oddly, Zurich airport is not famous for its shopping. This is because it is
owned and operated by the cantonal government which has to be sensitive to
the feelings of its many constituents who dislike the airport.
Attempts to expand airport facilities are always contested, so it is
pointless for the authorities to try to boost custom through marketing
promotions.
The transit areas feature a modest array of duty-free shops, but the prices
are not remarkably better than you can get in town.
On the other hand, there is an immense and varied shopping centre in the
basement of Terminal B above the railway station. It is as much for Zurich
residents as for travellers, being the only place in the region where
evening and Sunday shopping is allowed. But it is worth a browse, if only to
acquire a feel for how the natives shop.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940420

