FT943-711

FT  28 SEP 94 / Management: Turning lunchtime wine into water - Richard
Donkin bemoans the removal of the drinks cabinet from today's corporate
dining rooms


   By RICHARD DONKIN


It was a typical corporate dining room. Four places set for lunch, napkins,
side plates, wine glasses. Would I like an aperitif?, asked the chairman.
'Just a tomato juice, please.' His smile broadened as he revealed that he
too was on tomato juice. So too was his colleague - and his colleague's
colleague.
'So you don't drink at lunchtime?' he ventured. What should I say? There,
standing provocatively, in the middle of the table, dribbling with
condensation on its pond-green glass cooled side, was an uncorked bottle of
Sauvignon.
'Well, sometimes.' The bottle did the rounds, each host declining in turn.
It was a bottle straight from Wonderland. 'Drink me,' it said. So I did.
Just a glass or so, but it was pure sin - and I knew it.
There is no escaping the lunchtime culture change. One of the corporate
miracles of the 1990s has been the turning of wine into water. Drinking and
the company lunch is becoming a Spartan affair in our austere industrial
climate. Today's lunch is business from the first forkful.
The erosion of the chummy business lunch probably started with the 'working
lunch' some years ago and evolved into an in-house, buffet-style
get-together, no table cloth, peel-your-own fruit - more an excuse for a
meeting than an excuse for lunch. The other type of in-house lunch, the one
designed to impress your visitors, has survived after thriving during the
heady 1980s, but even this is becoming more businesslike.
In the City, at least, lunch has become the institution that sorts out the
roundhead champion of the Protestant work ethic from the cavalier lush, more
accustomed to keeping gentlemen's hours. The corporate roundheads are
winning the battle as the executives of yesteryear are routed from their
comfortable routines.
The roundhead manager is easy to spot, he - or, increasingly, she - keeps a
clean desk, works briskly and efficiently and uses lunch to stock up on
lettuce-laced fuel for the rest of the day. The knife is a tool for stabbing
home a point, the fork and plate merely utilitarian thinking accessories.
The greatest statement of all is made by the glass of water.
Whether effervescent or still, it says that you mean business, that you did
not come here to relax and enjoy yourself, that you are alert, sensible and
a fully paid-up member of workaholics anonymous.
Dianah Worman, a policy adviser at the Institute of Personnel and
Development, says: 'The latest thinking is that it is perhaps not a good
idea to expose people to lots of alcohol at work. We are talking about
something that undermines people's performance.'
Worman identifies professions such as medicine, the police force and
journalism where drinking cultures still exist, but she suggests the
practice is on the decline. Her own organisation bans drink in the workplace
except at retirement parties and the Christmas drinks party. The number of
companies with strict alcohol and drugs policies is growing markedly.
British Rail and Railtrack, which introduced policies last year, not only
insist that all their employees do not work under the influence of drink,
but that their contractors also comply with the same policy.
Ford, GEC, Nuclear Electric, Royal Bank of Scotland, Shell and Whitbread
were all listed in a recent Incomes Data Services study as companies with
alcohol policies. In 1980, Whitbread exchanged its traditional daily beer
allowance, which could be drunk on site, for a periodic take-home
arrangement. in an attempt to promote sensible drinking.
According to the IDS study, alcohol and drug misuse costs industry at least
Pounds 1bn a year. A fifth of large employers, it said, had formal alcohol
polices, still lagging behind the two-thirds that now have smoking policies.
The more stringent approach to alcohol in some companies has been influenced
by changes in the law. The 1992 Transport and Works Act made it illegal for
transport workers in safety-sensitive positions to report for duty having
taken alcohol or drugs. Their employers must also use due diligence to
prevent alcohol or drug use.
Equivalent US legislation is even more draconian, covering 7m employees with
a widespread use of random-alcohol tests.
As at British Rail, some employers are deciding that it is unacceptable to
allow drinking for some and not for others. Worman says that those company
directors who still have not consigned their office drinks cabinets to the
scrap heap might consider doing so.
There seems no disputing that the roundheads have firmly secured the legal
and moral high ground. In the new era of office prohibition, lean companies
and performance-related everything, there is nothing left for the cavaliers
to do but to clink their glasses of eau de tap and drink to the old days.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940928

