FT942-12164

FT  30 APR 94 / Burnish your image, sir?: Lunch with the FT - Michael
Thompson-Noel meets David Abbott, advertising executive


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


If you knew even a little about advertising, you would mark David Abbott
down at once as a highly-paid 'creative' - possibly a copy-writer - rather
than an account-managing 'suit'. But he does wear suits - expensive ones,
sometimes striped ones - so you would conclude, again accurately, that he
was probably an agency head.
If you knew nothing about advertising, you would at least be certain that
Abbott was rich and successful - a deal-maker, say, in movies or fragrances,
or from the sharp end of fashion, supposing there is one.
Abbott is one of the best-regarded and most influential creatives in British
advertising. He is chairman and creative director of Abbott Mead Vickers
(AMV), which in 1994 hopes to handle billings - media expenditure placed on
clients' behalf - of Pounds 200m, enough to position it among the three or
four highest-billing London agencies.
A recent coup was the capture, three months ago, of an annual Pounds 50m
worth of BT (British Telecommunications) business, described by the agency
as the 'largest single new-business win in the history of British
advertising'.
I met David Abbott at Bibendum, an elegant restaurant on the first floor of
Michelin House in London's Fulham Road (Sir Terence Conran is a
co-proprietor) - and remembered that an FT columnist, not long ago, had
called BT 'Britain's most hated company'.
I mentioned this to the ace image-maker as we handled our menus. Abbott is
tall, rangy and Hollywood handsome, with Persil-white hair, and is
preternaturally charming: the brand of deep charm that reassures powerful
clients - Sainsbury's, Volvo, Leeds Permanent Building Society, Pepsi-Cola,
The Economist, etc - and costs a zillion per hour.
He smiled. 'I am not sure,' he said thoughtfully, 'that that is right,
except that BT suffer from being people who send you bills. I think they
have made real efforts to improve their service and lower their tariffs,
encouraged by the regulators. Our main job for them is call-encouragement -
to extend the length of calls. On average, an American spends 20 minutes on
the 'phone each day; in Britain it is four.'
Only an idiot would imagine that anything could be gained by heckling an
image-burnisher like Abbott with back-handed remarks about his clients, so I
switched to food.
'Do you like food? Is this your favourite restaurant? Do you like
Michelin-starred establishments?'
'I like food,' he said. 'But this' - Bibendum - 'is about as posh as I get.
This is such a pretty room, and we have been given almost the best table, I
am not sure why. I don't like cathedrals to food. I quite like bad
restaurants. Let me re-phrase that: unpretentious restaurants. If I've got a
free day I like to take a book and eat on my own. If you asked me to name my
three favourite restaurants - breakfast, lunch, dinner - I would answer with
three in Venice: the Cipriani for breakfast, that nice one by the opera
house for lunch, and Harry's Dolci for dinner.'
Abbott still copy-writes. He has won many awards for it. He is particularly
well-known for 20 years' work on the Volvo account, though I was surprised
when he said he still writes plenty of ads for different campaigns. He did
all of the creative writing, for example, that won the BT account.
'I have a love-hate relationship with copy-writing,' he says. 'Now I need a
deadline. I am 55, my eyesight's going and my knees ache, so there are some
older audiences that I'm just beginning to understand.'
He works 70 to 80 hours a week. Is he rich? 'I am rich by most people's
standards.'
He had a notion, early on, that he would like to 'do something creative',
and discovered there was a job called copy-writing after picking up a book
called Madison Avenue, by Martin Meyer. First, in 1961, he joined Kodak's
advertising department. Then he worked at agency Mather & Crowther. 'I had
to take the copy test twice, but was offered a job because I was thought to
be the Mather's type.'
He had seven years at Doyle Dane Bernbach in London, including a year's
training in New York, where he came to admire the best qualities of US
advertising. Abbott Mead Vickers was started at the end of 1977, and has
just sort of grown.
Had British advertising improved in the last 10 to 15 years? 'I think it is
better. The general executional level of ads, particularly television ads,
is now of a very high standard. And technology has helped us do impossible
things. If you can think it, you can make it happen, really.
'I think also there's a recognition that the viewer - the consumer - is of a
visually literate generation. You can use shorthand: you can be quite clever
in your visual communication. There's less pounding on the door, more
subtlety, in advertising now. The danger is that that goes too far and you
just have entertainment and no persuasion.
'The real problem with advertising is that there's going to be so much of
it: that the proliferation of media is going to mean narrow-casting, rather
than broad-casting. The price of entry is going to go down and we will
become more like America than is perhaps desirable. I'm sure we're going to
have car dealers (on screen) doing their own advertising, more plumbers,
more back specialists and hair clinics.'
'I have read,' I said, 'that television is expected to last 10,000 years.
Will advertising always exist?'
'There'll always be a need,' he said, 'for some form of mass selling. As
long as we value mass employment, we have to have mass production.
Advertising is just an intrinsic part of western capitalist society.'
'Is it my imagination,' I asked, 'or has UK TV advertising become more and
more Americanised?'
'I'm not sure how real that is,' said the image-builder. 'There are two
things. One, there is the influx of the multi-nationals, and a desire to use
effective work from one market in another. One of my clients is Pepsi-Cola,
and they run Pepsi commercials made in the States for the American market
here in the UK - very effectively. And that will continue to grow. Second, I
think there's a vogue for things American, so that what may look like an
American commercial for Levi's is in fact created by an English agency.
'I think you're right, though. I think there will be not only more American
commercials on our screens but more Italian and more French ones that are
re-voiced. It's just the global economy. Certainly international business is
on the increase. In 1990, 1.5 per cent of our billing was international; in
1994 it will be something like 34 per cent. For the last couple of years,
nearly 60 per cent of our new-business inquiries have been from people
interested in our international capabilities.'
David Abbott is especially fascinating on the subject of redundancies. He
hates them, and has moved heaven and earth to avoid them at AMV, even -
especially - in a period when employment in London ad agencies has fallen by
a quarter.
'After a while,' he says, 'there are only so many costs you can cut before
hacking into live wood. It seems to me much more commendable for managements
to go out and try and make money rather than save it, so we went for a
really concentrated new-business drive, so as to hang on to jobs.
'It might have meant flat profits for a few years, but when the recession
was over we'd end up with a workforce intact, good morale, clients who had
not been short-changed during the lean years, and no diminishment of our
ability to win new business. You can't win new business and cut staff at the
same time, because you have to win new business while you're looking after
old business.'
When we left, the waiters, broadly smiling, sang their goodbyes to 'Mr
Abbott'. I was not at all surprised.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940430

