FT942-16383

FT  11 APR 94 / Business Travel: Run around history - Joggers' Guide to
Istanbul


   By ANNE COUNSELL


Istanbul caters well for the moderately serious to fanatical jogger. The
more casual runner, however, is likely to be deterred by the effort and
energy required to seek out, locate and then get round its widely dispersed
parks and recreational areas.
Jogging in the streets is not advisable, even for those with maximum life
insurance and full medical protection plans. The risk factor is high, the
enjoyment value nil. Traffic is heavy and drivers hold pedestrians in
contempt. On top of that, there are steep hills, poorly lit streets,
precipitous pavements (where they exist) and uneven surfaces.
So head for the public parks and recreation areas, many of which are a taxi
ride away. The municipal public parks are reasonably well-maintained, with
varying ratios of paved pathways to grassy areas.
On the European side, there is Yildiz park. The open spaces and greenery in
the grounds of its namesake palace are a 15-minute taxi drive from the main
hotels. Gulhane park incorporates a small zoo.
Many of the larger parks have, or are near, kiosks and cafes, where lost
fluids can be replaced with fresh juices. The smaller 'parks' tend to be
paved squares in elongated roundabouts or traffic junctions, such as Taksim
 -sufficient for a short, if uninspiring, stretch of the legs.
Emirgan park and Naciye Sultan Kurucesme are good running areas close to the
Movenpick hotel in the business district, where the new stock exchange and
bond market are being built.
On the Asian side of the Bosporus are the Beykoz Abraham Pasa park, the
Gubukla and Gamlica parks and, out towards the airport, the Florya Ataturk
Ormani coastal recreation area.
If you can manage only one outing, set aside an afternoon to visit Belgrad
Ormani (the Belgrade forests), about 45 minutes from the city centre. Among
the wooded picnic and amenity areas, you can take a jog around history - the
seven Byzantine and Ottoman reservoirs - and admire the breathtaking Moglova
aqueduct. It should be avoided at weekends, however, when picnickers clog
the more pleasant areas with campfires and barbecues.
If jogging does not appeal, the five-star hotels all have swimming pools
and/or well-equipped health and fitness centres. The pools at the Swissotel
and Dedeman are the best for length swimmers.
For replenishing energy levels, the health-conscious will find that dried
fruits, including figs, apricots, mulberries and sultanas, are readily
available. Most food stalls and shops offer light, unprocessed yoghurt and
untreated nuts.
While in Istanbul, take advantage of the continuing weakness of the lira to
stock up on sports wear. An extensive range of branded sports apparel is
made in Turkey under licence. The choice is wide, the quality good and
prices low, at about TL730,000 (Pounds 19) for Reebok running shoes and
TL450,000 for Adidas lightweight jogging trousers.
For further information contact Mr Kazim Arik, parks and gardens department,
Istanbul Municipality, tel: 514 0882

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940411

