FT942-14966

FT  18 APR 94 / B&C writ stops creditors getting Atlantic payout


   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent


A planned payout to the creditors of Atlantic Computers has been cancelled,
following news of an impending Pounds 1bn legal claim against the failed
computer leasing company, its administrator said yesterday.
Mr John Soden of Price Waterhouse, Atlantic's administrator, said he was
unable to proceed with plans to pay creditors a first dividend of 16 pence
in the pound in June. Instead, payment was 'unlikely to exceed a few pence
in the pound'.
A Pounds 1bn legal action against Atlantic Computers is being prepared by
Ernst & Young, the administrators of British & Commonwealth, which collapsed
in 1990 following the failure of its Atlantic Computers subsidiary. The writ
is expected to allege that Atlantic Computers mis-stated its financial
position when it was acquired for Pounds 407m in 1988.
The news of the impending writ has prompted the Atlantic Computer's
administrator to serve a protective writ against Atlantic Computers'
auditors Spicer and Pegler, now part of Touche Ross. Writs have also been
issued against three former Atlantic directors. The purpose of the writs is
to indemnify the Atlantic administrators if the B&C action succeeds.
The news of the legal action will come as a blow to creditors who have an
estimated Pounds 400m of claims. Mr Soden said it could be 'four or five
years' before the legal action was resolved.
The move by B&C's administrators will dash hopes of a swift payout that were
raised when Price Waterhouse recovered about Pounds 70m of an intercompany
debt due from Atlantic Computer System, a US subsidiary company. That led
the administrators to draw up a scheme of arrangement, a method of
distributing cash to the company's creditors that avoids a liquidation,
which was approved a few weeks ago.
A spokesman for the Spicer & Pegler partners said that they were aware that
'moves have been made on a protective basis' but they were unable to comment
further at this stage.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940418

