FT942-16213

FT  12 APR 94 / Japanese factions target LDP: Coalition parties are wooing
the opposition


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Japan's political upheavals over the past few days have seen the emergence
of two broad groups, on the right and left wings of the seven-party ruling
coalition.
Both sides are wooing potential defectors from the opposition Liberal
Democratic party, in an attempt to create the core of a future coalition
government.
If they succeed in dislodging one or two LDP factions, this will be another,
possibly terminal blow, to the LDP's chance of returning to power after
being ousted last summer for the first time in 38 years.
The lower house has 511 seats, so any new alliance will need to muster 256
for a clear majority. The main players have lined up roughly as follows
(with the number of party seats in the lower house in brackets).
On the right is the Ozawa-Hosokawa group.
The Japan Renewal party, (52 seats), is led by Mr Tsutomu Hata, the foreign
minister and a reluctant front-runner for the prime ministership, plus Mr
Ichiro Ozawa, who dominated policy in the coalition government.
The JRP is close to the Buddhist backed Komeito (60) or clean government
party, and to the Japan New party (40), led by Mr Hosokawa. The JNP, most of
whose members of parliament are first timers, has invited Komeito and the
JRP to join a new group, called Reform.
The JRP can also count on the support of five former LDP members, led by Mr
Mutsuki Kato, who left the party last year.
On the left is the Murayama-Takemura group:
The Social Democratic party (74) is the biggest coalition member, but
weakened by a split between 20 far-left members and 54 moderates loyal to Mr
Tomiichi Murayama, the party leader. The SDP has found a close ally over the
past few days in Mr Masayoshi Takemura's New Harbinger party (15).
The NHP was planning to merge with Mr Hosokawa's JNP, but Mr Takemura fell
out with Mr Hosokawa, once a close friend, over the prime minister's growing
closeness with Mr Ozawa.
Mr Takemura and Mr Ozawa have deep personal and policy differences. Also in
this camp is the Democratic Socialist party (19), a group of
conservative-minded former SDP members, which now also includes four members
of the former United Social Democratic party.
The above line-up could change, depending on possible defections from the
LDP (219), still the largest party in the lower house, which has so far
refrained from putting forward a rival prime ministerial candidate.
One main potential defector is the Watanabe faction (45), led by Mr Michio
Watanabe, a former foreign minister who has said he might join the
Ozawa-Hosokawa group if a 'comfortable' number of supporters follow.
He would also be in the running for the post of prime minister.
Also in the market for a partner is Mr Toshiki Kaifu, a reform-minded former
prime minister.
He has no formal faction, but has around 50 LDP supporters, and is being
wooed by Mr Murayama of the SDP.
The Miyazawa faction (54), led by Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, a reform-minded former
prime minister, is also said to be working loose.
Mr Miyazawa is unlikely to work with Mr Hata and Mr Ozawa, who between them
destroyed his government last year by staging a rebellion, so could be a
candidate for the Socialist-led group.
Finally, there is the isolated Japan Communist party (15), which is not in
the coalition.
However, it could be joined by the 20 SDP hardliners, if they leave in
protest at an SDP alliance with a former LDP faction.
Independents and vacant seats (17) are excluded.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940412

