FT942-15430

FT  15 APR 94 / One-man band takes Ulster lead: David Owen reports on the MP
elected as first chairman of the Northern Ireland committee


   By DAVID OWEN


It is one of the most delicate jobs in British politics and the first man to
hold it is the head of the smallest political party in the Commons.
Sir James Kilfedder, MP for North Down since 1970 and leader of the tiny
Ulster Popular Unionist party, was yesterday elected chairman of the new
Northern Ireland select committee.
Emerging from a Westminster committee room after the first meeting Sir
James, a former speaker of the Ulster Assembly set up while Lord Prior was
Northern Ireland secretary in the early 1980s, said he was 'greatly
honoured'.
He said the committee's establishment would benefit the province both
because it would improve parliamentary scrutiny of Ulster affairs and
because the spectacle of Northern Ireland MPs working together as a team
would set 'an excellent example to other people in the province'.
The committee is expected to make its first visit to the province - a highly
symbolic gesture - within a month.
Yesterday's appointment is understood to have been unanimous and, as his
first remarks suggest, Sir James's priority will be to ensure that the
committee establishes a reputation for handling its agenda sensibly and does
not fall prey to the partisan point-scoring that has tended to blight past
Ulster-related political initiatives.
The inter-party wrangling over the composition, with Labour complaining
bitterly about its quota of two MPs on the 13-member committee, suggests
that this will not be easy.
Sir James will almost certainly seek to improve the committee's prospects of
getting off to a good start by steering clear of subjects impinging too
directly on the UK-Irish peace initiative.
If he has his way then those keen for the committee to sink its teeth
immediately into the Anglo-Irish agreement or the functioning of the
security services will be disappointed. Economics, health and
agriculture-related subjects are much more likely to be on the committee'e
initial agenda.
Sir James is a committed devolutionist and is anxious for the committee to
be seen as a step towards a new Ulster assembly and not an integrationist
symbol.
Perhaps not surprisingly in view of his four years as speaker, he thinks
highly of the Prior assembly's 'rolling devolution' initiative and sees the
assembly's dissolution in 1986 as a wasted opportunity.
In spite of the high esteem in which he holds Lady Thatcher, he ranks the
Tory 'wet' Lord Prior alongside Labour's Mr Roy Mason as the best Northern
Ireland secretaries of recent times.
The fact that the new body will be the only Commons select committee not to
have an inbuilt Tory majority will place an additional responsibility on Sir
James's shoulders. There is a real chance that his casting vote will be
called upon quite frequently to break ties between the six Conservative
committee members and the MPs from the other political parties.
Although he sits on the Tory benches in the House of Commons, Sir James has
a strong independent streak - as indicated by his decision to soldier on as
virtually as a one-man band since resigning from the Ulster Unionist party
15 years ago. It remains to be seen whether he will toe the party line as
assiduously as some of his Conservative friends would like.
In his Georgian drawing-room, with its peerless view over the yachts and
eider ducks in Bangor Harbour, it is easy to see how Sir James's avuncular
charm has made him a popular and respected figure at Westminster.
The extent to which he manages to retain this popularity across the
political spectrum in his new role will be an important gauge of the
committee's effectiveness.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940415

