FT943-926

FT  27 SEP 94 / Arts: Mahler's 2nd - Concert


   By DAVID MURRAY


All the equipment was in place for Mahler's Symphony no. 2 at the Barbican
on Sunday, the second instalment of Michael Tilson Thomas's Mahler cycle.
The London Symphony was on cracking form, with the requisite extra brass,
and the London Symphony Chorus in glad cry; two excellent solo voices made
vivid personal contributions (very welcome) to the massive sound. This was
certainly a 'Resurrection' Symphony to wake the dead.
If you detect a note of reserve in this, it may indicate nothing more than a
jaded appetite. Mahler's grandiose canvas was brightly lit up (granted a
couple of smudges in the offstage brass, which made no difference), and the
newly improved acoustic proved itself again at the monster climaxes - plenty
of impact, without clotting or congestion. There was little in the way of
chiaroscuro, nor does the Barbican Hall afford much room for depth-effects.
Tilson Thomas delivered the score with sharp precision and some mildly
unusual ideas. The low-strings recitative at the start was fast and hard,
tempo giusto, a far cry from the sullen lament that older conductors used to
make of it, but most of that opening movement was solemn and quiet; so too
the Andante moderato, though tautly measured. Contrariwise the Scherzo, made
newly famous by Berio's Sinfonia, went like the wind: the sense of a
sinister moto perpetuo was enhanced, at the loss of any black humour.
The 'Urlicht' movement went to the Parisian contralto Nathalie Stutzmann,
whose exquisitely wrought line came in a lovely, dusky timbre. Suddenly the
symphony showed a human face. Nina Stemme (Cardiff's 'Singer of the World'
last year) joined her in the Finale, with a fine-spun, tremulous tone
perfectly adapted to her music. The timpani thundered mightily, and the
Chorus roared their heads off. One felt a bit battered at the end.
What to play with Mahler Two is always a problem. It is a tad short for an
evening, but hardly brooks anything substantial by way of programme-filler.
Tilson Thomas opted for a little Oliver Knussen commission from six years
ago, his racing, twinkling 'Flourish with Fireworks' (it nods gracefully to
Stravinsky's Fireworks), and an earlyish Krenek piece Die Nachtigall, for
coloratura soprano with flutes and strings, in which Sarah Leonard warbled
with all her customary charm. It seemed hardly ten minutes before we were
out in the bar again for the interval.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940927

