FT942-12328

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (20): Clarify your
needs in the confusing world where everyone is doing everything - A
profusion of overlapping services makes it hard to know where to turn, yet
the dearth of impartial financial advice has pushed the onus of choice
firmly on to the customer / High Street Investment


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR


The 1980s revolution in food retailing was hard to ignore or misunderstand.
The out-of-town superstores were highly visible, and one visit sufficed to
show what they sold and how their goods compared with traditional high
street competitors'.
The revolution in the high street market for savings and investment has been
more confused and confusing. Banks and building societies both seem to be
all things to all customers nowadays. Cash management, mortgages, other
loans, savings, investment and share dealing are all available on most
street corners. But this profusion of overlapping services makes it hard to
know where to go for which service. You no longer get impartial financial
advice from any of the major banks or most building societies, which has
pushed the onus for making the right choice firmly on to the customer.
The clearer your idea of your own financial requirements, the easier you
will find it to work out where to go for what. But the precise services
provided vary considerably, particularly among different building societies.
Bradford & Bingley is the only major society that continues to provide
independent advice. Some societies provide chequebooks; some provide
execution-only stockbroking, some have their own unit trusts, some have
credit cards - and so on.
Current accounts and money transmission
Banks, building societies and customers are all unhappy about this key
aspect of the market. The financial firms admit that they are really only
interested in current accounts with large balances, and keen to introduce
charges on other current accounts.
As an interim measure, they continue to impose stringent penalties on any
current account holders who slip into overdraft, particularly any who fail
to get permission first. Current accounts which pay (currently derisory)
interest often have the steepest penalties for temporary borrowing.
Customers dislike the penalty system, the time it takes for cheques to
clear, and what they see as inefficient bureaucracy.
The remarkable success of the telephone banking system, pioneered by
Midland's First Direct, is testimony as much to the unpopularity of
conventional branch banks as to the convenience of a 24-hour telephone
service.
Telephone banking seems has far wider appeal than the alternative, currently
fashionable with bankers, known as 'private banking'. Broadly this consists
of getting the banks' more affluent customers to pay stiff fees in order to
receive the kind of all round advisory service that most people feel is
their birthright.
Deposit accounts
These still exist, but perhaps it would be better if they did not. Most of
the principal high street chains offer very poor deposit rates. If you
glance quickly down our weekly table of Highest Rates for your Money
(published every Saturday in Weekend FT), it's unlikely you'll find any of
the big high street names there. And once again, if you really want the best
rate you'll probably have to do some shopping around and may well find the
results surprising.
You can often get nearly as good a rate of interest from some instant-access
accounts with relatively small minimum deposits as you do for larger
deposits with a longer notice period. One point to watch: the best rates
often come from postal accounts, which share the cost advantages of
telephone banking. Some of them have the reputation of getting a bit behind
with their paperwork at times.
Short-term borrowing
It's sensible to consider this in tandem with your current account. For, as
we said, the big drawback to many current accounts is the penal costs they
impose on borrowing. Using a credit card to finance short-term borrowing is
usually the cheapest and most flexible way of doing so, even if you have a
card which charges an annual fee as most now do.
Rolling the credit from one card to another, and thus avoiding charges on
longer term borrowing, will appeal only to those who regard avoiding charges
as a sport. But even if you do pay charges for a short period, that may well
be cheaper than an overdraft if you are borrowing a small amount for a
shortish period.
The point to grasp is that the old-fashioned current account with a built-in
overdraft really is dead.
You need an efficient current account and (depending on the extent of your
financial rectitude) a cost-effective borrowing facility. The two may happen
to come from the same source, but there is no longer any automatic tie
between them.
Mortgages
Available everywhere, with rates changing all the time. The high street
banks and big building societies are often competitive here, but the best
offers tend to vary over time.
First decide what kind of mortgage you want - fixed or floating rate,
repayment or endowment (not recommended), or even a Pep mortgage. Then
either prepare for a lot of telephoning, or send off for a free copy of
Moneyfacts (telephone 0692-500677) which carries the latest rates. One
rather dastardly short-cut is to phone a mortgage broker, such as John
Charcol, and find out what his best offer is - then try to match it
yourself.
Longer-term savings
Until the recent stock market setback, very few savings rates looked at all
attractive compared with stockmarket-based alternatives. Now their main
drawback is that the longer-term schemes may look unattractive if interest
rates rise significantly. As so often, some of the National Savings products
look relatively attractive.
Investments
If you want to buy a unit trust or individual shares, all the banks will
oblige and so will a handful of building societies. But be aware that the
banks only sell their own unit trusts nowadays, and these are not
necessarily the leaders in their chosen areas.
With building societies, you need to check what the society's role is -
promoter or agent. Even if you are buying a very conservative trust, it's
worth checking its comparative record in one of the trade magazines, such as
Money Management, first.
For more specialised trusts and advice on share dealing, you might well do
better deserting the high street for a good stockbroker or independent
fee-based financial adviser. But it is misleading to generalise.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940429

