FT944-5972

FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Lilley accused of removing housing safety net


   By JAMES BLITZ and ALISON SMITH


Mr Peter Lilley, the social security secretary, was last night accused of
removing a crucial safety net from millions of home-owners by announcing
cuts in mortgage interest relief for people on benefit.
In a statement that caused deep concern to mortgage lenders and housing
pressure groups, Mr Lilley said current home-owners would not be able to
claim interest repayments in the first two months if they lost their jobs
and took up state benefits.
However, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, announced in Tuesday's Budget
that, from October next year new mortgage holders would not receive interest
rate repayments for the first nine months that they took out Income Support,
the principal welfare benefit.
The regulations are among a list of measures designed to reduce the Pounds
1.2bn annual spending on home-owners drawing income support.
Mortgage lenders said yesterday that Mr Lilley had considerably extended the
effect of the measure.
Mr Lilley said that in the subsequent four months50 per cent of mortgage
interest relief would be paid to the lender rather than the borrower to
ensure proper use. He confirmed that the mortgage ceiling for applications
would be reduced from Pounds 125,000 to Pounds 100,000.
Britain's biggest mortgage lender, Halifax building society, said that
removal of the safety net would force more people into subsidised rented
accommodation.
Mr David Gilchrist, corporate development manager, said the restriction
would 'make borrowers more cautious and make lenders more cautious about
lending at the margin'. He added: 'The growth of home ownership from the
mid-19th century had been through lending to people at the margin.'
The housing charity, Shelter, described the decision as 'appalling' and
predicted a rise in repossessions. 'Ministers are effectively telling every
home-owner to go out and get private insurance to cover themselves,' it
said.
In his statement Mr Lilley said poor credit decisions by mortgage lenders
were partly to blame for the spiralling costs of the benefit, which is
claimed by more than 500,000 people. 'Since Income Support cover is paid
direct to lenders, the scheme is simply bailing them out for their bad
lending practices,' he said.
Social security officials said that the reforms would reduce the
department's budget by Pounds 200m over several years.
Mr Lilley also announced that, under proposals to be introduced next
October, new claimants for housing benefit would only be entitled to the
full repayment of a defined average rent in their area.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

941201

