FT943-12785

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Bonds: Argentina targets Swiss retail
investors with schilling offering


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY and TRACY CORRIGAN


The Republic of Argentina entered the Austrian schilling market for the
first time yesterday with a small eurobond offering worth Sch750m.
The three-year bonds, priced to yield 220 basis points over the 7 1/4 per
cent Austrian government bond due 1997, with a relatively high coupon of 8
per cent, is designed to appeal mainly to Swiss retail investors but lead
manager Creditanstalt said domestic institutional investors had also
expressed interest.
Previous eurobond issues by the Republic of Argentina have not performed
well this year, dealers said. The spread on Argentina's D-Mark bonds
launched last month via Deutsche Bank, has widened to 260 basis points from
220 basis points at launch.
In the dollar market, Federal Home Loan Bank System's global offering of
two-year notes was priced yesterday at 10 basis points over the comparable
Treasury yield, in the middle of the indicated range.
Lead managers Lehman Brothers and Morgan Stanley said around 60 per cent had
been placed outside the US, reflecting the success of international
roadshows in promoting the issuer, which has not tapped the international
market since the mid-1980s, to international investors.
Other dealers reported a mixed reception from investors outside the US, with
some saying that the spread of 10 basis points offered little scope for any
tightening.
However, by the end of the day the deal was quoted at 10 basis points over
on the bid side.
Despite predictions that the market is about to enter a summer lull, two
more borrowers are preparing large offerings.
Sears Roebuck, the US retailer, is preparing a Dollars 750m to Dollars 1bn
offering of asset-backed securities, while the European Investment Bank is
taking bids from banks for a Y50bn to Y100bn three-year offering.
A fall in the UK government bond market in early trading yesterday hampered
the launch by Cre'dit Local de France of a Pounds 100m four-year eurobond
issue.
Syndicate managers said that demand for the deal had also been hit by the
closure of the Belgium bond markets yesterday for National Day.
Aimed mainly at continental European retail investors, the bond was priced
to yield 27 basis points over the 6 per cent gilt due 1999. This spread
widened to about 33 basis points in later trading. Goldman Sachs, the lead
manager, admitted that placement of the issue had been affected by the
closure of the Belgian market.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940722

