FT942-15883

FT  13 APR 94 / A country torn this way and that: Ukraine's elections have
heightened political tensions and threaten prospects for reform


   By JOHN LLOYD and JILL BARSHAY


The democratic voice of Ukraine, as in Russia last December, has spoken the
mind of a people unable to trust what has been advertised as reform. They
seek refuge in old (communist) and even older (nationalist) certainties, or
myths which promise deliverance of one kind or another.
Unlike in Russia, however, Ukraine's 52m people have experienced at best
partial reform. Inflation has reached as high as 90 per cent, but prices
have not been liberalised. The state can no longer support its enterprises
and farms, but there is little privatisation. It could be said the greatest
reform of all - that of creating an independent state in place of a Soviet
republic - has succeeded, but even that is partial, contested and insecure.
In all the crucial aspects of its citizens' life and wellbeing, Ukraine has
gone towards the edge, but drawn back, not once but many times. Thus the
considerable pain which people have suffered and still suffer has been less
a result of reform than of a lack of reform. The pain of a real
transformation is yet to come.
The danger which the new parliament seems certain to bring is of a
legislature and an executive unable to negotiate the impasse. It is the
danger of a country drifting into a combination of government paralysis and
economic decline, where the need grows for extreme solutions and thus for
extreme politicians and groups to introduce and administer them. This has
not yet happened and may not, but Sunday's elections heighten the
possibility.
Mr Yuri Yekhanourov, the deputy economics minister and one of the
government's few (frustrated) reformers, says of the people's condition of
life that 'it may not be dangerous, but it is very, very hard. I have been
to farms where the workers have received no pay since October  - because the
state has taken their produce and paid nothing for it. In the shops, I saw
notebooks with column after column of figures where the families' debts are
just totalled up, day after day.'
The figures he has for the drop in overall output are startlingly bad. In
January, it was down by 34.1 per cent compared with the same month last
year; in February, 38.9 per cent; in March (unpublished figures), 42.6 per
cent. The hugely improved figures for inflation - January 12.6 per cent,
February 12.2 per cent, March 5.7 per cent - show why. A tight credit
squeeze introduced in December has worked its way through the system to
puncture hyperinflation. But since the end of February, the policy has been
reversed, and the government has agreed an emission of 50,000bn karbovanets
(half last year's gross national product) in the first quarter, though
central bank delays have meant not all of that has been released. Next
month, inflation will start a probably violent upward spiral once more.
Privatisation has begun, but only as a 'trial' limited to 150 enterprises.
Roughly 70 per cent of each will go to the workers, who must buy their
shares with vouchers and cannot then trade them. The vouchers, to be printed
in the US, are not even issued, because no minister will take the
controversial step of endorsing them. A state-of-the-art electronic stock
exchange has been provided by the French government, on which just two
stocks trade for half an hour a week.
Mr Yekhanourov takes some heart from the election of the main figures of
economic reform - these include the economics minister Mr Roman Shpek, Mr
Volodomyr Lanovoi and Mr Victor Penzenik, two former deputy prime ministers,
and a few others. But, he says, 'there will be no majority in parliament for
reform'.
Nor, says Mr Nikolai Mikhailchenko, the main aide to President Leonid
Kravchuk, is there likely to be a consensus for constitutional reform. The
president's preferred constitution is one confirming him as commander in
chief of the armed forces and security establishment, and permitting him to
conduct foreign policy, propose the prime minister to parliament and guide
the government's work. But Mr Ivan Plyushch, the outgoing speaker in
parliament and probably the most powerful figure in the new one, has already
put down a marker that he will press for a parliamentary system with a
figurehead president.
'The new parliament will present a very tough problem,' says Mr
Mikhailchenko. 'It's not so much divided left and right, with a defined
centre. There are extremes, with a mass of deputies who will go this way and
that. And you won't be able to tell how.'
For the nationalists, who see themselves as the force which did most to keep
alive and then recreate Ukrainian statehood, the elections have been a
bitter disappointment. They are essentially confined to their west Ukrainian
redoubts (the less heavily populated part of the country) and to some
districts in Kiev.
Mr Vyacheslav Chornovil, the former dissident and leader of the main
nationalist grouping Rukh, gave a typically verbose press conference on
Monday which dismissed any compromise allowing Russian to be a state
language with Ukrainian or contemplating an economic union with Russia. He
is more pragmatic away from his supporters - but can move very little away
from his platform pronouncements without losing part of his support to the
more extreme nationalists. At any event, the victorious Communists and
Socialists will see little reason to accommodate him.
This latter grouping, more than a third of the parliament so far announced
and likely to attract many from the independent 'swamp', sees itself as
riding the wave. Mr Leonid Hrach, the Communist leader in the Crimean
region, has already hailed the Ukrainians as having returned to both
communism and Russia. For him and for many of the left, the way forward is
the way back to the Soviet Union, or at least economic integration with
Russia and the other former Soviet states. Russia, which will at Friday's
gathering of the heads of the Commonwealth of Independent States propose
just such a grouping, is keen to pull Ukraine back more firmly into its
orbit, even if much less willing to pay its debts and support its stagnant
enterprises.
The two states have a whole field of tensions between them. The
Russian-dominated Crimea is steadily increasing what Kiev sees as its
'provocations' as it senses Kiev's already flabby power weaken further. The
peninsula's president, Mr Yuri Meshkov, yesterday named his own internal
affairs minister and KGB chief (both, of course, Russians), thus flouting
Ukrainian law. Mr Mikhailchenko says: 'The solution is simple: Crimea must
obey the law.' But he knows it will not be obeyed and that the presence of
Mr Meshkov as a president recognised by Kiev already establishes an illegal
precedent.
Also dangerous is the dispute over the Black Sea fleet - where a Russian
seizure of equipment and retaliatory Ukrainian arrests over the weekend
brought a high-level Russian delegation scuttling to Kiev to attempt again
to deal with the fleet's ownership. It locates tension among men under arms
who, whatever their former good relations, are increasingly provoking each
other, with the approval, even the urging, of their respective governments.
The last accord, between Presidents Kravchuk and Boris Yeltsin of Russia, at
Massandra last year, is interpreted differently by each side, the Russians
insisting it means that the fleet reverts to them in return for cancelled
debt, the Ukrainians that it was a mere protocol calling for further work
which has proved unfruitful. The US defence secretary William Perry said in
Kiev recently that he would be ready to act as a mediator. Says Mr
Mikhailchenko: 'We would be ready to go along with that but the Russians
never would.'
Ukraine now reels, but there is no figure capable of steadying it. It has -
Mr Yekhanourov sees this as a fundamental problem - no 'natural' ruling
class. A tragic century, during which Russians, Soviets and Nazis
decapitated the best in the society (and murdered much of the society as a
whole) has left a pervasive passivity, in which a creditable desire for
agreement tends to become a constant descent to lower and lower common
denominators. It has produced no outstanding economic reformer, no tough
leader, no indisputably moral touchstone. 'We will need,' says Mr
Yekhanourov, 'a generation or two before we produce a new leadership class.'
In the meantime, pressures mount in the void where leadership should be.
Additional reporting by Jill Barshay

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940413

