FT944-11112

FT  08 NOV 94 / PM hits at rumours on leadership


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mr John Major yesterday hit back at rightwing attacks on his leadership as
rumours spread at Westminster that a 'stalking horse' candidate is preparing
to challenge him later this month.
Amid sniping from the right Downing Street dismissed claims that the Post
Office privatisation debacle showed the government had run out of steam.
Officials said the prime minister retained the support of the 'vast
majority' of Tory MPs and there was 'a tremendous head of steam' behind the
legislative programme for the next parliament.
Uncertainty deepened, however, as Mr David Martin said he had resigned as a
parliamentary private secretary partly because of Mr Major's handling of
allegations of impropriety against ministers.
Mr Martin, who quit on Sunday as PPS to Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary,
said he was annoyed by the sacking of Mr Neil Hamilton, the former corporate
affairs minister, who denies newspaper allegations of impropriety.
Rightwingers said that the prospect of running a 'stalking horse' candidate
against Mr Major - intended to open the way for a challenge by a more
serious candidate - was again being discussed after being dropped during the
summer.
The threat was dismissed by Tory officials, who said there was no prospect
that such a candidate could collect the 34 nominations required.
A senior official said: 'There are no stalking horses around who would
remotely command the support required to proceed. There are a few wooden
horses around who might fall down at the first fence, but that's about all.'
Mr John Biffen, a former Conservative cabinet minister, said that Mr
Martin's resignation 'crystallises' the frustration felt by many
rightwingers over the Post Office retreat.
He warned rightwing MPs to 'do a spot of arithmetic before you start
striking attitudes'. The government was 'much wiser' to proceed only with
legislation it was sure it could carry.
Rightwingers remained determined to embarrass the government by seeking to
block a crucial bill to increase UK contributions to the European Union.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, sought to ease tensions
over Europe by insisting in a speech to the CBI that EU membership was 'a
key attraction' for overseas companies investing in the UK.
But rightwing suspicions of Brussels were exacerbated by confirmation that
Mr Padraig Flynn, the social affairs commissioner, is pressing for an end to
the UK's opt-out from the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941108

