FT943-12833

FT  22 JUL 94 / British & Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - DTI
censure offers insight into auditing / Auditors criticised


   By ANDREW JACK


John Gunn built British & Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
Yesterday's DTI report on the accountants involved with Atlantic Computers
and British & Commonwealth includes a powerful criticism of one firm, and
strong remarks about two others in a rare insight into the audit process.
Singled out for most criticism is Spicer & Oppenheim, now part of Touche
Ross, which became auditor to Atlantic in preparation for the company's
float in 1983, and remained until June 1989.
The DTI inspectors say that, in a report produced in 1983, the firm failed
to carry out sufficient investigative work as specified in their terms of
reference, and did not take adequate steps to verify the information
provided to them.
They criticise Spicer's report on Atlantic's working capital forecast at the
time of the company's takeover by B&C in 1988. They say no account was taken
of Atlantic's trading and funding difficulties and that the firm did not
follow up concerns raised in a report by a subsidiary auditor on the
possible need to provide for losses on lease contracts.
During 1983 to 1987, Spicer planned its audits without sufficient
understanding of the risks of the company, relied too heavily on Atlantic's
own accounting control systems when it knew their weaknesses, and did not
consider sufficiently the recommendations about risks identified by KPMG
Peat Marwick, auditor of several subsidiaries.
The 1988 audit placed excessive reliance on Atlantic's internal controls,
did not justify the introduction of a higher level of 'materiality' beyond
which concerns would have been flagged, did not set adequate objectives and
was 'poorly conducted' in a number of areas.
The inspectors say stock was not properly confirmed, a planned circular of
debtors not carried out, incorrect conclusions drawn from reconciliations
between equipment and lease income, and sections of the audit file not
adequately reviewed or detailed to show significant problems met during the
audit.
The inspectors suggest that Spicer was inclined to accept problems as not
material and include them in the post-audit letter, rather than raise them
with Atlantic before providing audit clearance.
They conclude that the Spicer audit was conducted in good faith and that
there was no evidence to suggest there was any collusion with Atlantic. But
they stress that the firm was responsible for the audit and should have
designed procedures to identify and address the areas of risk.
Touche Ross distanced itself from the conclusions of the report last night
and stressed that matters relating to Spicer were 'ring-fenced'. It is
believed that the engagement partner at Spicer for Atlantic had not joined
Touche when the two firms merged in 1990.
Spicer said last night: 'The partners disagree with much of what the
inspectors say about them. They do not believe that anything Spicer did
caused the collapse of Atlantic or B&C to buy it. The real story is not
about them but about corporate governance.'
The DTI also considered the role of three other firms of accountants.
Rowland Nevill, now part of Moores Rowland, was instrumental in the
formation of Atlantic in 1975 and acted as auditors of the company until
1982.
The inspectors concluded that recollections from so long ago were hazy, that
the company was in its infancy and that a balanced and objective assessment
of the audit would be impracticable.
They considered the role of Deloitte Haskins & Sells, now part of Coopers &
Lybrand, which was auditor of B&C during the period of its involvement with
Atlantic.
They expressed 'surprise' that Deloitte relied so heavily on Spicer's audit
of Atlantic's accounts when they should have been aware that the company was
a high-risk audit. They said a careful reading of Spicer's audit files
should have alerted Deloitte to deficiencies in the accounts.
There was no criticism of Deloitte's role in the 1989 interim statement, nor
of its review of Atlantic's accounting policies following its acquisition -
since they were instructed by their client not to complete the review.
KPMG, which took over as auditors of Atlantic from Spicer in 1989,
identified the problem of Atlantic's exposure to potential liabilities
early, and were justified in accepting assurances by company's directors
that the exposure was dealt with, inspectors say.
However, they say there was 'an unfortunate lack of clarity' in framing its
audit opinions, which did not communicate its reservations in a way that was
picked up by Spicer. The inspectors blame 'lack of perceptiveness' on
Spicer's part rather than criticising KPMG on the matter.
Atlantic Computers and Atlantic Computer Systems, Investigation under
Section 432 of the Companies Act 1985, HMSO, Pounds 35
'In our view Spicers' failings had their origin in Spicers' inability to
establish credibility and influence with Atlantic at the very beginning of
their involvement in the days of Mr (John) Foulston. (Co-founder of
Atlantic). This led to a passive relationship in which Spicers would be
challenged rather than consulted. From the outset Spicers did not have a
sufficient understanding of Atlantic's business, and in particular of
Flexlease and its attendant risks. Spicers failed to develop their knowledge
and understanding of the business at the same pace as the business itself
developed. This lack of understanding hindered the effectiveness of Spicers'
audit procedures such that by 1988 there were significant failures in the
approach and conduct of the audit.
'DTI report

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940722

