FT942-16143

FT  12 APR 94 / Arts: Close up on Tintoretto - William Packer visits the
Accademia and the Guggenheim in Venice


   By WILLIAM PACKER


No one is ever short of things to see in Venice, but then why not pile
Pelion on Ossa, given the chance? Certainly the current programme of special
exhibitions is as strong as ever, quite apart from the remarkable exhibition
of architecture at Fiat's Palazzo Grassi, The Renaissance: from Brunelleschi
to Michelangelo (to be reviewed later).
This, in Venice, is the year of Tintoretto, the 400th anniversary of his
death at the age of 76. The Commune di Venezia is marking the moment with
wide publicity of itself as the City of Tintoretto, drawing attention to the
many works hung in its churches and ancient institutions and, until May 1,
showing a group of the religious paintings in the Church of San Bartolomeo,
near the Rialto. The principle celebration, however, is of Tintoretto the
portrait painter, now on show at the Accademia.
Tintoretto, with Titian, his master, and the somewhat younger Veronese,
completes the commanding trio of great artists that forms and dominates our
view of Venetian painting through the greater part of the 16th century.
Which was the greatest? Titian, who, some would say, in his great old age,
was the first modern painter; Veronese, the virtuoso, pittore sovrano di
Venezia, as the plaque on his house near San Samuele would have it; or
Tintoretto himself, with his driving expressive energy and emotional force?
Who would say?
All three of them were portrait painters on the side - and in the middle as
well, for with the model used even for the idealised figures of any
devotional composition, the donors - sponsors as we would say - required
their own personal, if peripheral commemoration. The family kneeling at the
sacred throne, one head turned perhaps to look us directly in the eye, is
ever poignant and humane.
But the smaller single and private portrait will always bring us closer to
the artist himself in his practical working of the image, just as it allows
us closer to the surface of the canvas. Here is the artist alone and
himself. And what we find here in Tintoretto is a certain crudity and
awkwardness, almost a naivety in the immediate drawing and handling that
never leaves him. The odd thing is that we find these qualities being not so
much overcome as turned to advantage.
Sophistication and an easier naturalism come with experience, but always
there will be the commitment and attack, that saving determination to get
the mark and thus the image down, to make it real and to make it work. It is
moving and inspiring to follow an artist as he moves towards true greatness
by sheer force of character. What a pity it is that the two self-portraits,
in youth and old age, are not hung side by side. The boy is father to the
man.
The short walk beyond San Vio takes us to the late Peggy Guggenheim's
Palazzo Venier and into another world and another age. Her collection of
modern international art, prime Ernst, Miro, Picasso, Giacometti and the
rest, remains the draw it always was, but changes are afoot. It is not that
the emphasis is to shift away from the collection as such, with its strong
personal flavour; nor should it, ever. But with pressure from visitors
continuing to grow, the need for more space, if only to maintain the
peculiar character of the place, is undeniable.
The opportunity has been taken to acquire much of the property behind the
Guggenheim, over the garden wall. The central portion was taken over some
time ago and has already been converted into a shop and temporary gallery,
with a cafe to open this summer. The intention is thus to concentrate
offices and services, with the old Palazzo returned as much as possible to
its old self.
Along with this comes the opportunity to make rather more of temporary
exhibitions. Two such are now on show. Italian Artists' Books in the 20th
Century, already shown at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, is a rich
documentary display that makes the useful point that artists everywhere, and
not just in Italy, continue to be intrigued by the relation of image to
text, and the creative collaboration between artist and writer. Artists
represented range from de Chirico to Clemente.
Josef Albers: glass, colour and light is a small but substantial
retrospective study. Drawn principally from the holdings of the Josef Albers
Foundation in Connecticut, it lays a fresh and proper emphasis on Albers'
early development in his years at the Bauhaus in the 1920s and '30s, first
at Weimar and then at Dessau. Albers died in 1976 at the age of 88. He moved
to America in 1933, where he spent the rest of his life, engaged after 1950
in endless colour variations upon his 'Homage to the Square', three simple
squares inset in a uniform format. With his post-war reputation resting on
this American minimalism, it is useful to be reminded of the European
constructivist tradition from which he came, with Klee, Schwitters and
Mondrian the most obvious and notable influences.
Jacopo Tintoretto: Portraits; Gallerie dell'Accademia until July 10, then on
to Vienna. Sponsors: Hyundai Automobili Italia and Ramazzotti. Josef Albers:
Glass, Colour & Light; Peggy Guggenheim Collection, until July 10. Italian
Artists' Books in the 20th Century; Peggy Guggenheim Collection, until May
22.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940412

