FT941-13038

FT  27 JAN 94 / Steel joint venture cleared by Brussels


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


French, German and Italian steel tube companies yesterday won approval to
merge, creating a bulwark against Scandinavian, Japanese and east European
competition, after the European Commission overturned an internal
recommendation that the deal should be blocked.
After weeks of lobbying by the companies and their trade unions, the 17
European commissioners were split eight against eight on the issue as Mr
Jacques Delors, Commission president, abstained. This made it impossible for
Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, to obtain majority approval
for his proposal to outlaw the deal.
Vallourec, a French steel tubing company, Dalmine, a subsidiary of Ilva, the
Italian steel producer, and Mannesmann of Germany, want to form a joint
venture called DMV, and cut capacity in high-technology seamless stainless
steel tubes, which are used in the nuclear and chemical industries.
But the Commission's merger task force had said the deal should be blocked
as it could create an anti-competitive duopoly in the European Union market.
Together with Swedish engineering group, Sandvik, DMV will have nearly 69
per cent of the EU market. Most of the remainder is shared by Tubacex of
Spain, Schoeller Bleckmann of Austria and Sumitomo of Japan.
Mr Jean-Claude Cabre, chief operating officer at Vallourec, welcomed the
Commission's decision and said: 'Now we will have a level of competitiveness
which will permit us not only to compete with Sandvik, but with Sumitomo,
the eastern bloc and even Russia.'
It is Mr Van Miert's first Commission defeat since he took over as
competition commissioner in January 1993. The defeat is a setback for the
merger taskforce, which had hoped to set a precedent for the treatment of
duopolies with no structural links.
The three companies estimate that after production cuts DMV will have a
turnover of FFr1bn (Pounds 110m) a year and employ 1,000 people.
Van Miert's first defeat, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940127

