FT942-15411

FT  15 APR 94 / Parties struggle to seize the high ground: Arguments over
the council tax miss the point


   By JOHN AUTHERS


As the local election campaign gathers pace, both Labour and the
Conservatives are claiming that the councils they run are cheaper. The
arguments have revolved around the council tax, but increasing government
controls over local authority spending, which have blurred accountability,
make it hard to sustain either party's arguments.
Claims by Mr David Curry, local government minister, are based on
'band-for-band' comparisons. The council tax is split into eight bands,
according to property value, and for all eight, the average bill is higher
in Labour authorities than Conservative councils - by Pounds 129 for band C,
in which most properties are graded. Nine of the 10 most expensive councils
on this measure are Labour-controlled.
For Labour, Mr Jack Straw argues that the average council tax paid in Labour
authorities is lower because most properties are in lower bands. Therefore
they need to charge more in each band, but the overall amount is less - by
an average of Pounds 40.
Government grants to local authorities are supposed to take differing
property values into account, so that straight band-for-band comparisons are
fair. However, Labour also claims that the final council tax figure is so
dependent on government grants that the comparison is pointless. For
example, according to Mr Straw, only 4 per cent of Westminster City
Council's total budget comes from council-taxpayers' funds.
Conservatives have also attacked Labour councils' spending records, with
figures which show that 18 of the 20 English councils with the highest debt
are Labour-controlled. According to the Conservative league table,
Manchester and Birmingham, with debts of Pounds 1.326bn and Pounds 1.233bn
respectively, both had higher external debts than any of Paraguay, Niger and
Nepal.
But these figures might merely reflect the greater needs of the urban areas
which tend to elect Labour councils.
Mr David Thomas, head of local government for the Chartered Institute of
Public Finance and Accountancy, said that all borrowing was for capital
expenditure and has to be cleared with the government. He added: 'Local
authority debt is really there because that authority has responded to
need.'
The true differences in councils' management culture emerge from figures for
areas where they have more direct control - contracting services, and
education.
Conservative councils are markedly more enthusiastic about competitive
tendering than their Labour counterparts. For example, the Institute of
Public Finance found that only 6 per cent of Labour authorities had let
refuse collection contracts to the private sector. The average for all
councils is 25 per cent, and Tory councils have allowed 41 per cent of
contracts to leave in-house teams.
There are still exceptions to the rule. Contractors claim that both Tory and
Labour councils have manipulated competitive tendering rules to favour
in-house employees.
On one big campaign issue, nursery education, Labour has a strong case that
its authorities deliver results. Provision for three- and four-year-olds is
the responsibility of local education authorities.
Department for Education figures suggest that Labour authorities have a
strong record for providing nursery places. Labour-controlled Newham had the
best record, providing places for 64 per cent of its three- and
four-year-olds. Judged on this statistic, 35 of the top 40 authorities for
nursery education are Labour-controlled, while only two - Hillingdon and
Ealing, which was Labour-controlled until 1990 - were run by the
Conservatives.
Only three of the 40 councils with the lowest provision were
Labour-controlled, while 25 are run by Conservatives.
Philosophical divisions such as this still present voters with real
decisions in local elections.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940415

