FT942-14649

FT  19 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: US resists broadening of
aluminium cuts


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


Aluminium producing countries are at odds about how Brazil, Venezuela and
the Gulf States could be encouraged to join in international efforts aimed
at reducing world output by between 1.5m and 2m tonnes a year.
This subject will top the agenda when the six countries and the European
Union - which agreed to make the cuts as part of an unprecedented trade deal
in January - meet again in Brussels this week.
Western companies so far have announced annual cuts totalling more than
900,000 tonnes to last two years and the Russian government has promised
cuts of 500,000 tonnes. So there is considerable disappointment that some
important aluminium-producing countries not represented at the trade talks
have failed to follow this lead.
The European industry is now urging EU trade delegates formally to invite
Brazil, Venezuela and the Gulf States into the production-cuts scheme. It
suggests that the reluctance of these countries to share the industry's pain
by cutting output by about 10 per cent is understandable because they did
not take part in the original discussions.
However, US trade delegates are strenuously resisting any broadening of the
scheme on the advice of Justice Department lawyers, who are worried about
anti-trust problems. The more countries involved in the scheme, the more it
begins to look like an illegal cartel, the lawyers argue. It was for this
reason that Japan, one of the biggest aluminium consuming nations, was
excluded from the negotiations even though it asked to join in.
Brazil's aluminium smelters have an annual capacity of more than 1.3m tonnes
and Venezuela's can produce about 640,000 tonnes. The Gulf States' capacity
is roughly 800,000 tonnes. So far only Alba (Aluminium Bahrain) has
announced cuts - 20,000 tonnes - as a way of 'supporting the present
international drive to re-establish balance between supply and demand in the
primary aluminium market'.
The industry's determination to re-establish that balance has resulted in
the aluminium price climbing by abut 25 per cent since it reached an
all-time low of 47.2 US cents a pound in November.
Some analysts suggest the rising price might result in some companies either
not going ahead with planned cuts or reversing those already made. With this
in mind, Canada will be pressing at this week's Brussels meeting for more
'transparent' or precise statistics from the industry.
It is understood that Russia has made a first stab at presenting its
production statistics to the International Primary Aluminium Institute, the
London-based trade association, in time for the meeting.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940419

