FT943-13050

FT  21 JUL 94 / MPs call for NHS spending overhaul


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


A complete overhaul of the way the National Health Service makes decisions
on drugs spending has been proposed by the Commons health committee.
In a report published yesterday the committee calls for more appropriate
prescribing of medicines - the first time parliament has become involved in
clinical decisions.
The most radical proposal is the creation of a national list of drugs which
would be reimbursed by the NHS. All drugs would be included at the time of
their launch, but their inclusion would be subject to a scientific review
after five years.
Those found less effective than existing therapies, or more expensive with
no additional therapeutic value, would be excluded from the prescribing
list.
This process would in effect create a fourth hurdle for medicines. Drugs
companies would have to demonstrate their products were not only safe,
effective and manufactured to sufficient quality, but also cost-effective.
The recommendations have drawn a sharp response from the industry. Bayer's
UK subsidiary said a prescribing list would be cumbersome, inflexible and
bureaucratic.
Mr Peter Lumley, director of public affairs at the Association of the
British Pharmaceutical Industry, said: 'The threat of a national formulary
(prescribing list) will certainly not help the Department of Health or the
Department of Trade and Industry in their endeavours to attract inward
investment to the UK from American and Japanese companies.'
Most of the report's conclusions were supported unanimously by the
committee. But the creation of the prescribing list was opposed by two
Labour MPs.
A number of committee members called for a review of prescription charges.
They argued that the charge, now Pounds 4.75, is excessive, but that the
number of people exempted should be cut. At present 80 per cent of drugs are
dispensed without any charge to groups including pensioners, children,
pregnant women and nursing mothers.
The rise in the drugs budget above the general rate of inflation was not
necessarily a serious cause for alarm, the committee says in the report. The
success of drug therapies could lead to savings elsewhere in the health
service.
However, the committee criticises the present system of controlling NHS
drugs spending, in particular the limited lists of drugs that could not be
prescribed.
The committee calls for a National Audit Office report on the pharmaceutical
price regulation scheme by which the government controls drug company
profits and which the committee says is too complex and insufficiently
transparent.
Members suspected multinational companies manipulated the intricacies of the
scheme to their own advantage.
Four Conservative committee members called for the abolition of the scheme.
It should be replaced by a system based on using the NHS' considerable
purchasing power, said Mr David Congdon, MP for Croydon North East.
Priority-setting in the NHS: the NHS drugs budget. HMSO, Pounds 11.40.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940721

