FT942-12704

FT  28 APR 94 / Leading Article: Germany's Europe


John Major said he would put the UK at the heart of Europe. That intention
was geographically absurd and proved politically vainglorious. The leader
whose country is indeed the geographic, economic and political heart of
Europe was his visitor of yesterday, Mr Helmut Kohl. Europe is failing to
prosper, either politically or economically, largely because Germany is not
leading. Germany's accession to the presidency of the European Union, next
July, is the occasion for it to start doing so once more.
The agenda Germany confronts is simultaneously its own and Europe's: how to
extend the zone of western stability to its eastern neighbours; how to
deepen its integration with its western neighbours, particularly with
France; and how to engender new vigour in the European economy.
Mr Kohl's signal virtue is that he understands the nature of the task he,
his country and Europe confront. It is to resolve Germany's historic
dilemma: the choice between east and west. Germany's strategic solution is
to seek stability in the east, while being safely embedded in a prosperous
west. So long as it is deprived of capacity for independent action, the
problem posed by an over-mighty, sovereign Germany might at last be
resolved. The failure of British politicians is their inability to recognise
that the nightmare Germany's leaders wish to avoid is the 19th century
balance-of-power politics that the British deem normal.
Starting point
The German strategy is right. The difficulties arise with the tactics. The
starting point must be to Germany's east, where shaken electorates may yet
turn their backs on an EU that is often seen to have turned its back on
them. The Europe Agreements with Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland, Romania and Slovakia were a start. But the EU remains far too
protectionist, notably over agriculture. These agreements provide for free
trade in industrial goods between the EU and the countries of eastern
Europe, but not among the east Europeans. There is, more important still, no
ladder leading them to the EU membership that they seek and the EU promised,
conditionally, at the Copenhagen European summit in 1993.
What is to be done? First, the decision must be taken that, whatever it
costs, Poland will become the east of the west, not the west of the east.
Second, the EU's barriers to the industrial exports of central and eastern
Europe must be eliminated and agricultural access also expanded. Third,
existing trade agreements need to be made multilateral, embracing the whole
region. Fourth, central and eastern Europe should be absorbed into the
European single market, perhaps by modifying the still-born European
Economic Area for that purpose.
Last but not least, the issue of EU membership, which the countries
concerned think crucial for the credibility of their engagement with Europe,
must be broached. But membership would be feasible before 2010 only if the
common agricultural policy, the budget and probably voting weights were
reformed. This is an agenda that Germany, pivotal on all three questions,
must address.
Europe's plight
Enlargement to the north is, pace the European parliament, decided.
Enlargement to the east must be started. But what then of deepening? To the
extent that a larger Europe must be bureaucratically streamlined,
institutional reform is inescapable. This issue will be the heart of the
agenda for the next intergovernmental conference, due in 1996. Ideas must be
floated now if that conference is to be less messy than the political side
of the last one.
Realistically, however, rapid further deepening of the soon-to-be Europe of
16, still more of the Europe of 20 or so that should emerge within the next
decade, is unfeasible. The solution must be deepening among fewer countries.
This is already implicit in the Maastricht treaty's approach to economic and
monetary union. Some version of Emu must occur this century, if the EU is to
retain credibility. But it will then exclude several members. Germany will
have to be tough with its partners about whom it is necessary to exclude and
whom it is necessary to include.
Perhaps the most fruitful way for Germany to secure early deepening to the
west is by strengthening its foreign and security policy co-operation with
France. With the US disengaging, the UK equivocating and Russia looking more
threatening, it is difficult to envisage a basis for European security other
than Franco-German integration. But Germany must first commit itself to
participation in envisaged security action. If it has power, without bearing
responsibility, as happened in the former Yugoslavia, European security
policy becomes internally divisive and externally ineffective.
Germany's presidency starts a run of large countries - France, Spain and
Italy - with an integrationist outlook. But it is primus inter pares. It
alone can set the agenda for a revitalised Europe. Its forthcoming elections
will make it difficult. But Europe's plight makes it essential. Germany must
be bold and imaginative. As for the UK, it may be on the margins of
Germany's Europe, but cannot afford to turn its back.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940428

