FT941-4088

FT  12 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Selection is all when you're
thinking small - What investors should know about emerging companies


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR and SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Emerging companies seem likely to join emerging markets as flavour of the
year. The two stories have a lot in common. Both start with the premise that
it is intrinsically easier for a company or economy to advance rapidly if it
starts from a very low base. Just as growth in the Pacific Rim economies is
significantly faster than that in the developed economies, so a relatively
new company with a good business can often expand much faster than ICI. As
one stock market pundit put it: 'Elephants don't gallop.'
Before you get caught up in the general euphoria, however, there are four
questions to ask. Is the basic argument in favour of investing in smaller
companies sound? Is this a good moment to be buying? What are the snags? And
what are the best ways into the market?
Why buy small companies?
Over the long term, small companies as a whole have performed much better
than the giants. Look at our first chart. This tracks the smallest companies
on the main UK equity market, (the 1,279 individual companies in the Hoare
Govett Smaller Companies index) against the FT-SE-A All-Share index (which
includes the 853 biggest quoted companies).
If you go back to the mid-1950s, a modest investment of Pounds 10 in smaller
companies then would by now have grown to Pounds 890, compared with only
Pounds 300 from a similar investment in the All-Share. This does not mean
that buying tiddlers always pays. In some years the giants prevail,
particularly when markets as a whole are going through a bad patch, such as
the mid-1970s, late '80s and early '90s. Last year, though, the smaller
companies came through strongly and have continued to hold up so far in
1994.
Our second chart takes the FT-SE small cap index (which is roughly
comparable to the the Hoare Govett index) and tracks it against the FT-SE
100 index of corporate giants.
Very broadly, small companies tend to flourish when the economy is expanding
but are more vulnerable than large ones when recession bites. Not all
individual small companies exemplify this pattern, though, either long term
or short term; early this decade, they seemed to be dying like flies. And
even when the index is doing well, there will always be enormous variations
between the performance of individual companies.
Reasons for the growth in profits and share prices also vary. What investors
like most - because it will give them long-term outperformance - are small
companies with a simple, profitable formula that can provide above-average
growth for several years.
Peter Lynch, who built up Fidelity's best-known mutual fund, Magellan,
called such shares 'tenbaggers' - those with the potential to give tenfold
returns. But, in the recent smaller company boom, many of the strongest
performances have come from companies which nearly went bust but survived to
fight another day.
The first of our individual company charts shows what happened to an
acquisitive little textile company called Hartstone, which looked like a
real growth story - at least a fivebagger - but ultimately came unstuck. The
second chart shows how jewellery company Signet, the former Ratners, clawed
its way back from the brink.
Conclusion: although small companies as a whole have done better
historically than larger ones, there are periods in which they do worse  -
and many individual companies fail to conform to the norm. So, it is helpful
to buy at the right time and essential to invest in the right companies.
Is this a good time to buy?
Most pundits reckon small companies are unlikely to produce such strong
relative share price performance this year as last. The shares are starting
to look very highly priced already when measured against their actual
earnings although earnings should grow strongly.
One argument from enthusiasts is that UK markets are repeating the pattern
already set by US markets - and US smaller companies have outperformed by
some 40 per cent since they bottomed late in 1990. So, UK smaller companies,
which have outperformed by a paltry 30 per cent since they touched bottom
late in 1992, must have further potential. Well, maybe.
An alternative argument is that even if British smaller companies have
nearly run out of puff, there is still scope in smaller companies overseas.
European economic recovery is relatively immature. On this analysis, the
American small company boom is pretty mature, the British one ripe but with
a bit further to go, and the European one just on the launching pad.
What are the snags?
Anyone who owned smaller company shares late in 1987 will not need reminding
that smaller companies can be illiquid. This innocuous-sounding word means
you cannot always buy when you want to (or not without moving the price
against yourself) and you cannot always sell when you want to - at any
price. In addition, the gap between buying and selling prices - the spread -
could be much wider than it would be with a large company. This means your
shares must rise further before you can genuinely notch up a profit.
Some fund managers are already finding it hard to buy as many shares as they
want in companies they like. But others argue that the stream of attractive
new issues is alleviating this problem.
How should you invest?
Your can either invest directly in smaller company shares, or buy a smaller
company unit or investment trust. If you are an experienced, knowledgeable
and sensible investor, smaller company shares are one area where the private
individual is not necessarily at a disadvantage to the professionals.
Many readers may prefer to use a unit or investment trust although, often,
these have done substantially worse than the index. Existing funds and those
with a finite pool of money to manage probably have an edge over new or
expanding ones. Management groups with a traditional emphasis on
stock-picking should also have an advantage.
The consistently highest-performing funds with a three-year track record,
according to Fund Research, are (unit trusts): Hill Samuel UK Emerging Cos;
Thornton UK Smaller Cos, Royal Life UK Emerging Cos; Lazard UK Smaller Cos
Growth; Britannia Life Smaller Cos; (investment trusts): Murray Enterprise;
Aberforth Smaller Cos; Smaller Cos (Abtrust); Throgmorton Trust; and
Moorgate.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940312

