FT942-12460

FT  29 APR 94 / Leading Article: Come clean, Mr Berlusconi


Mr Silvio Berlusconi, who yesterday was asked officially to form the new
Italian government, does not seem yet to have fully grasped the implications
of his sudden transformation from successful businessman to successful
politician. He has accepted only under pressure, rather than spontaneously,
the need to place his business empire in an arm's length trust for the
duration of his term of office; and he has not accepted at all the need to
make public what exactly that empire consists of or how its ownership is
structured.
Some of his compatriots will sympathise instinctively with this attitude. A
certain discretion about one's assets and balance-sheet is not considered
unethical in Italy. But a prime minister, and more especially one who has
just been elected offering a clean break with the old, corrupt political
system, cannot take the same attitude to the tax system as an ordinary
private businessman. It is his job to see that the state receives its due
revenues and that its accounts add up.
The notion of 'conflict of interest', familiar in English-speaking
countries, is less so in Italy where businessmen have traditionally used
political connections, and politicians used business connections, to make
money. But Mr Berlusconi's rise to power is the direct result of a national
revulsion against the extremes to which that ethos had been carried by the
established political class. If the notion of a clean break means anything
at all, it should mean that from now on public and private interests will be
kept firmly separate.
That is even more important in Mr Berlusconi's case because of the nature of
his business, or rather of one of his businesses. Many people regarded the
concentration of media ownership in his hands as excessive and unhealthy
even before he went into politics, and when he did so his opponents not
unnaturally claimed that it gave him an unfair advantage. That such power
should be combined with control of the state is hardly compatible with
democracy, since it would allow its holder to impede the access of his
opponents to the public ear and eye.
The right course for Mr Berlusconi is not to react defensively to such
arguments, but to take the initiative. He could and should set a timetable
to divest himself of parts of his empire, such as the Standa supermarket
chain, by selling them on the open (which must mean the international)
market.
To do that with his media interests would be more difficult, given
prevailing uncertainty about the legal framework in which they will operate.
(The present legislation may be overturned by referendum.) Here, Mr
Berlusconi should turn his interests over to trustees of unimpeachable
integrity and propose himself a new media ownership law to make such
concentrations impossible in the future. If he does that, Italians will know
that they are indeed entering a new era, and can do so with pride.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940429

