FT944-11173

FT  08 NOV 94 / Russians set to get share of Kazakhstan's largest gas field


   By STEVE LEVINE and ROBERT CORZINE


   MOSCOW, LONDON


Russia is set to be included in a Dollars 6bn proposal to develop
Kazakhstan's largest gas field, as pressure mounts on the western partners
in the deal to reach agreement with Moscow by the end of November.
Kazakhstan television reported that Mr Yeset Azerbayev, head of the state
gas company, had urged British Gas and Agip, its Italian partner, to approve
by November 30 a proposal for Gazprom to join the development consortium
with a 15 per cent share of the two western companies' stake in the huge
Karachaganak gas field.
He threatened to scrap an agreement giving the two companies exclusive right
to negotiate the development of the field unless they meet the deadline. 'If
it is not signed by November 30, then we shall consider ourselves free from
any obligations under the agreement with the British Gas and Agip joint
venture which we signed in June 1992,' Mr Azerbayev said.
Inclusion of Gazprom is meant to persuade the company to agree to ship
Karachaganak's production through Russia's pipeline system to markets in the
west.
Gazprom discovered and partially developed Karachaganak. It also controls a
large gas treatment centre outside the nearby Russian city of Orenburg,
which was built in large part to process Karachaganak gas. The field
contains proven reserves of 1.3 thousand billion cubic metres of natural
gas, 650m tonnes of gas condensate and 200m tonnes of oil.
British Gas says no official deadline has been set, although dates have been
suggested for the completion of the current round of negotiations with the
Kazakhs.
The company has been negotiating separately with Gazprom over transport and
tariff issues, as well as discussing the terms of its possible participation
in the scheme. The talks have been complicated by uncertainty within Gazprom
over which Russian fields it wants to develop for future export and domestic
sales. The Kazakh threat against the western partners may just be an attempt
to get the long-delayed project moving.
But it also indicates the pressure under which the Kazakh government is
operating to generate hard currency export earnings.
Russia has recently made clear that it wants to take part in large energy
projects discovered during the Soviet era and now proposed for development
in the former Soviet republics surrounding the Caspian Sea.
Lukoil, a Russian oil company, this year succeeded in getting a 10 per cent
share of an Dollars 8bn Azerbaijan oil deal led by British Petroleum.
But the Kazakhstan project appears to be the first in which Russia is poised
to acquire a percentage of the western partners' share.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941108

