FT943-12643

FT  23 JUL 94 / An Old Lady with new battles to face: As the Bank of England
celebrates its tercentenary, John Plender considers its past links with the
finance of war and speculates on its future


   By JOHN PLENDER


Are central bankers a good thing? A simple enough question, you might think,
as the 300th birthday of the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street approaches.
Yet, from the beginning, when the Bank of England's charter was sealed on
July 27 1694, the debate has never failed to excite powerful passions.
Within a year, a pamphleteer was declaring that the competition provided by
this fledgling institution had 'almost crush'd several sorts of
Blood-suckers, mere Vermin, Usurers and Gripers, Goldsmiths, Tally-Jobbers,
Exchequer Brokers and Knavish Money-Scriveners, and Pawn-Brokers, with their
Twenty and Thirty per cent'.
Then, as the charter renewal of 1709 loomed, another polemicist busily
penned a tract entitled Some Considerations against the Continuance of the
Bank of England. At 300 years' distance we can safely say that he failed to
win the argument. And, of course, the concept of central banking, embracing
the goal of price stability and the role of lender of last resort to the
banking system, was unknown to people of the late 17th century.
In the 20th century the reputation of central bankers has waxed and waned -
or, more accurately, waned and waxed. The Bank of England's heyday was in
the four decades that preceded the first world war. Sterling was pre-eminent
in a monetary system pegged to gold and the City of London financed the
lion's share of world trade.
Then came Montagu Norman, whose autocratic reign as governor of the Bank
from 1920 to 1944 incorporated the ill-fated return to the gold standard and
the Depression.
It was Norman's financial orthodoxy, and his opposition to Keynesian demand
management in the 1930s, that gave central banking in Britain a bad name.
Elsewhere, central bankerly conservatism was attracting similar opprobrium.
Politicians sought to assert greater control over the dangerous and
misguided people who brought us the slump.
Murder] Rape] Ravishment] Ruin] was the caption on the celebrated Gillray
cartoon of the Old Lady being wooed by William Pitt for her money. Where
Pitt failed, the Labour chancellor Sir Stafford Cripps succeeded. In 1946
the Old Lady was not only raped, but subjected to the indignity of becoming
a nationalised industry.
Political economy has since experienced a mood swing. There is a new
orthodoxy, and it states that while central bankers have been bad,
politicians have been worse. Having taken over much of the central bankers'
job, they created a devastating inflation that destroyed savings, distorted
incentives and imposed a hidden tax on the people. And they have proved
incapable of maintaining a stable international exchange rate regime.
In the first 250 years of the Bank of England's existence, inflation was
largely associated with the financial stresses of war. Indeed, the Bank of
England's initial raison d'etre was to provide money for William of Orange's
battle against the French and to tidy up the mess of unfunded public debt
that remained after the three Anglo-Dutch wars.
War could always be financed on the basis that it was unlikely to go on for
ever. Investors in government debt assumed that any deficit in the
government's accounts would be temporary and would ultimately be made good.
The striking feature of the surge in the general price level that came after
1945 is that it was the first great peacetime inflation since the Bank came
into existence. The technique of deficit financing was applied to the huge
and very un-temporary apparatus of the modern welfare state.
In the absence of a gold standard, or any other anchor for the monetary
system, public sector deficits were not made good. They were monetised. In
the vernacular, the government paid its bills by borrowing from the banking
system, which is the modern equivalent of printing money. War Loan, the
undated, archetypal government IOU, lost most of its value. Investors were
swindled in a manner not seen since the Elizabethan period, as governments
provided monetary accommodation not only for their own deficits, but for
wage claims, oil shocks and the rest.
The result has been a relative revaluation of the central bankers'
reputation. At a time when other nationalised industries have been
privatised and downsized, more central banks have materialised in the global
public sector. Their number has risen from 59 in 1950 to 161 at the start of
this decade.
As Forrest Capie, Charles Goodhart and Norbert Schnadt put it in a monograph
for the Bank of England tercentenary, which has been shamelessly plundered
for parts of this article, 'when a new nation state seeks to establish
itself, the foundation of an independent central bank will be an early item
on the agenda, slightly below the design of the flag, but above the
establishment of a national airline'.
Meantime, the managers of established central banks have demanded, and in
some cases achieved, independence from government - this is the great new
economic nostrum of the day, for which officials at the Bank of England all
too understandably yearn. And in the extraordinary case of Italy, central
banking recently achieved its apotheosis. The head of the Banca d'Italia,
Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, was elevated to the job of prime minister because no
politician was deemed sufficiently credible.
The paradox here is that central bankers are flattered by the choice of
comparison. They may be less corrupt than politicians. But their record, in
those activities where they have retained freedom from the politicians, is
at best patchy.
Many economists argue, for reasons that will be explored shortly, that
central bankers are a threat to the taxpayer's health and should be
dispensed with altogether. In practice, a place such as Hong Kong, where
people enjoy higher per capita incomes than in the UK, has rubbed along
remarkably well over the past four decades without the services of a formal
central bank.
So the question is not merely whether central banks are a good thing, but
whether they are so different from other commercial organisations that they
are entitled to their exalted and protected status; and, more fundamentally,
whether they are necessary at all.
The unique feature of the Bank of England, in 1694, was that it was the only
public bank in Europe with the power to issue notes. A unique feature of
central banks today is that they usually have a monopoly of the note issue.
Yet there are some theorists, most notably the late Friedrich Hayek, who
believe that the issuing task should be privatised and that all
commercialbanks should have the freedom to issue their own notes. The
anti-inflationary logic is the opposite of Gresham's law: good bank notes
that held their value would, in Hayek's view, drive out the bad notes from
banks that over-issued.
Scottish banks continue to issue their own notes, which are accepted in
English supermarkets if not in corner shops. Yet these are not quite what
Hayek envisaged: they are fully backed by cash deposits with the Bank of
England. The Old Lady actually prints notes and her officials in
Threadneedle Street solemnly put them in separate boxes marked Bank of
Scotland and Royal Bank of Scotland.
In Hayek's banking market, in contrast, everyone would have to make
judgments about individual banks' credit-worthiness. Since commercial banks'
reserves would no longer be pooled centrally, they would have to have more
liquid balance sheets and stand ready to convert notes and deposits into
real assets, such as gold.
The strength of the case for 'free banking', as the abolitionist cause is
known, is the poor performance of the existing monetary authorities in
delivering price and financial stability. The fact that the central bankers'
powers are centralised means that they are open to manipulation by
politicians for electoral ends, which introduces a bias towards inflation.
The human and financial resources that central banks pour into supervising
commercial banks appear to deliver precious little. Despite all the effort,
the English-speaking economies have experienced one banking crisis per
economic cycle since the mid-1970s, running from the property crash in 1974,
to the Third World debt disaster in 1982, to the property and junk bond
fiasco of the late 1980s, and the simultaneous Savings and Loans debacle.
Taxpayers have ended up footing a multi-billion dollar bill.
The free bankers argue, entirely plausibly, that the existence of the
central bank as the backstop of the system is a cause of this instability.
Commercial bankers are less risk-averse when they know there is a lender of
last resort. Depositors impose no constraint on bankers' activities if their
deposits are statutorily insured.
The snag with free banking is the assertion that it would lead to a more
stable system. Anyone who believes that knows nothing of the behavioural
pressures on bankers and will believe anything. History suggests that in
periods of free banking, instability was endemic and that the social costs
of banking panics were high.
This is because banking is a fundamentally unstable activity. Banks exist to
satisfy demands that financial markets cannot meet. Indeed, when the Bank of
England was founded, the organised markets were restricted to government
debt and the paper of a few chartered companies. Because bank loans are not
quoted, they are difficult to value and to turn into cash. Moreover, bankers
inevitably have less information about customers than the customers
themselves.
Yet the banks' deposits are for fixed amounts and can be withdrawn on a
first-come-first-served basis. Depositors are also short of detailed
information about the people to whom they have entrusted their money. It
thus takes only a niggling doubt on the part of depositors about adverse
changes in the value of a bank's assets to spark off a run.
It follows that banks are different from ordinary companies, and widespread
bank failures can lead to a vicious spiral of default and falling prices, as
in the US in the 1930s, when a third of all banks collapsed and the Federal
Reserve failed to prevent a savage deflation. So the risks in any experiment
in free banking are high.
There must be a possibility that in the first free banking panic money would
fly to the biggest and safest bank, which in the UK would probably end up
being called the Bank of England, if it was not the Bank of England already.
In other words, we might find ourselves going through the painful process of
rediscovering the convenience of central banking, while being occasionally
rebuffed in shops and pubs over our choice of notes.
This does not sound practical. Bigger and cruder threats to the central
bankers' status probably come from elsewhere. For a start, the bond markets'
power and prestige are in the ascendant. The flavour is well conveyed in The
Agenda, Bob Woodward's new book on the Clinton administration.
The sleuth of Watergate and the Washington Post writes, in a reference to
Democratic political consultant James Carville: 'That day the 30-year bond
rate dropped another 11 per cent. Carville was beginning to understand real
power. He told the Wall Street Journal: 'I used to think if there was
reincarnation, I wanted to come back as the president or the pope or a 400
baseball hitter. But now I want to come back as the bond market. You can
intimidate everybody'.'
The bond market is certainly more intimidating than Alan Greenspan of the US
Fed. In the face of quickening economic recovery and increasing inflationary
potential, bond yields started to rise as early as last October, while the
Fed waited until this February before tightening. And in Europe bond yields
have risen to levels that impose a swingeing penalty on countries such as
Spain and Italy, where budget deficits and the outstanding stock of
government debt are deemed unduly large.
Because long-term interest rates have a disproportionate influence on
economic activity in continental Europe, bond markets may even nip economic
recovery there in the bud. They have already put a damper on the British
housing market by forcing increases in the fixed rates of interest offered
to borrowers by building societies and banks.
In the new liberalised global market place, the central bankers' task is
thus double-edged. They must ask not only whether economies are overheating,
with inflationary consequences, but whether bond markets are overshooting to
the point of threatening serious deflation. Perhaps the bond market
over-reaction is the late 20th century equivalent of a free banking panic.
In the smaller and more open economies, however, the central bankers' room
for manoeuvre is somewhat curtailed. Sovereignty may still have a strong
national dimension for the Americans, the Germans and the Japanese, but for
most others - pace Britain's Euro-sceptics - it is overshadowed, in the
realm of monetary affairs, by the actions of the Big Three and the bond
markets.
All of which brings us to what, for the Bank of England, could render any
future anniversary a nugatory affair: European economic and monetary union.
This would deliver to the Old Lady a spurious form of independence from the
British government, while the remaining ability to influence monetary
affairs was transferred to a European central bank - rape, in fact, by any
other name, since the European bank's decisions will be made on the basis of
Europe-wide economic conditions, without much regard for domestic economic
shocks.
The good news is that the proposed European bank, unlike the Bank of
England, is not being set up to finance wars. The bad news is that the
relevant protocol of the Maastricht Treaty gives the new European central
banking system a greater degree of independence than any other central bank,
while offering less accountability to the European parliament than that
demanded of any other central bank. Even the notoriously independent
Bundesbank is required to account more seriously to the German parliament.
Such a transfer of power to foreign hands would not be without precedent in
Britain. After all, England's disaffection with James II and his alien
religion prompted the English to swap their flawed sovereign for William of
Orange. Yet the constitution of the proposed European central bank - pace
the Euro-enthusiasts - is a recipe to make the bond markets look tame. At
least William of Orange deigned to cross the Channel and submitted his
spending plans to parliament.
Admittedly, Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, argues that monetary union is
not on the agenda. James no doubt felt a similar insouciance on the eve of
his premature ejection from the throne. But it is hard to believe that a
hard core of European countries will not move towards monetary union. Will
the British establishment have the nerve to stay out? Will the Old Lady end
up running a sub-post office in the new European banking system?
This is no place to re-run the Maastricht debate. But for those who, like
the 18th century pamphleteer, wish to air Some Considerations against the
Continuance of the Bank of England, history has a lesson. If nothing else,
she is a durable old bird. Do not write off the quatercentenary yet.
An FT Bank of England survey will be published on July 27

The Financial Times


London Page I

940723

