FT941-3282

FT  17 MAR 94 / Retail sales fall sparks calls for interest rate cuts:
Unemployment declines as earnings growth picks up


   By EMMA TUCKER and PHILIP COGGAN


Unemployment resumed its downward path last month, but a sharp drop in
retail sales prompted calls for another cut in interest rates to help the
economy weather next month's tax increases.
The number of people out of work and claiming benefit fell by a seasonally
adjusted 38,800 in February to 2,751,800, or 9.8 per cent of the UK
workforce, the lowest level since June 1992.
But retail sales dropped 0.5 per cent in February, dragging the year-on-year
growth rate down from 3.7 per cent in January to 2.5 per cent, the slowest
rate since May last year.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, said it was time for an immediate
reduction in lending rates.
'The figures undermine bank and government optimism about the recovery,' he
said. 'Retail sales are falling even before taxes have gone up and the
government must act now to prevent further damage to the economy.'
But Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, vigorously defended the tax increases
as necessary to keep the recovery going.
'We have a background of a large amount of borrowing, as does every other
country coming out of the recession,' he said.
According to Mr Clarke, the government's programme for dealing with the
budget deficit will enable the economic climate to carry on improving, keep
inflation down, and allow interest rates to remain low.
But yesterday's mixed set of figures also included the first pick-up in the
annual growth rate of average earnings for two years. This affected
sentiment in the government bond market, where investors grew uneasy that a
long period of subdued wage rises was coming to an end.
The underlying rate of growth of average earnings in January was 3.25 per
cent, higher than the 3 per cent analysts had expected. The June long gilt
future fell 1 1/4 points on the news to 110 25/32 . Shares also fell
yesterday, with the FT-SE 100 index falling 24.5 points to 3,242.9.
Overall, the official retail sales figures painted a less downbeat picture
than a survey from the Confederation of British Industry earlier this week
which showed two successive months of slowing retail sales growth. The
official figures, from the Central Statistical Office, included a sharp
upward revision to January's month-on-month increase, from 0.6 per cent to
0.9 per cent.
The employment figures showed that January's unexpected increase in
unemployment was revised even further upward, from 15,500 to 19,800.
Generally, the figures from the Department of Employment suggested many of
the jobs being created are not in traditional areas. A rise in the number of
the self-employed was the main cause of the increase in employment in the
fourth quarter of 1993. Manufacturing employment continued to decline, while
the quarterly Labour Force Survey showed a continuing shift to part-time
employment.
Mr John Prescott, the shadow employment secretary, kept up pressure on the
department to alter the way it measures unemployment by saying that the
current figures gave a misleading impression of the true state of the labour
market. The employment department's chief statistician had, according to Mr
Prescott, admitted that changes to the count since 1979 had removed at least
400,000 from the official figures.
'That alone would push the official unemployment rate up to 11.2 per cent,'
said Mr Prescott.
Details, Page 10
Samuel Brittan, Page 20
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940317

