FT942-12517

FT  29 APR 94 / MPs urge flexibility in dividend payments


   By DAVID OWEN and ROLAND RUDD


MPs yesterday urged leading institutional investors to adopt a more flexible
approach to corporate dividend payments as part of a blueprint for
increasing long-term investment in British industry.
In a report on UK competitiveness, the Conservative-dominated Commons trade
and industry committee said pressure for 'consistent' dividends was 'an
example of the interests of institutions and companies (and the UK economy
as a whole) being in conflict'.
For institutions to insist on companies retaining the same dividend level
throughout an economic cycle was to treat companies 'as if they were banks'.
What was required was 'not consistent dividends but consistent investment by
industry'.
Questioned on a statement by one institution - M&G Investment Management -
that dividends should not be cut because of temporary fluctuations in
profit, Mr Richard Caborn, the committee's Labour chairman, said that
members thought M&G should change its approach.
Yesterday's report precedes by about three weeks the government's
competitiveness white paper, expected to be published on May 16. Labour said
yesterday that it would shortly publish its own 'programme for industrial
competitiveness'.
As expected, yesterday's report recommended that the Department of Trade and
Industry should take over primary responsibility for training from the
Department of Employment as part of a government drive to give training a
higher profile.
'As long as funding for training is in the Department of Employment it gets
corrupted and distorted into being funding for unemployment,' said Mr Keith
Hampson, a Conservative committee member.
The report also called for consideration of a compulsory element of training
and some form of remissible payroll levy if voluntary training targets were
not met.
MPs proposed a series of measures to address short-termism in manufacturing.
These included:
Modifying the tax system to encourage scrip dividends.
Imposing 'limited' controls on hostile takeovers.
Making institutions' tax privileges conditional on locking in a proportion
of their funds with particular companies for long periods.
Among steps to improve financing of smaller companies, the report proposed
changing rules for life assurance companies to allow unquoted investments to
be valued in full, up to a specified proportion of assets.
The Trades Union Congress said the proposal for training levies was an idea
whose time had come.
But Ms Ann Robinson, head of the policy unit at the Institute of Directors,
said: 'The conclusions . . . are rehashes of old ideas about the role of
government which is generally counter-productive.'
Competitiveness of UK Manufacturing Industry. HMSO. Pounds 21.30.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940429

