FT942-15639

FT  14 APR 94 / Arts: Peter Grimes - Scottish Opera


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


From politicians' sex lives to violent videos, public concern over morality
seems a peculiarly British phenomenon. It is at the heart of Britten's first
full-scale opera, which shows a small seaside town embarking on a moral
crusade to bring the outsider Peter Grimes into line - with tragic results.
Although it is 50 years since the opera was written, it still packs a
powerful punch. Scottish Opera has largely done it justice with this new
production, as it has with other operas tackled this season. The company
seems to be moving on to firmer ground, announcing yesterday at its annual
press conference that it has cleared its financial deficit a year early and
is cautiously optimistic about the future.
There were no signs of skimping in Peter Grimes. After a long period in
which the opera has been played against bare sets stripped down to the
essentials, the style here was quite elaborate. The sea-front of 'The
Borough' (Britten's barely disguised portrayal of Aldeburgh) has once again
become a picture-postcard parade of shops and houses, including the local
church and Auntie's pub, 'The Boar'.
When Joachim Herz was active in Britain in the 1970s, East Germany was still
in existence and he was one of its roving band of controversial producers
overseas. He seems to have mellowed since then. His assertion in the
programme that the townspeople of 'The Borough' are ants slaving to work for
Mammon can be read as an attempt to keep old socialist beliefs alive, but
the idea is not worked at insistently on stage.
By and large the production is as traditional as Reinhart Zimmermann's
designs. As dawn breaks, a fishing community starts the day's work, the
women scraping the newly-caught fish, the men weighing them for market. Only
a tendency to staginess weakens the effect, for Britten's first success at
opera is a touch naive and responds best to handling which is natural and
sincere.
It gets that in Anthony Rolfe Johnson's Peter Grimes, which was no doubt the
raison d'etre for the production. (He will sing the role at Glyndebourne and
New York.) The contradictions of Grimes the visionary and the bully are held
judiciously in balance. He treats his young apprentice roughly but gives him
his own jacket in the storm, hits him but tells him gently not to worry.
Most tenors find this a taxing part to sing and in Rolfe Johnson's case that
manifests itself as some strain at the top of the voice.
Rita Cullis sings beautifully as an elegant Ellen Orford, who looks as if
she has had a softer life than most in 'The Borough'. Russell Smythe plays a
sympathetic, but lightweight Balstrode, not the usual hardened sea-dog. 'The
Boar' is well staffed by Patricia Boylan's hearty Auntie and her two
tempting 'nieces', Anne Dawson and Ann Archibald. Anthony Roden as the moral
ring-leader Bob Boles has a fanatic gleam in the eye. Catherine Wyn-Rogers
is too young by half for the old busybody, Mrs Sedley.
At the start there is not much sea spray in the music, but Richard Armstrong
builds up a tidal wave of intensity. Scottish Opera must be glad to have a
Music Director with his experience. For the 1994-5 season Armstrong will
conduct three of the new productions: Beethoven's Fidelio, Donizetti's Maria
Stuarda and Schnittke's Life with an Idiot. Nicholas McGegan will look after
Le nozze di Figaro.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940414

