FT941-3530

FT  16 MAR 94 / Ties with Tokyo 'in disrepair'


   By NANCY DUNNE and MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   WASHINGTON, TOKYO


US-Japanese trade and economic relations are 'in serious disrepair,' Mr
Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, said yesterday.
Japan must take 'its full share of responsibility in promoting global
economic growth,' he told the House trade subcommittee. It had not yet done
that in bilateral talks with the US or in the Uruguay Round.
Mr Kantor, who has pursued a tough line in efforts to encourage Japan to
produce a market-opening package containing 'numerical indicators of
progress,' won warm support for his stance from both Republicans and
Democrats on the committee.
'Unless or until Japan is prepared to take their share of responsibility
we're not going to resolve these problems.'
The US, he said, had been 'somewhat victimised' with the characterisation
that it was proposing managed trade solutions. 'The Japanese have practised
managed trade for years,' he said. 'We're trying to unmanage trade in
Japan.'
Meanwhile it emerged in Tokyo that the US has presented Japan with detailed
proposals for measures to promote deregulation and market access.
The proposals, contained in a discussion paper, were delivered to Japanese
officials in January during the framework negotiations and cover 45 specific
areas.
The Japanese government has resisted demands made by the US under the
framework negotiations to set specific objective criteria in opening up its
markets. Instead, it has hoped to deflect criticism over its huge trade
surplus by taking the initiative in compiling the deregulation plan.
In competition policy, the US is calling for the abolition of exclusionary
business practices, active application of criminal charges under the
anti-monopoly law and substantial relaxation of rules governing transport,
airline, shipping and trucking fees.
In administrative transparency, the US wants more foreign participation in
government advisory groups, while in deregulation it seeks establishment of
an independent organisation to supervise progress in deregulating the
markets.
In distribution, the US is asking for infrastructural investment to improve
rail and road access to Japanese ports and airports, more warehouse space
for imports at Narita Airport, introduction of computer systems to handle
import matters before goods arrive in Japan and greater handling of imports
by small retailers.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940316

