FT942-16125

FT  12 APR 94 / Air France wins workers' support for rescue plan


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


Air France workers voted overwhelmingly yesterday in favour of a rescue
package, securing an important victory for Mr Christian Blanc, the chairman,
in his attempt to restructure the state-owned carrier.
Air France said a ballot of the company's 40,000 staff had shown that 81 per
cent of those who voted were in favour of the package. More than 80 per cent
of employees voted.
Acceptance of the plan will clear the way for an injection of FFr20bn
(Pounds 2.34bn) of state capital over the next three years. The capital
increase is necessary to reduce debts of about FFr38bn at the airline and to
curb losses estimated at FFr7.5bn last year. But the plan requires approval
from the European Commission and is likely to face resistance from Air
France's competitors, including British Airways.
Mr Blanc, who took over as chairman last October, had threatened to resign
if he did not receive a 'clear and massive' vote in favour of his plan to
cut 5,000 jobs, freeze wages and increase productivity by 30 per cent. He
appealed directly to staff following the refusal of eight of the airline's
14 unions to sign his recovery plan, although the six that signed
represented just over half the workforce. Mr Blanc's success was attributed
to a strong communications effort which has involved more than 2,000
meetings with staff and union representatives. It also reflected the
severity of the company's problems.
The vote in favour of the restructuring plan will come as a relief to the
French government, which was forced into a humiliating climbdown last
October when it withdrew a previous plan. The scrapping of the plan, in the
face of a wave of strikes, forced the resignation of Mr Bernard Attali, the
previous chairman, and set a precedent for government concessions to
opponents of reform.
Mr Bernard Bosson, the transport minister, said the plan was an endorsement
of the government's consultations. He saw no reason why Brussels should
oppose the plan, adding that the proposed state aid represented only half
the company's debts.
The result represents a blow to the eight unions at the airline which had
rejected Mr Blanc's proposals. However, an official at the communist
Confederation Generale du Travail, the second largest union at Air France,
said: 'We continue to oppose the plan'. He said the union did not rule out
industrial action in protest at the plans to cut jobs and freeze wages.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940412

