FT942-12424

FT  29 APR 94 / UK Company News: Airtours acquires SAS Leisure - Pounds 82m
rights issue to help purchase tour operator and cruise ship


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


Airtours, the holiday group, yesterday announced that it was buying
Scandinavia's largest tour operator and a cruise ship. It also launched an
Pounds 82m rights issue to help fund the purchases.
Airtours is buying SAS Leisure from Scandinavian Airlines System for Pounds
74m. SAS Leisure, which has 31 per cent of the Scandinavian tour operating
market, owns or manages 14 resort hotels and has a 50 per cent stake in
Premiair, a charter airline.
Mr David Crossland, Airtours' chairman, said the purchase of the 752-berth
ship from Closter Cruise of Norway, would require an investment of Pounds
16m - including the cost of refurbishment. Airtours will begin selling
cruises in the Mediterranean and the Canary Islands to both UK and
Scandinavian customers in spring 1995.
Mr Crossland said that if the venture was successful, Airtours would invest
in further cruise ships, although there were no immediate plans to do so.
The rights issue is on a 1-for-5 basis at 390p a share. Airtours' shares
fell 24p yesterday to close at 424p.
Mr Crossland said the purchase of SAS Leisure would provide the enlarged
group with greater strength in the purchase of accommodation, aviation fuel
and airline insurance.
He said the Scandinavian company's hotels had average occupancy levels of 73
per cent, compared with close to 100 per cent at Airtours' own hotel in
Majorca. He said the combined group would be able to boost occupancy
substantially at the newly-acquired hotels.
Mr Crossland added that SAS Leisure was expected to return to profit in the
year to December 31 after incurring pre-tax losses of SKr94m (Pounds 8m) in
1993.
He said the purchase would be earnings enhancing in the current year.
COMMENT
When Airtours ventured from its Lancashire base to London to launch its
ultimately unsuccessful bid for its rival Owners Abroad, it showed better
judgment than the City. Shareholders backed Owners Abroad's top executives,
only to see them depart last year when profits dived. When Airtours moved on
to Cardiff to buy Aspro Travel last year its judgment was less sure. It is
now suing the vendors for fraudulent misrepresentation. Airtours' decision
to wade into the icy waters of Scandinavia clearly has the City shivering.
As a move into a new, and for UK investors, relatively unknown market, the
SAS Leisure purchase has its dangers. But it would be a pity if a company
which has achieved the UK growth that Airtours has did not try to reproduce
that success on a wider stage. If Airtours is to expand outside its UK base,
this is the time to do it. The Scandinavian company has already cut costs
and Airtours' UK summer 1994 bookings are up 42 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

940429

