FT944-5987

FT  01 DEC 94 / Revamped think-tank worships widgets


   By DIANE SUMMERS


The Design Council's own radical redesign from a 230-strong quango to what
it is hoped will be a lean, fast-moving think-tank of just 40 people is due
to be unveiled tonight by Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary.
The transformation, carried out over 35 weeks, is described by Mr John
Sorrell, the Design Council's chairman, as 'one of the fastest turnarounds
of a public organisation - or any organisation - that's ever been achieved'.
The familiar shopfront in London's Haymarket stands empty, regional offices
have been disbanded and services privatised or transferred to other
organisations. The old council's main activity - dispensing design advice to
industry - will be taken over by the network of Business Links being set up
by the Department of Trade and Industry to provide 'one-stop shop' help.
The newly formed Design Council team, which is as yet without a chief
executive, occupies one room at the top of the old Haymarket building,
although it is likely to relocate eventually. It is described by Mr Sorrell
as 'a national think-tank, which develops and disseminates new knowledge,
sets agendas, focuses debate on design and inspires action' as part of the
'drive to improve competitiveness in the UK economy through design'.
It has eschewed new logos and the usual corporate identity trappings in
favour of a set of mottoes for use on letter headings, envelopes and
business cards. An example is: 'Widgets aren't born, they're designed. The
new Design Council is here to inspire innovation.'
Initiatives include:
A student competition to redesign the Houses of Parliament and the setting
up of an all-party group on design.
Research programmes on design effectiveness, investment policy and
management.
A programme to bring design into schools and business courses.
The launch of 'Project 2045', which will involve designs for the future, as
visualised by children, businesses and design professionals, being buried in
time capsules for 50 years.
The relaunching of the British Design Awards and the council's magazine,
Design.
The shake-up started in September last year when the government announced
that it wanted the council, which had been receiving a grant of Pounds 7.5m,
to refocus its activities. Mr Sorrell, who is himself a designer, carried
out a review, the findings of which were accepted by the DTI in March. Staff
have been made redundant or redeployed and the organisation has been
restructured into four teams covering research, communications, design, and
education and training.
The process, which has been welcomed by the design world, is due to be
completed tonight, when Mr Heseltine launches the new council at a reception
which also marks the organisation's 50th anniversary.
The main question which remains concerns the operation of the government's
new Business Links. The aim is for 200 one-stop shops, but so far there are
fewer than 80.
Mr Sorrell expects there to be about 15 to 20 design counsellors installed
in Business Link offices by early next year, but concedes that 'inevitably
there are some seams' in the transfer of design advisory services.
The Design Council's biggest project remains government itself. Mr Sorrell
said: 'It's very much on our agenda to look at the way government buys, uses
and manages design. It would be crazy to think there wasn't room for
improvement.'
Mr Sorrell said government spending on items which are at some point
designed - from the screw that goes into a plug, to an aircraft carrier -
amounted to Pounds 74bn a year. 'Imagine if those things could be designed
just 1 per cent better, with 1 per cent saving in cost.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941201

