FT942-14336

FT  21 APR 94 / Euro-MPs may delay entry of new EU members


   By DAVID GARDNER


   STRASBOURG


The European parliament last night threatened to upset plans for Austria,
Sweden, Finland and Norway to join the European Union next year.
The parliament must approve the accession of the four countries but Euro-MPs
have been angered by a controversial compromise deal on EU voting rights
agreed by the UK and its European partners during accession negotiations
last month.
Despite assurances by Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, that
the compromise was virtually meaningless there was still no certain majority
of MEPs in favour of approving the accession treaty.
Mr Delors made a pointed if implicit reference to the British government,
warning that although the compromise was entered into 'in good faith', in
today's EU 'giving your word doesn't count for what it used to'.
The parliament's faction leaders will decide today whether to put the
mandatory ratification on the agenda for May 4.
Ratification is not likely to be placed on the agenda if it is thought that
there is a possibility it might be voted down by the MEPs.
'It is highly uncertain whether there is a majority in this house for
enlargement,' said Mr Gijs de Vries, a Dutch liberal leader. He added that
only if parliament got equal status to the Commission in the 1996 treaty
review could ratification be guaranteed.
The votes compromise - which was agreed to overcome Britain's objections to
a dilution of voting powers following the EU expansion from 12 to 16 -
allows a small minority of member states in the Council of Ministers to hold
up decisions for a 'reasonable' period, even when they cannot muster the
higher threshold of votes which are needed to block.
Mr Delors said that the political agreement on votes was not legally
binding, and that the EU treaty and Council rules of procedure could be used
to overcome obstruction tactics.
Pressing for ratification yesterday, Mr Theodoros Pangalos, the Greek
European affairs minister, who currently chairs the Council, said 'this
simply codifies what has long been established practice in the Council',
aimed at getting the widest consensus.
Mr Pangalos said anything beyond a two to three-month hold-up of
controversial measures would be difficult.
Attempts continued yesterday to secure the votes of 260 out of 518 MEPs
needed to enable the newcomers to enter the EU.
Faction managers claimed firm support of about 250 votes, but most felt a
good 20 to 30 more vote pledges were needed.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940421

