FT942-16332

FT  11 APR 94 / UK Company News: Intermediate Capital has flotation value of
Pounds 100m


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


Intermediate Capital Group, the niche provider of mezzanine finance to
unquoted companies, is to float late next month in a placing and
intermediaries offer that will value it at more than Pounds 100m.
The flotation will raise about Pounds 30m, some Pounds 18m of which will
repay existing preference holders.
ICG was formed in 1989 and is Europe's largest specialist provider of
mezzanine funds, a layer of finance that lies between equity and debt in
terms of risk and reward.
The core business is lending to UK management buy-outs, where demand has
been steady, and to buy-outs in continental Europe where there has been
'strong' growth in demand this year, according to Mr Tom Bartlam, one of
four founders and managing director.
The group is also aiming to lend more to companies seeking development
capital, but which do not need to pay the high cost implicit in issuing
equity.
ICG prices its loans at about 4 per cent over Libor but enhances its return
to between 16 and 20 per cent by receiving warrants or a redemption premium.
In January ICG also started managing funds for third parties when Postel
provided the group with Pounds 20m to invest alongside its own funds in the
mezzanine market. Postel bought a 20 per cent stake, most of it from Westpac
Banking, the Australian group.
ICG is likely to be regarded by institutions as a yield stock, unlike
Mithras, the mezzanine investment trust floated last month by Legal &
General Ventures. 'We are run for profit and not assets growth,' Mr Bartlam
says. 'We are more a quasi-bank than a quasi-investment trust.' Its main
competition comes from banks such as NatWest, Samuel Montagu and Kleinwort
Benson.
In the year to January 31, ICG had operating income of Pounds 20.6m, of
which Pounds 11.1m represented gains on the disposal of shares in companies
that had floated. The previous year's income was Pounds 12.5m, of which
Pounds 5.5m was disposal gains.
ICG recognises that pre-tax profits will be volatile because it has no
control over when its investments float. Mr Bartlam said ICG would be
looking to pay a growing dividend from core income, while capital gains
would strengthen the balance sheet for more lending.
The four founding shareholders will retain about 80 per cent of their stakes
and hold between 10 and 15 per cent of the company after the float.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940411

