FT942-16297

FT  11 APR 94 / Equity Markets: Other Markets


TOKYO
Investors succeeded in absorbing Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's
unexpected resignation announcement quickly last Friday but uncertainty over
the political situation could weigh on share prices this week. The main
focus for the stock market will be the passage of the 1994 budget, which has
been stalled by the opposition parties.
FRANKFURT
The Bundesbank meets for the first time in four weeks on Thursday. James
Capel notes that the repo rate has fallen by 15 basis points from 5.88 per
cent since the last meeting. The broker says there is an outside chance of a
cut in the key discount rate at this week's meeting, although it expects the
more likely date for the next reduction is April 28.
MILAN
The Italian president makes known on Friday who will be the country's prime
minister. NatWest Securities says that while Mr Silvio Berlusconi is widely
expected to be asked to form a government, the brinkmanship and politicking
seen at the end of last week will continue.
However, this background should not detract from the momentum that is
driving equities, bonds and the lira.
PARIS
Michelin, the tyre manufacturer, reports on Wednesday and the consensus
estimate is for a full-year loss of FFr3.2bn as a result of the downturn in
the European automobile industry and exceptional charges relating to its
restructuring. Accor, the hotel and tourism group, also reporting on
Wednesday, is expected to announce a fall in net income of about 25 per
cent, depending on exceptional items.
COPENHAGEN
Today sees the first day of trading in Copenhagen Airport shares, and it is
also the first day of subscription for Tele Danmark for domestic,
non-institutional investors.
STOCKHOLM
The equity market is expected to continue last week's strong run. UBS says
news that foreign investors were net buyers of SKr8.3bn of equities during
February, a time when the market was falling, suggests domestic institutions
have already built up substantial reserves of liquidity in advance of the
hefty new issue programme.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940411

