FT944-2973

FT  15 DEC 94 / Leading Article: India on trial


Indians are not doomed to be poor. They are poor because of foolish
policies. Unfortunately, the likely response to the defeats suffered by the
Congress party in state elections will be precisely the wrong mixture of
caution with profligacy. The prime minister deserves credit for initiating
reform, but has failed to persuade the electorate of its benefits. Indeed he
has barely tried.
India's politics has become a struggle over the redistribution of poverty.
This can be seen in the resistance to reform of the labour market, in the
opposition to privatisation of public enterprises, in the continued pressure
for protection from imports, in the demands for affirmative action for
'backward' castes, in the failure to charge properly for electricity and
irrigation, in pressures for more public spending on food and fertiliser
subsidies and in the widespread exemptions from taxation.
The brilliantly executed response to India's economic crisis of 1991 offered
the country a chance to break out of the zero-sum trap into which politics
had led. Unfortunately, reform has not gone far or fast enough. In addition,
fiscal stabilisation more or less stopped after 1992-93. The fiscal deficit
is expected to be 6 per cent of gross domestic product this year and may
rise sharply again next year, in response to the electoral defeats. Yet even
this year's level is almost certainly unsustainable in the long run.
The pity of it all is that the reform agenda is beneficial to huge chunks of
the electorate. The elimination of controls has already reduced corruption
and, zealously pursued, could reduce it further. The beneficiaries of
industrial protection, over-employment in public enterprises and the failure
to allow plant closures are a small minority of the labour force. Equally,
trade liberalisation should favour agricultural output. While subsidised
power, water and fertilisers do benefit many farmers, the big gainers among
them are certainly not the rural poor.
The danger now is that reform will stand still, while fiscal stabilisation
starts to go backwards. If so, the economic momentum built up over the last
three years, though probably enough to produce growth at 5 or 6 per cent,
may well prove insufficient for anything more. It could even reverse. The
tragedy is that India desperately needs - and could achieve - an east Asian
level of economic performance.
While India was capable of fiscal stability, in the 1960s and 1970s, its
economy was shackled by controls. Now that controls are being lifted, it
cannot sustain fiscal stability. Worse, after these elections, Mr Rao's
instinct will be to go slow on reform and backslide on stabilisation. It is
a politically attractive strategy, but the wrong one. The only solid
platform for political success and even stability lies in the promise of a
better life for all. India's hope lies in the achievement of East Asian
growth, not in the false allure of Latin American populism.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941215

