FT942-15549

FT  14 APR 94 / International Company News: Caremark in low-cost drugs
alliance - Pharmaceutical companies respond to the hard bargaining of
healthcare providers


   By DANIEL GREEN


Three pharmaceuticals companies - Bristol Myers Squibb and Pfizer of the US,
and France's Rhone-Poulenc - have joined Caremark International, a US drug
distributor, in an alliance intended to offer lower cost drugs to buyers.
Caremark manages the pharmacy aspects of healthcare provided by corporate
clients to their employees. Customers include companies such as retail group
Sears, oil company Amoco and United Airlines, and it is involved in the
healthcare management of more than 12m people.
The areas of healthcare identified as being the most expensive to deal with
were for corporate clients and include heart disease, asthma, depression,
diabetes and HIV/Aids. Of the three companies which have joined Caremark,
some have allocated their entire portfolio of drugs to be sold through
Caremark, while others have allocated specific products.
The collaborative work will involve so-called outcomes analysis in which
financial comparisons are made between different treatment regimes.
The move is partly in response to the Dollars 6bn purchase last summer of
drug distributor Medco by the US drugs company Merck. That was, in turn, a
response to the determination of healthcare providers - both hospitals and
companies - to drive hard bargains with drugs companies.
Caremark is involved in several of these cost-cutting methods, called
capitation, in which a company agrees to look after the health of a group of
people on a per-head basis.
This involves having access to a variety of drugs to deal with a range of
illnesses and means that a deal should involve as many different therapeutic
areas as possible.
The company held talks with 11 pharmaceutical companies last summer just
after the Merck-Medco deal. It said yesterday that it was still in talks
with at least two further potential partners.
Caremark already distributes drugs made by US biotechnology company
Genentech, the UK's Zeneca and Swiss drugs company Sandoz.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940414

