FT942-14334

FT  21 APR 94 / MPs to probe Credit Lyonnais


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


The finance committee of the French parliament yesterday unveiled proposals
for a cross-party investigation into the financial problems of Credit
Lyonnais, the heavily loss-making bank which last month was baled out by a
FFr44.9bn (Pounds 5.25bn) government-backed rescue.
The plan to create a team of 12 politicians to conduct a six-month inquiry
into Credit Lyonnais will be debated by parliament today. Mr Philippe
Seguin, president of the parliament, will lead the team. The appointment of
a man who is one of the bluntest members of the centre-right government has
been interpreted as an attempt to quash suspicions that the inquiry will be
toothless.
'Seguin is one of the few people tough enough to make sure there's a
thorough investigation,' said a senior financier. 'But there are so many
vested interests at stake here that it's hard to believe the inquiry won't
be a whitewash.'
However, the investigation could provide an unprecedented opportunity to
discover the truth behind the tangled story of Credit Lyonnais's problems
and to demystify the intricate relationship between the French government
and public sector companies.
Mr Jean Yves Haberer, who chaired Credit Lyonnais from 1988 until last year,
has been widely blamed for its problems. However, he has attempted to spread
the blame by claiming that many of his actions were the result of government
instructions.
Different areas of the French financial establishment are already attempting
to distance themselves from the scandal. The Bank of France last month
issued a statement exonerating Mr Jean-Claud Trichet, its chairman, from
responsibility for Credit Lyonnais in his old role as head of the Treasury.
Liberation newspaper recently published a leaked memorandum in which Mr
Michel Sapin, former socialist economy minister, warned Mr Haberer about the
bank's involvement with MGM, the stricken Hollywood film studio. Economy
ministry officials are expected to try to divert attention to the state
accounts office, which vets the finances of public sector companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940421

