FT942-15509

FT  14 APR 94 / Balladur pledge on labour reform


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


Prime Minister Edouard Balladur yesterday said he would not be deflected
from reforming the country's labour market and claimed that success in
halting the rise in French unemployment was 'within reach'.
Mr Balladur returned to the issue of labour reform for the first time since
his controversial measure to cut wages for short-term apprenticeships was
abandoned following angry mass street protests.
Speaking at a jobs conference organised by the Patronat employers'
federation, the prime minister delivered what he called 'a message of
encouragement and hope in the future'. He said the increase in job-seekers
in the past three months was only one-sixth of its level in spring 1993,
while the number of unfilled vacancies and apprenticeships was rising. He
appealed to employers and union leaders to make his employment law work.
Among other things, this provides for the two sides of industry to negotiate
shorter, but more flexible working hours than permitted under edicts dating
back to 1936-37 and which still govern much of French labour practice.
Mr Balladur yesterday faced an unemployment debate in the National Assembly
tabled by the Socialist opposition. Because of his slim parliamentary
majority, Mr Balladur was in danger of losing the censure motion. However,
disputes within the UDF on the unrelated issue of the forthcoming
Euro-elections played in favour of Mr Balladur.
The Republican party, which is the largest element in the UDF federation,
has been threatening to form a separate parliamentary group, out of pique at
not getting their man put at the head of the government Euro-election list.
In the end, they decided to stay in the UDF fold in the short term, but in a
swipe at the federation's leader, former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing,
said they would back 'a new candidate rather than candidates who have
already taken part in previous elections' in the 1995 presidential poll.
Support for Mr Balladur has fallen nine points since youth protests last
month, according to a poll yesterday.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

940414

