FT942-15983

FT  13 APR 94 / Forza Italia begins change from force to party


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


Forza Italia has begun to confront the problem of converting itself from a
movement backing Mr Silvio Berlusconi's political ambitions into a proper
political party, writes Robert Graham in Rome.
The full-time post of party secretary has been created to co-ordinate a
permanent five-strong secretariat. Mr Berlusconi will be chairman but the
principal organisational role is expected to be carried out by Mr Domenico
Mennitti, the new secretary.
A 54-year-old journalist and executive in Mr Berlusconi's Fininvest group,
Mr Mennitti is a former parliamentary deputy for the neo-fascist MSI who
defected to Forza Italia before the election. One of his first tasks will be
to carry out proper checks on the more than 13,000 Forza Italia clubs formed
over the past five months throughout Italy. This applies in particular to
the south.
Yesterday, Ms Tiziana Parenti, a former Milan investigative magistrate who
was elected as a Forza Italia deputy, warned that the clubs could be
infiltrated by the Mafia. She was speaking during a two-day conference of
newly-elected Forza Italia deputies preparing for the opening of parliament
on Friday.
The previous day Ms Parenti, a possible ministerial candidate, criticised Mr
Berlusconi for failing to act more quickly to separate Forza Italia as a
political movement from the organisational structure of his Fininvest
empire. Forza Italia was set up and run by executives on secondment from
Fininvest, mainly using the network of representatives of Publitalia, the
group's advertising arm.
'I regret that we have to have gentlemen from Publitalia running the next
political phases of our movement,' Ms Parenti said. At least 40 executives
are understood to have taken unpaid leave from Fininvest to help fight the
election.
In reply to this continued Fininvest linkage with Forza Italia, Mr
Berlusconi said his company executives must now decide whether they were to
devote themselves to politics or return to business. The names of the people
likely to form the five-strong secretariat are all Fininvest employees.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940413

