FT943-801

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (6): Flag-carriers in
a flutter - Competition among airlines is likely to intensify


   By PAUL BETTS


Even during the last four years of recession, European business travel has
continued to grow at an appreciable rate.
A recent study by British Airways, covering all European airlines, shows
that the number of passengers travelling by air for business reasons in
Europe rose by 15.5 per cent between 1989 and 1992, and is expected to
continue growing by 4.4 per cent this year and 5.5 per cent in 1996.
The International Air Transport Association (Iata), the Geneva-based
organisation grouping more than 200 airlines, also expects to see overall
European air passenger numbers increase from 394m this year to 653m by the
turn of the century, and as many as 1bn by 2010.
This growth in European air travel demand, which is likely to be further
stimulated by the emergence of the new markets of eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union, is expected to intensify competition in the European
airline market, with airlines already having to adapt to growing
liberalisation and new competing modes of transport, including high-speed
trains and the Channel Tunnel.
Liberalisation is gradually changing the structure of the European airline
industry. Under the European Union's three-stage liberal policy, European
governments are being forced to abandon the era of heavy regulation, which
protected national flag-carriers from the rigours of free-market
competition, and has kept many air fares, especially for business
travellers, artificially high.
The process of liberalisation has been slow and controversial. Under the
EU's third package of liberalisation measures, EU-registered airlines were
finally given last year much greater access to the overall European market
and greater pricing freedom.
In theory, the process of deregulation will be completed in April 1997, when
all EU airlines will be able to fly wherever they choose within the single
European market. In practice, it is unlikely that full European 'open skies'
will lead to a rush of new airline start-ups, the opening of new routes and
services and fierce price competition, which has been one of the
characteristics of airline deregulation in the US, the world's biggest
aviation market, during the past decade.
Many governments continue to be reluctant to give up sovereignty over their
airspace. The French government, for example, fought hard this year to try
to block the opening of Paris Orly airport to UK competition, to protect its
financially troubled flag-carrier, Air France.
The European Commission has also come under pressure from several
governments to approve large financial support packages and subsidies to
help their national carriers restructure themselves and prepare for the new
deregulated European airline market. Privatised airlines like British
Airways, and other carriers in the process of being privatised like
Lufthansa, have attacked these latest subsidies as threatening to distort
competition in the new liberalised market.
In July alone, the EC approved state aid totalling Dollars 7.1bn to three
airlines, including Air France, Olympic Airways of Greece and TAP of
Portugal. Since August 1991, the industry calculates that the Commission has
approved state aids to European airlines totalling Dollars 10.35bn.
Mr Robert Ayling, BA's group managing director, recently said Europe was
creating a two-class airline industry. The first involved airlines which had
to solve their problems on their own; the other included airlines which
continued to defy the laws of economics and were being protected by their
governments to the detriment of other airlines.
But despite continued obstacles in the way towards full 'open skies' in
Europe, liberalisation has started to bear fruits for the European consumer
and the business air traveller.
On busy routes now served by more than two airlines, like London-Paris or
London-Brussels, fares have fallen and service standards improved. Smaller
regional carriers have emerged and opened new services between regional
centres. The big carriers have also intensified their efforts to strengthen
their European networks and sought partnerships with smaller carriers,
either by investing in equity stakes or forging commercial and franchising
agreements with these airlines, to feed traffic into their increasingly
global operations.
BA, for example, has developed a string of partnerships with smaller
European carriers, including taking stakes in TAT in France and Deutsche BA
in Germany. Many flag-carriers are also setting up lower-cost subsidiaries
to serve domestic markets, to provide lower-cost air travel, reflecting
growing competition in their home markets as liberalisation starts to gather
momentum.
But the expected growth in air travel in a more competitive and liberalised
European airline market risks being seriously undermined unless governments
step up their efforts to address the urgent issue of congestion at a number
of big European airports, as well improving European air-traffic control.
The rising tide of airline traffic is bound to put even greater pressure on
Europe's existing air-traffic control system as well as its airports
infrastructure.
The introduction of a new generation of larger aircraft, being developed by
Boeing and Airbus, may help to ease the growing strains on Europe's air
transport infrastructure; but much more will have to be done to avoid a
repeat of the crisis that occurred a few summers ago, when Europe's air and
ground infrastructure simply could not cope with the volume of traffic.
Since that crisis, European governments have started to address the problem
of congestion by attempting to harmonise and modernise Europe's diverse
air-traffic control systems, and encourage more airport development and
expansion.
But Iata has already warned that additional efforts will be needed in
air-traffic control and airport facilities to cope with the expected growth
in European air travel. Unless there is a common political will to undertake
these big investments, the benefits of 'open skies' will be quickly eroded,
and Europe could face, in the not too distant future, chaos in its skies.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940927

