FT944-10901

FT  09 NOV 94 / Italy to provide initial Pounds 1bn aid for flood-hit north


   By ROBERT GRAHAM and ANDREW JACK


   ROME, PARIS


The Italian government declared a state of emergency in the north yesterday
and set aside L3,000bn (Pounds 1.18bn) in immediate aid to areas hit by the
country's worst floods this century.
The moves were intended to head off criticism of the authorities' slow
response to the floods that have led to the loss of at least 60 lives, left
more than 5,000 homeless and caused damage conservatively estimated at
L10,000bn.
Friday has been declared a day of national mourning.
The aid funds were agreed at an extraordinary cabinet meeting, and are only
an initial response. The government is expected to cover the costs in full
because few companies or individuals have adequate insurance.
The disaster comes as the 1995 budget targets have been undermined by higher
interest rates on Italy's debt, while trade unions want proposed public
spending cuts on pensions to be eased. The unions yesterday declined to call
off a demonstration in Rome on Saturday against the cuts.
Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the prime minister, has consistently opposed an
increase in taxes, but last night his coalition partners suggested that the
flood damage costs be covered through a special tax. The government has also
asked the European Union for financial help.
Opposition politicians hinted that they would mount further attacks on the
government's plans to introduce a pardon on building carried out without
proper permits. The pardon, a key source of revenue for 1995, is seen as
condoning widespread abuse of town and country planning regulations - abuse
which has contributed to the flooding problems.
The worst-affected areas are in Piedmont, where flooding has damaged
industrial plant, agricultural crops and livestock as well as the region's
infrastructure. A meeting of all the main agricultural organisations in
Piedmont yesterday estimated damage at L1,350bn.
However, the local association of small farmers said total damage could be
more than L3,000bn with the loss of autumn seed, land that could not be
planted until 1996 and the effect of flooding over 400,000ha.
The floods, caused by torrential rain on Friday and Saturday, were beginning
to recede yesterday. Many areas of Piedmont and parts of inland Liguria
lacked proper water supplies and electricity. About 5,000 police, fire
fighters and civil defence personnel and 7,000 volunteers were working in
the disaster zone. The death toll is still expected to rise, with more than
25 still missing.
Andrew Jack adds from Paris: French insurers yesterday said the total cost
of the floods in the south of the country at the end of last week could
exceed FFr500m (Pounds 59.5m).
Five people were reported to have died, four in Lozere and one in Corsica.
Another person was still reported missing in Aveyron after the flooding.
Weather, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941109

