FT942-14595

FT  20 APR 94 / Brussels heads for clash on Orly monopoly


   By GILLIAN TETT


   BRUSSELS


France appears to be heading into a new row with Britain and the European
Commission following a Commission report which says Air France is abusing
its monopoly position at Orly airport, Paris.
The report, after a seven-month investigation, says Air France's refusal to
let rival airlines such as TAT operate from Orly on routes to London,
Marseilles and Toulouse has broken community law on equal access to air
routes.
The European commissioners were due to adopt the report, which demands that
France open Orly to rival airlines, yesterday. But with France now lobbying
to block the report, indicating it will fight any attempt to force it to
open Orly, the commissioners yesterday stepped back from a decision, citing
lack of a voting quorum.
The Commission is now expected to adopt the report, next week. If France
refuses to comply, the Commission could take the case to the European Court
of Justice, which could fine the airline.
With the Commission also embroiled in a row over FFr20bn (Pounds 2.34bn)
state aid recently provided to Air France, officials admit the issue has
left the Commission in an increasingly sensitive political position,
reluctant to begin a full-blown fight.
'The French have threatened that they will simply not implement any
decision. . . they have said that they attach as much importance to this as
to Gatt,' claims one diplomat.
The battle centres over a complaint from TAT, the private French regional
airline, which is 49.9 per cent owned by British Airways, that Air France
has refused to provide slots at Orly on two routes - the lucrative
Paris-London route, where TAT could be a strong rival to Air France, and the
southern routes between Orly and Toulouse and Marseilles, currently the
third and fourth busiest routes in the European Union, where Air Inter, a
subsidiary of Air France, has a monopoly.
The Commission's report has largely accepted these complaints, concluding
that 'the French authorities. . . were wrong to refuse and to continue to
refuse TAT European Airlines permission to exercise traffic rights on the
Paris (Orly)-London route'.
The French government denies this breaks EU law, arguing that Orly is
saturated, and already allows Greek, Spanish and Portuguese carriers to
operate some services from the airport.
Faced with the political sensitivities, some sectors of the commission's
legal services are now arguing that the matter should be referred to the
European Court of Justice.
Any such 'soft' option is likely to provoke a furious response from the
British, who have stepped up lobbying in recent weeks, with Mr John
MacGregor, UK transport minister, personally pressing Mr Abel Matutes, the
outgoing EU transport commissioner, on the matter and seeking support from
the British commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940420

