FT942-16281

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (12): New incentives for
investment - Caribbean


   By CANUTE JAMES


Caribbean countries are seeking new ways to attract foreign economic
support, following the unenthusiastic response to their efforts to lure
private foreign investment.
With increasing uncertainty over the future of markets for traditional
commodity exports, and growing reliance on fickle tourism, several
governments have radically reshaped their economic policies, implementing
wholesale deregulation, opening their markets, removing exchange controls
and floating their currencies.
Regional economists say that the response by foreign investors to these
steps has been disappointing, especially for the governments of the
Dominican Republic, Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. Flows from
traditional sources in North America and Europe have been diverted to more
attractive places, including eastern Europe, the far East and Mexico, say
regional economists.
While the economies of some Caribbean countries recorded fair levels of
growth last year, the performance of most was disappointing. In reviewing
the performance of regional economies in 1993, the Caribbean Development
Bank said that growth of between 7.5 per cent and 3.5 per cent in gross
domestic product was recorded by several countries, including Guyana, the
Cayman Islands and Belize. Lower than expected earnings from banana exports
led to low growth in the Windward islands of Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia and
St Vincent.
Jamaica recorded low growth because of marginal expansion in bauxite and
agricultural commodities, while Trinidad and Tobago's economy contracted
because of the weak state of the international market for oil, the country's
main export. The National Planning Office of the Dominican Republic said
that the economy grew last year by 2.7 per cent.
The prospects for improvement in the short term depend on the performance of
the industrialised economies, mainly the US, the region's main trading
partner, and the European Union.
Government planners and economists say that if the signs of improvement in
some OECD economies can be translated into sustainable growth, this will
help to lift Caribbean economies out of their lassitude.
In the meantime, several governments are hoping that their move towards
economic deregulation, including the divestment of a range of state
enterprises, will increase investment flows. Power companies, hotels,
telecommunications firms and airlines are being offered for sale to foreign
and local investors.
The divestment has given a fillip to regional stock exchanges, mainly in
Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. Coinciding with the opening of
regional economies, this has stimulated the development of the financial
markets. Foreign and local investors are becoming increasingly involved in
the flotation of issues and the underwriting of privatisation issues. Unit
trusts are increasingly attractive.
There remain, however, some obstacles to the expansion of capital markets in
the region. In Jamaica the bond market has been killed by inflation which
was 30 per cent last year. The bond market is lively in Trinidad and Tobago,
where inflation last year was 4 per cent, and this helped to take up the
slack in the equity market.
The market for equities in the region is underdeveloped. While some private
issues are favourably received, many companies are highly geared, continuing
to finance their operations through debt rather than equity. The capital
markets in the region are dominated either by short-term, attractively
priced government paper, on the one hand, and instruments which are held as
longer term investments, with their owners unwilling to trade. This is
compounded by the absence of a secondary market in most countries in the
region.
Opportunities for investing in the Caribbean will improve later this year
with the establishment of a Dollars 50m investment fund for the 13 members
of the Caribbean Community (Caricom). The fund's investments are expected to
include equities in all Caricom member countries, with a portfolio which
will cover listed and unlisted stocks, including unquoted companies wanting
funds for expansion and likely to be listed on the stock market.
It will undertake equity investments in sectors such as export and domestic
agriculture, tourism, construction, utilities, financial services and real
estate development, but with more attention to those undertakings involved
in exporting to hard currency markets.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940411

