FT942-15398

FT  15 APR 94 / People: Turner to manage UES Holdings


UES Holdings, the Rotherham-based engineering steels and forgings company,
has strengthened its top management by appointing Don Turner to the key post
of managing director of the UES Steels division.
With effect from July 1, Turner replaces David Stone, who will become
managing director of UES Holdings' subsidiaries division, which has
interests in bright bar - a shiny steel used in the automotive and other
industries - stockholding and metal reclamation.
Stone will also directly assist Don Ford, UES Holdings' chairman, on matters
such as relationships in Europe and US trade issues.
Ford said Stone would be retiring in two to three years, but stressed: 'I am
not moving him aside, but planning the succession in a managed way.'
The changes come only seven months after UES restructured the company,
eliminating the post of chief executive and giving greater autonomy to its
three operating divisions. As a consequence, chief executive Graham
Mackenzie left the company.
The shake-up was engineered by UES' two owners, British Steel and GKN, and
Turner's appointment was carried out with the full approval of the two
shareholders. The final selection was left to Ford, however.
Turner, 54, has been managing director of British Steel's tinplate division
since 1992, but will be on familiar ground in Rotherham as he previously ran
British Steel's narrow strip business, based around the Brinsworth strip
mill in the Yorkshire town.
UES Steels has been hit badly by rising scrap prices, reduced selling
prices, and what it sees as unfair subsidies in Europe.
Last year UES Holdings lost a record Pounds 48.1m, but according to Ford
this year's loss will be much lower. GKN has made clear it would sell its
39.1 per cent stake if an opportunity arose.
At British Steel Tinplate, Turner will be replaced by Tony Vickers,
currently technical director at British Steel's strip products business.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940415

