FT942-12855

FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Hong Kong (12): Futures exchange shifts to new era
 -The colony is emerging as the Pacific Rim's biggest derivatives market


   By LOUISE LUCAS


By the end of this year the colony's Futures Exchange expects to see a
return to the volumes of business witnessed in the pre-crash era. It has
already - last October - paid off the special HKDollars 1.93bn 'lifeboat'
loan which saved it from bankruptcy in October 1987. It is making a profit.
Finally, and with a lot of hard work, it is shifting into a new era: one
where it will be defined, not by history, but by its future.
Mr Ivers Riley, who took over from Mr Gary Knight as chief executive of the
exchange on January 5 of this year, admits he timed his move to Hong Kong
perfectly. He has inherited a mechanism that is no longer vulnerable, and
can concentrate on enhancing the products offered and staking Hong Kong's
claim as the major derivatives market in the Pacific Rim.
Already traders have access to a raft of hedging tools introduced over the
past 18 months: Hang Seng Index options with 56 separate contracts for
trading, a welter of warrants which now command a total capitalisation of
HKDollars 60.6bn and - as of January - regulated short selling.
The field is heavily oriented towards equities. Daily turnover of HSI
futures last month surged through 30,928 lots - the highest post-crash level
 -in the face of massive volatility on both the cash market and the futures
market. The HSI Futures has stayed at a ratio of 2.5 to 3.5 times that of
the cash market in terms of dollars traded.
HSI options started trading in March 1993 and daily volumes a year later
were averaging around 2,255 lots. More market making power is still required
to handle liquidity: even so, in the four months since Mr Riley has been in
office the proportion of futures trade in options has risen to 13 per cent
from 10 per cent and the aim is to bring it closer to 25 per cent over the
next few months.
It is all a far cry from the disastrous handling of the 1987 crash, which
ensured the Hong Kong Futures Exchange a place in history and cost it dearly
in terms of international credibility.
Speculation in the HSI futures mounted in the 10-month run-up to the crash,
and the contract became the world's second most traded stock market future.
When the crash came, losses were huge and exacerbated by the closure of the
Hong Kong stock exchange for four days. Brokers defaulted to the tune of
HKDollars 1.8bn, but only HKDollars 22m was in the guarantee fund.
But now, with a return of confidence and liquidity - arguably two sides of
the same coin - the exchange is ready to move forward on plans for expansion
and development. As it does so, it is tapping into a major appetite for
derivative products in the region.
Mr Sunimal Goonetillake, head of derivatives marketing at Peregrine
Brokerage, attributes the demand for derivatives to the volatile nature of
the markets and the levels of foreign interest in Hong Kong and Asian
markets generally. Additionally, derivatives are being used by investors to
access markets which are otherwise semi-closed to foreigners, such as Korea,
the Philippines and India.
'Asia's markets are incredibly exciting. Most people believe there is strong
earnings potential for companies based in Asia and wherever there's an
exciting story, derivatives and the leverage they can give are attractive to
a whole host of investors, both domestic and foreign.
'In Hong Kong, all this is still true but you can double it. China is the
biggest emerging market, and Hong Kong is the way to it. Everything about
Asia applies in an extreme sense to Hong Kong,' he says.
The volatility which ripped through stocks and derivatives alike in the
early part of the year has slowed somewhat on the Futures Exchange, although
volatility on options remains high - encouraging investors to use options
contracts to hedge against losses on the stock market and in turn leading
companies to engage in index arbitrage.
Volatility is one of the biggest differences Mr Riley noted on taking up his
post in Hong Kong, after a career spent on US exchanges: 'I'm used to
implied volatility of 15-16 per cent at its highs, and here implied
volatilities are going north of 50 per cent,' he says.
Complementing futures and options, there are now some 300 warrants traded on
the Hong Kong stock exchange; this compares with 496 listed companies. A
recent flurry among securities houses saw a spate of issues earlier in the
year, mostly of blue chips.
Warrants remain highly popular with retail investors, despite soaring
premiums. Institutions, which tend to take up warrant issues for leverage or
cash extraction, gradually sell down into the hands of small investors who
view them as speculative tools and a cheaper entry into the underlying
stock.
After taking a severe battering when the market came down, warrants are
again looking expensive thanks to the retail investors' attitude of buying
for what Mr James Vinall, who handles equity derivative sales for SBC
Derivatives (Far East), calls 'pure and unadulterated speculation' with
scant regard to the technicals.
As an example, he says the Swiss Bank warrant on Hongkong Telecom was
trading at a 60 per cent premium at one stage, suggesting that the colony's
appetite for warrants owes less than it might to fundamentals.
Investment banks - especially the US houses - have been quick to take
advantage of the derivatives markets, initially on the Futures Exchange. As
of last year, many of these banks have been trading on the OTC market, too.
Mr Vinall says an early interest in indexes has now extended to OTCs on
individual stocks. This market remains the preserve of the institutions,
OTCs being private agreements between separate financial institutions.
The US and French houses - plus those banks which have staffed themselves up
with American options specialists - have tended to dominate this market to
date, largely because of the depth of their options technology. Big players
include Merrill Lynch, Salomons, Morgan Stanley, Bankers Trust, SBCI and
Credit Lyonnais.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940427

