FT942-16235

FT  12 APR 94 / Rift grows over UN action: Russia insists that it should
have been consulted over air strikes


   By LEYLA BOULTON and BRUCE CLARK


At the heart of one of the biggest diplomatic rifts between Russia and the
west since the end of the cold war lies the question of how much power Mr
Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general, has to act on his own.
Western governments insist legal and diplomatic procedures were followed to
the letter before Nato's air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs.
The decision to recommend air attacks was taken by the UN commander in
Bosnia, General Sir Michael Rose, who says he issued repeated warnings to
the Serbs before making a move. He passed on his proposal to Mr Yasushi
Akashi, the Japanese diplomat who has been given wide-ranging authority as
the secretary-general's representative in Bosnia.
Mr Akashi, after consultations with his boss in New York, then made a formal
request for support to Nato, which has been mandated by Mr Boutros Ghali to
give air support for the international peacekeeping effort in Bosnia.
President Yeltsin maintains that Russia, a permanent member of the Security
Council, ought to have been consulted.
Western governments, in justification of the air raids, have cited Security
Council Resolution 836, which allows member states or regional organisations
to protect UN forces in Yugoslavia with 'all necessary measures, including
air power'. It specifies that these protective measures must be taken 'under
the authority of the Security Council and subject to close co-ordination
with the secretary-general and Unprofor (the UN force in former
Yugoslavia)'. This wording would not suggest Mr Boutros Ghali requires any
fresh, explicit mandate to order air strikes; but Russia can still argue
that the secretary-general has a standing obligation to consult the Security
Council's permanent members.
While the bombings will strengthen anti-western feeling in the state Duma
(parliament), it was significant that the Russian Foreign Ministry focused
on the need to continue peace efforts and stop the western military being
sucked further into the conflict.
'Things went terribly wrong in Goradze,' said Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian
negotiator in Yugoslavia. 'We are very much concerned. . . that we may be on
a slippery slope in terms of international involvement in the fighting. We
will be trying to do everything we can in order to prevent situations where
such actions could even be contemplated.'
Mr Vyacheslav Nikonov, chairman of the Duma's subcommittee on international
security, appeared to echo the view of Russian foreign policy makers when he
deplored the fact that Russia had not been consulted but hoped that
relations with the west would not be damaged as a result.
'My first feeling was one of disappointment because for several weeks we had
hoped that the peace process was moving ahead and I think the strikes will
now interfere with this process,' said Mr Nikonov, whose Russian Unity and
Accord party is less nationalistic than the communists and far right who
dominate parliament. The strikes would not only produce predictable 'fury'
in the Duma but would 'also add to some tensions between Russia and the
west'.
A first test of the longer-term impact on foreign policy will be whether
Russia still signs up with Nato's partnership for peace programme later this
month as planned. Mr Nikonov said that although opposition to the programme
would only strengthen in the Duma, the way the air strikes had been carried
out, without consulting Russia, only underlined the need for closer military
co-operation.
Part of Russia's grievance lies in the fact that western governments have
two separate inputs into Bosnian policy. The US, Britain and France are
makers of UN policy as permanent members of the Security Council, and
executors of that policy as participants of Nato - which has been invited by
the secretary-general to play the role of 'regional organisation', as
referred to in Resolution 836.
For the western governments, there was was no danger of Mr Boutros Ghali
acting 'behind their backs' - because it was their firepower on which he was
relying.
In practice there is no other organisation besides Nato with the military
clout, and above all the co-ordinated structure, to police the skies of
Bosnia. But its role leaves Russia out in the cold, and acts as a red rag to
nationalist bulls.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940412

