FT942-14265

FT  21 APR 94 / Minister hopeful on Malaysian ban


   By KIERAN COOKE


   KUALA LUMPUR


British officials say considerable progress has been made towards lifting
Malaysia's ban on giving government contracts to British companies. They
believe it will be some time, however, before trade relations between the
two countries return to normal.
Lord Cranbourne, the junior defence minister, has been in Kuala Lumpur for
talks with Mr Najib Abdul Razak, the Malaysian defence minister. 'I have had
some very constructive negotiations,' Lord Cranbourne said. 'I don't want to
get into details of how the matter is going to be resolved. It is a matter
of some delicacy, but we hope an accommodation will be made before too
long.'
Mr Najib said the ban 'could not be lifted overnight'.
Malaysia announced the ban in February in retaliation for unfavourable
British press reports about Malaysia and its prime minister, Dr Mahathir
Mohamad.
British companies say the UK could lose millions of pounds worth of
contracts if the ban continues.
Since a memorandum of understanding on defence sales was signed between
Malaysia and Britain in 1988, British defence companies have sold Pounds
1.3bn of equipment to Malaysia, including 28 British Aerospace Hawk aircraft
and two frigates.
More than 60 British defence companies are attending a defence exhibition
this week in Kuala Lumpur.
UK companies have been told that they are not being considered in
pre-qualification applications to bid for construction of a Pounds 2.5bn
international airport outside Kuala Lumpur. They are also likely to lose
contracts in Malaysia's fast-expanding power sector.
Dr Mahathir has said the ban will remain until the British press 'stops
telling lies'. He wants an apology from The Sunday Times for publishing a
story suggesting that a British company offered him bribes in exchange for a
government contract.
'Much nonsense has been talked about Malaysia in the British press,' said
Lord Cranbourne. 'We must not let the press come between old friends.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940421

