FT942-15491

FT  15 APR 94 / Italian allies agree choice of speakers: Northern League
insists on 31-year-old former student activist 'to breathe new life into
parliament'


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


The three main parties of Italy's Freedom Alliance yesterday buried their
differences over the choice of speakers for the two houses of parliament and
agreed on compromise candidates.
The agreement paves the way for a smooth opening of Italy's 12th postwar
legislature today and early election of the speakers of the senate and
chamber of deputies. This is the first constitutional step towards forming a
new government, which is likely to be headed by media magnate Mr Silvio
Berlusconi.
The Alliance parties - Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia, the populist Northern
League and the neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance - have been squabbling for
four days over who should fill these two key institutional posts. The most
difficult has been that of the senate, where the Alliance is six seats short
of a majority and whose speaker deputises for the president of the republic.
Yesterday, the three parties agreed to propose Mr Carlo Scognamiglio, an
economist and former rector of the private Rome university, Luiss. Mr
Scognamiglio was a Liberal senator who transferred to Forza Italia.
His good contacts with the Rome establishment are considered likely to
attract some cross-party support to help the Alliance majority. He is also
well connected to the business world through his second wife, the daughter
of Susanna Agnelli (sister of Fiat boss Giovanni) and his current companion,
Cecilia Pirelli, daughter of Leopoldo Pirelli, the former head of the family
tyre and cables group.
The agreement on Mr Scognamiglio, 49, who studied at the London School of
Economics, was made possible by the withdrawal of the League candidate, Mr
Francesco Speroni. The League, as the party with the most parliamentarians
in the Alliance, had insisted on one of its own being the senate speaker. By
persuading him to stand down, Mr Berlusconi has been able to demonstrate he
is not going to be dictated to by the League with its strong federalist
aims.
But as a sop, the Alliance agreed to accept a League deputy to act as
speaker of the chamber. They chose to propose Ms Irene Pivetti, 31, a former
Catholic student activist and League deputy for Monza in the previous
legislature.
Never before has such a young and inexperienced person been proposed for
this key moderating post in the chamber; but the Alliance wanted to signal
their desire to breathe new life into a discredited parliament.
Commenting on the proposal to nominate Ms Pivetti, Mr Massimo Scalia, a
Green spokesman, said: 'We Romans are long used to being tolerant. Since
Caligula proposed a horse to be senator we are not surprised by anything.'
Today, as the new parliament convenes, the immunity of the members of the
11th legislature is finally removed. This means that 26 members risk
immediate arrest, the most prominent being Mr Giulio De Donato, the former
Socialist minister, whom Naples magistrates have been seeking to arrest on a
string of corruption charges for several months.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940415

