FT943-12805

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Slumbering Lac Minerals receives
a wake-up call - The gold producer is fighting a bid


   By BERNARD SIMON


Lac Minerals has for many years been near the top of mining analysts' list
of companies in need of a wake-up call.
Its board of directors is heavily tilted towards retirees and professional
men. Its executive chairman, Mr Peter Allen, has an imperious style which
has won few friends in the investment community.
That loud call came on July 7 when Lac, the Toronto-based gold and
base-metals producer which has been widely criticised for tardiness, became
the target of a bid.
An audacious USDollars 1.4bn takeover offer was launched by Royal Oak Mines,
the Vancouver-based gold producer whose pugnacity makes it the antithesis to
Lac.
By the time Lac delivered its response early this week, the directors had
tripled their estimate of its gold reserves and given the go-ahead to invest
Dollars 600m over the next three years in new projects.
Mr Jim Pitblado, a non-executive director and retired head of Canada's
biggest securities dealer, said the board had 'complete confidence' in Lac's
management.
However, he acknowledged that 'there's a feeling that we should be telling
our story a little more firmly and a little more aggressively in the market
place'.
Royal Oak, with projected 1994 gold output of 375,000 ounces, is only about
one-third Lac's size.
Its four low-grade mines in Canada are minnows compared with the Lac empire,
which stretches across the US, Canada and Chile. As the bid for Lac shows,
Royal Oak seldom backs away from a scrap.
Ms Peggy Witte, its tenacious president, is a US-born mining engineer with a
reputation for putting crippled mines back on their feet by cutting costs to
the bone.
She kept the Giant Yellowknife mine in the Northwest Territories running for
a year during one of the most bitter and violent strikes in Canadian mining
history.
Although Ms Witte can take credit for rousing Lac from its slumber, Royal
Oak remains a long-shot to win the takeover battle.
'You've got to be out of your tree to accept the Royal Oak offer,' says Mr
Peter Miller, analyst at Yorkton Securities in London. Almost three-quarters
of the bid comprises Royal Oak shares, which Mr Pitblado dismissed as 'paper
of questionable value'.
Much of the Dollars 40m-Dollars 50m a year in cost savings which Ms Witte
claims she can squeeze out of Lac would be offset by interest charges on the
Dollars 700m in long-term debt which Royal Oak would take on to finance its
bid and augment working capital.
The combined company's earnings could be wiped out for years by the
amortisation of almost Dollars 1bn in goodwill, which under Canadian
accounting rules would not qualify as a tax deduction.
The chances of the combined company paying a dividend in the near future
without a large increase in the gold price, are nil.
The increased reserves and new projects announced by Lac this week -
assuming they come to fruition - raise further questions about the value of
Royal Oak's offer.
Estimates of proven and possible reserves have been lifted from 8.6m to
13.5m ounces, plus 'additional geological resources' of 13.5m ounces. The
increases come largely from exploration projects at two properties in
northern Chile, Red Mountain in British Columbia, and from mines in Ontario
and the US.
In the past 10 days, Lac's board has approved construction of a Dollars 110m
mine at Red Mountain with an expected annual output of 225,000 ounces a year
from the end of 1996.
It has given the go-ahead for the Dollars 168m La Nevada mine in Chile,
whose target production is 200,000 ounces a year. A new vein, with estimated
reserves of 1m ounces, has been discovered at the El Indio mine in Chile.
Lac has stepped up exploration outside North America over the past year or
so, concentrating on Australasia, Sweden and Niger.
The Royal Oak bid, which expires on August 9, is unlikely to be the last
word in the Lac story. Royal Oak said this week it was highly sceptical of
the sudden increase in Lac's gold reserves. 'Royal Oak has always
acknowledged Lac's world-class assets, but it has questioned Lac's
management of those assets,' Ms Witte said.
Lac's shares are widely held, mainly by North American institutions.
Several shareholders have stepped up the pressure by tentatively depositing
their shares with Royal Oak. But most observers expect a better offer to
materialise. A Canadian analyst came away from a Lac briefing in Toronto
last Monday with the firm impression that the company was for sale.
Mr Pitblado confirmed that Lac's financial advisers were exploring other
strategic options. He declined to be more specific, nor to say whether Lac
was likely to survive in its present form.
Several other gold producers may be interested in Lac, and be more
acceptable to its management and shareholders than Royal Oak.
At the top of Mr Miller's list is Cambior, the Montreal-based gold producer
whose properties in Quebec and Latin America would make a good fit with Lac.
Other possible candidates within North America include American Barrick,
Battle Mountain, Amax Gold and Pegassus Gold. South African mining houses
eager to expand abroad may take a serious look.
The betting in the investment community is that if Lac doesn't survive in
its present form, nor will some of its directors and managers.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940722

