FT941-3600

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (5): Diversity in the Pacific
Rim - Harmonisation of standards seems a long way off / Accounting systems


   By ANDREW JACK


Financial reporting in the West Pacific Rim
Edited by TE Cooke and RH Parker Routledge,
Pounds 50
450 pages
Accounting and Society
by RW Perks
Chapman & Hall, Pounds 15.99
213 pages
The enormous post-war growth of the economies of the Far East has brought
about corresponding, but little discussed, changes in financial reporting
practices in the region.
It should also have increased the importance of considering the impact of
these practices, which is why Financial Reporting in the West Pacific Rim is
a useful addition to the literature.
We learn that Japan only adopted double-entry bookkeeping in the 1870s; and
that the Philippines still has an underdeveloped stock market, because the
system was introduced by its US colonisers but has not taken off because of
the closely-held nature of companies.
It seems there are as many ways of classifying accounting systems in the
region as there are authors, including one which divides the countries into
'Anglo', 'Commonwealth' and 'Cloud-pine'.
The editors see little evidence of efforts to harmonise standards, and there
is still a wide diversity. They should be congratulated for managing to find
some authors for the book who are from the countries about which they write.
It is a shame they were apparently unable to find a contributor who could
have written for them on Indonesia. More disappointing is that they decided
against sections on the more exotic financial reporting regimes in countries
such as China, Cambodia and Vietnam.
On a different tack, it is welcome to find a book on accounting that takes a
broader view of the sector than purely technical texts.
Accounting and Society, by Bob Perks, a professor at Birkbeck College of the
University of London, makes some controversial points in a skim across the
realms of the sociology of the subject.
He argues that accountants are under commercial pressures, and suggests that
their energies are focused on maintaining the appearance rather than
necessarily the practice of independence. He quotes one writer who remembers
being told by a senior partner at his firm: 'You can do anything with our
clients but don't lose them.'
He says there should be a 'Campaign for Independent Auditors' to counter
this problem, although he fails to analyse why no such initiative has
emerged.
Even more controversially, he suggests auditors can be seen as supporting
'criminal' activities, such as increasing management's income and the value
of their shareholdings at the expense of third parties.
Perks makes a case for greater social reporting, a movement which had its
heyday in the 1970s, and argues that there should be extremely wide access
to corporate information, except for sensitive personal data on individual
employees. He neglects to discuss the issues of commercial confidentiality.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940315

