FT943-991

FT  27 SEP 94 / Settlers prepare for Golan fight to the last: David Horovitz
visits the site of most Israeli resistance to a deal to return the occupied
Heights to Syria


   By DAVID HOROVITZ


It's a bad pun, but it seems to be working. 'The keys to the Golan are in
your hands,' shouts the moustachioed salesman, proffering a cheap key-ring
bearing a map of the Golan Heights on one side and the slogan 'Peace with
the Golan' on the other.
At 10 shekels (more than Pounds 2) a time, the profit margin is healthy. And
there's no shortage of customers. Well over 100,000 Israelis have sauntered
past the key-ring vendor in the past fortnight, along the dusty track that
leads to the awning where a dozen Golan Heights activists are on hunger
strike.
Stirred into action by a flurry of reports that Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime
minister, is ready to give up the Heights in return for a peace deal with
Syria, the hunger-strikers are becoming unlikely national celebrities, and
their hilltop headquarters is an essential stop-off for all those who
consider the mountainous Golan ridge essential to Israel's defence.
Until recently, Mr Rabin was of that opinion himself. Indeed, one of the
most powerful propaganda weapons in the pro-Golan campaigners' armoury is a
videotape of the prime minister at the height of his pre-election oratory
two years ago, declaiming earnestly that 'It is inconceivable, even at a
time of peace, to come down from the Golan.' Recorded on a self-rewinding
tape, the prime minister's stirring words boom out across the Gamla site,
hour after hour, day after day, from a television on a mobile stand across
the path from the key-ring salesman.
It was none other than Yitzhak Rabin who, as chief of staff, presided over
the capture of the Golan in the 1967 Arab-Israel war and who later, as prime
minister in the 1970s, encouraged many of the Golan's 13,000 Jews to move
here. And it was none other than Syria's President Hafiz Assad, then his
country's inexperienced defence minister, who relinquished the Heights.
Now Mr Assad is apparently prepared to make peace with his enemies in return
for the precious land. While Mr Rabin is saying nothing, Mr Shimon Peres,
his foreign minister, has as always put the cards on the table.
'Complete peace is more important to Israel's security than the entire
Golan,' Mr Peres said at the weekend.
Mr Sammy Bar-Lev, the mayor of the Golan's main Jewish town, Katzrin, and
one of the hunger-strikers, is disgusted by the turnaround. 'They've always
said Rabin couldn't take the pressure. Now here's your proof. Peres and the
Americans have bludgeoned him into a deal. And he's capitulated.'
Hardly plump at the best of times, Mr Bar-Lev looks almost emaciated,
subsisting with his 11 colleagues on a diet of water and salt tablets,
camped out on a hilltop in vicious heat that three electric fans are doing
little to ameliorate. On Sunday, he collapsed and was hospitalised but
continues to refuse food.
He says they have a clear aim and will fast for weeks if necessary to
achieve it: blocking parliamentary approval for a Golan land-for-peace
accord, by persuading several hawkish members of Mr Rabin's own Labour party
of the validity of their cause.
Mere Knesset (parliament) approval, however, will not be enough. Having
delivered that pre-election pledge, Mr Rabin recognises that he has no real
mandate for a full withdrawal. So he has promised to hold a national
referendum on the issue. And it is here that the Gamla protesters may have
their most profound impact.
Opinion polls suggest that fewer than 50 per cent of Israelis favour even a
partial pull-out. The visitors to Gamla - fed the legendary account of how a
few thousand Jews defied the Romans for years at this very site, before
jumping to their deaths from a jagged hilltop - are having that anti-
withdrawal sentiment reinforced.
In marked contrast to the noisy, but ill-supported campaigners against the
autonomy deal with the PLO in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, the
tens of thousands of Gamla pilgrims are neither overwhelmingly religious nor
right-wing.
Indeed, some of the strikers and many of their supporters are card-carrying
members of the Labour Party. 'Rabin isn't with us any more,' says Yehuda
Harel, a veteran Labour man who is one of those fasting, 'but the Labour
movement is. There is no other Labour movement.'
In truth, many in Labour are hesistant about leaving the Golan. But if Mr
Assad were to make a Sadat-style trip to Jerusalem and declare a genuine
desire for peace, a healthy proportion in Mr Rabin's party and among the
electorate at large would probably put their doubts aside. With that in
mind, Mr Bar-Lev argues that the referendum should be held immediately -
that it is 'immoral' for Mr Rabin to promise an eventual vote 'when the deal
is all wrapped up'.
'He'll play it so that to vote against the deal will seem like voting for
war. It's unethical. It's not right.'
But it is good politics. And it could well mean that, for all the thousands
of supporters patting Mr Bar-Lev gently on the back and shaking their heads
at Mr Rabin's empty videotaped Golan rhetoric, the resistance at Gamla is
destined to fail again.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940927

