FT941-17157

FT  06 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Asia to be focusfor investment - Strong
yen spurs shift to offshore production


   By DAVID DODWELL


Strong Japanese interest in investing in China, south-east Asia and the
fast-growing Asian 'tiger' economies is forecast to revive the country's
foreign investment flows by 1995, according to a survey by Japan's
Export-Import Bank.
The revival is being driven by companies in the electronics, chemicals and
motor vehicle sectors, the survey reveals. The strong yen, which has raised
the cost of domestic production, has spurred many companies to make plans to
shift production off-shore.
The survey, conducted by Jexim's Research Institute of Overseas Investment,
covered over 330 companies. It showed that foreign direct investment in the
manufacturing sector had fallen sharply since recession struck in 1990 and
was likely to continue falling this year before turning up in 1995.
Actual foreign direct investment by the 222 companies giving full details
for 1992 and 1993 showed a 25 per cent fall, from an aggregate of Y985bn to
Y736bn. Jexim predicts a more modest 6.4 per cent fall in 1994 based on
estimates received in its latest survey companies.
For the first time in five years, the survey revealed an increase in the
number of companies admitting they have plans to invest overseas during the
coming three years. From 1989, when almost 84 per cent of companies had such
plans, the 'bursting of the bubble economy' swept this total down to 54 per
cent.
In the latest survey, just over 59 per cent of companies said they had
medium-term foreign investment plans.
While the recovery in foreign investment brings Japan nowhere near the boom
years of the second half of the 1980s, Jexim points to different reasons for
the revival - and different target destinations, mainly in Asia.
Most striking of all is the focus on China. Almost 92 per cent of companies
have plans to invest in China over the next three years.
A total of 150 Japanese companies named China in their top five investment
destinations, compared with just 65 for the US, 63 for Indonesia, 51 for
Vietnam, and 49 for Thailand. Just 18 companies named the UK and Germany in
their top five destinations.
The main force behind this renewed strength appears to be the positive
investment intentions of companies in the vehicle and electric/electronic
industries in such countries as China, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and the
Asean countries. The survey says: 'Their motives are to seize export bases
for their products to be sold in foreign markets including Japan -
undoubtedly spurred by the abrupt appreciation of the yen in the first half
of 1993.'
More than 70 per cent of companies in the electrical machinery sector now
plan to raise foreign investment, compared with just 36 per cent a year
earlier. Over 73 per cent of motor manufacturers have similar plans,
compared with 52 per cent at the end of 1992.
By contrast, none of Japan's big five iron and steel manufacturers have
medium-term foreign investment plans - a clear reflection of chronic global
oversupply.
'Investment to advanced countries is suffering the dampening effects of the
declines in sales and profits, as well as the acute cost increases of parts
imported from Japan,' says the survey.
'Companies may well have to adopt short- to mid-term investment programmes
to expand sales bases and increase local content.'
* The Outlook of Japanese Foreign Direct Investment: Exim Japan 1993 survey.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940106

