FT942-15728

FT  14 APR 94 / Japan yields in tax row with US


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO


US and Japanese tax authorities have agreed that Japan should reimburse AIU,
the US insurance company, a proportion of back taxes collected under Japan's
transfer pricing tax rules, according to AIU.
The agreement represents a significant blow to the efforts of Japan's tax
authorities to win penalty taxes from foreign groups which they believe have
transferred overseas profits made in Japan.
It also underlines the difficulty governments face in trying to determine
how to tax a foreign company engaged in cross-border transactions.
Japan's National Tax Administration levied back taxes of about Y9bn (Pounds
59m) on AIU, which the company's branch in Japan paid in 1991. The demand
was prompted by concern that AIU's Japan branch had paid an excessively
large amount of reinsurance fees to overseas insurers and received less
commission than would have been expected. As a result, it was thought that
profits which AIU had made in Japan were transferred overseas.
AIU disagreed and asked the National Tax Administration to discuss the case
with the US Internal Revenue Service. The US company was also slapped with
about Y2bn in back taxes by the Tokyo Taxation Bureau in 1990, a move which
is also likely to be discussed by Japanese and US authorities.
The transfer pricing tax system is not intended to penalise companies for
avoiding tax payment, AIU said in a statement. The focus of the talks was
how much tax AIU should pay the Japanese government and how much it should
pay the US government, it said.
In line with a growing international trend, Japan has used its transfer tax
pricing system introduced in 1986 to try to get foreign companies to pay
taxes on what the authorities consider profits made in Japan.
Last month, the Tokyo tax authorities levied a Y15bn penalty on Coca-Cola,
which it believes transferred around Y36bn of profits to the US by paying
its parent company excessive royalties. Coca-Cola said it would seek
bilateral government talks on the issue.
'It is easy for corporations operating internationally to decide where to
pay their taxes,' says Mr Mitsuru Komiyama, an accountant familiar with
international tax rules. Disagreement has to do with which country gets to
claim tax revenues from multinationals and the outcome is often determined
by a political settlement, he says.
The US has been aggressive in applying transfer pricing tax against Japanese
companies. For its part, Japan has applied penalty taxes under the system 50
times since 1986 but in only five cases has the penalty been cut through
government-to-government negotiations.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940414

