FT944-5842

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Capital Markets: Uphill struggle to drum up
interest in property - Derivatives


   By SIMON LONDON


At first glance it is difficult to see why derivative financial products
based on a property index have never captured the attention of investors.
Property is the most illiquid institutional asset class. As a result,
investors find it difficult to make tactical asset allocations into property
at the right point in the economic cycle.
At the start of this year, for example, institutional investors were eager
to buy UK property. Yet many could not find suitable investments.
Property index-linked bonds or futures would, in theory, solve these
problems and allow institutions to gain quick exposure to property.
Owning and managing a building is also far more complex than owning an
equity or a bond.
Property company shares are are no answer because there is little
correlation between the performance of the quoted property sector and the
performance of the underlying property market.
Index derivatives might offer smaller investment institutions a way of
including property in their investment portfolios without the hassle of
owning buildings.
Yet the recent history of property derivatives is not encouraging. In 1991,
the London Futures and Options Exchange (Fox) admitted that its property
futures contract was manipulated to inflate trading volume.
In practice it seems that investment institutions are not that interested in
such products.
The failure of the Fox futures contract was all the more worrying because it
was at least based on a widely recognised property index.
The Investment Property Databank index is based on valuation data provided
by investment institutions and covers about 75 per cent of all UK investment
property.
Many other countries are years away from having a similarly robust index,
although IPD is now working with Dutch investors to that end.
However, the experience of Fox suggests that the conservatism of
institutions is a big hurdle to the creation of a liquid market even where a
reliable property index is available.
A survey of UK institutional investors by Jones Lang Wootton, the surveyors,
found that only 22 per cent were actively interested in new innovations in
property derivatives.
A further 20 per cent said they would use property derivatives, but only
once the market has become established.
Disappointingly, 43 per cent of the respondents would only participate
selectively even in an established market, and 15 per cent were generally
not interested at all in such instruments.
The findings show why drumming up interest in property derivatives has been
an uphill struggle, even in countries such as the UK with a reliable index.
Earlier this year, Barclays Bank took the initiative and issued property
index certificates (Pics) - essentially bonds linked to the IPD index. The
instruments helped the bank hedge a portion of its own property portfolio.
Although the issue came after the flow of institutional funds into property
had subsided, the bank managed to sell Pounds 150m of Pics.
The JLW survey found that almost half of the investment institutions which
decided not to buy Pics declined because they expected to beat the IPD index
with their own holdings of direct property, whereas the instrument offered a
return in line with the index.
This finding underlines that the 'stock-picking' attitude among property
investors is very strong. Since no two properties are alike, it is perhaps
not surprising that most investors have relied on their stock selection
skills. The modest success of PICs offered a glimmer of hope to supporters
of property derivatives, but it may take a wider cultural change before a
truly liquid market can be created.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

941201

