FT942-12160

FT  30 APR 94 / How to Spend it: Silver master goes public - Gerald Benney
is opening a shop to sell his exquisite wares


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


Gerald Benney is one of the grand old men (if he will forgive the 'old') of
British silversmithing. With Robert Welch and David Mellor, he was part of a
particularly talented triumvirate that trained at the Royal College of Art
in the 1950s and that breathed life and interest into modern silverware when
British design was struggling to find an identity.
Benney has always been known as an innovative silversmith. Peta Levi, the
design consultant, points to his 'technique of texturing silver as well as
his painstaking development of a method of producing translucent enamels'.
She feels sure that Benney's work, 'rooted in 1950s style will stand the
test of time for its simplicity and sheer elegance'. Fiona McCarthy in her
book on British Design since 1880 places him in the tradition of
idiosyncratic British designers with a 'lavishness that often verges on the
jokey'.
Some of his early work, as befits a young designer, did indeed display an
exuberant delight in new techniques that was not always happily integrated
into the total design. But his later work is often of great refinement and
almost exquisite simplicity.
Almost all his work has been done to special commission so that these days
his grand ceremonial pieces, his silver goblets and cutlery, his vases and
candlesticks, reside in grand City offices, in privileged private homes and
in museums. The Goldsmiths Company has a large collection of his work as
does the Victoria & Albert Museum.
Though many of his smaller pieces are eminently suited to a domestic setting
(look at the simplicity of the silver goblets, the desirability of the
exquisitely plain salt and pepper pots) too few people seem to think of
commissioning a work from as skilled and talented an artist as this.
Possibly they are daunted by the unfamiliarity of the process, by the
challenge of putting together a coherent brief and by fear of the cost. For
all these reasons Benney has decided to open a shop where ranges of more
accessible pieces, which people can look at, pick up, touch and feel, will
be available.
This venture will be largely overseen by his younger son Simon, who has in
turn become a silversmith (having won first prize at the Gemological
Institute of America in Santa Monica for his pieces) with a special interest
in jewellery. So there in the shop, from May 9 onwards, will be a collection
of sycamore and silver pieces (trays, coasters, wine-coolers), some
classically simple polished silver pieces (tea-sets, coffee-sets, trays and
goblets) and a collection of cuff-links, thimbles, ear-rings and other
jewellery.
A silver thimble will be Pounds 52, textured sterling silver cuff links
Pounds 100, gold ear-rings Pounds 168. Prices for the silver and sycamore
range will start at Pounds 460 for a wine coaster and go up to Pounds 870
for a champagne bucket. The collection of simple domestic pieces is
particularly desirable. Many of these pieces would make splendid wedding,
christening or anniversary presents. All are made in the Benney workshops,
none are mass-produced.
Anybody wanting a special piece, however, will still be able to order one.
Above the shop in Walton Street will be a special commissions room where
projects can be discussed. And above that will be a working design studio
where many of the pieces will be designed.
Benney opens on May 9 at 73 Walton Street, Knightsbridge, London SW3.
Anybody unfamiliar with the Benney range and wanting some idea of its scope
can telephone 071-589-7002 and ask for the well-illustrated booklets on the
silver and / or the jewellery collections.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940430

