FT942-14494

FT  20 APR 94 / Talking shop soon open for ideas: European works council
legislation strikes a nerve among employers


   By DAVID GOODHART


A European committee for informing and consulting employees shall be
established in every Community-scale undertaking.' It sounds harmless enough
but the planned extension to the European Union's employment legislation,
discussed by ministers yesterday in Brussels, has provoked an angry reaction
from European business.
'The way some businessmen talk, you would think we were proposing to
establish Soviets of workers and peasants in every European company,' says
Mr Willy Buschak of the European Trade Union Confederation in Brussels.
The committees, or works councils, are back in the limelight because an
attempt to reach a deal on a voluntary consultation procedure between the
confederation and Unice, the European employers body, broke down this month.
An EU directive should be passed by October, and will become law two years
later, with a further two years for works councils to be set up.
About 1,000 multinational companies, those with at least 1,000 employees in
Europe and with operations in at least two EU countries, will be affected.
The works councils, of about 30 management and employee representatives in
total, will meet at least once a year, although a sub-committee may meet
more often in the event, for instance, of a merger or redundancy
announcement.
British companies are not directly affected, because the government won an
opt-out from some aspects of social legislation during negotiation of the
Maastricht treaty. But about 100 UK-owned multinationals will be covered
through their continental European operations, and many are likely to
include their British employees in the works council system. Some UK
government critics claim that this inclusion illustrates the limited
effectiveness of the opt-out.
But because the UK is no longer formally involved in formulating the
legislation, a big obstacle to the directive becoming law has been
eliminated. The other 11 member states are happy to support the initiative
and it is only British objections which have stalled it over recent years.
But why, if EU governments appear sanguine about the issue, are European
businesses antagonistic? And what effect will the works councils have on
European multinationals?
The debate about worker consultation goes back 20 years, but has taken on a
new lease of life since the arrival of the internal market last year and the
growth of cross-border mergers within Europe.
Statutory systems for informing and consulting workers exist within larger
companies in most individual EU member states, with the notable exception of
the UK. To Commission officials and European trade unions it seems logical
to extend such mechanisms to the European level in multinationals.
Further, there has been a feeling in parts of the Commission that much
recent legislation, such as the single market, has benefited business, 'and
it is about time we did something for labour to balance things out', as one
Commission official puts it.
Mr John Monks, general-secretary of the British Trades Union Congress, says
unions have long supported the notion of the 'stakeholder' company, in which
employees have the legal right to be consulted about matters which affect
them. They have also seen European works councils as the first step towards
Europe-wide collective bargaining and, perhaps most useful from their point
of view, as an opportunity for trade union networking at employers' expense.
The Commission has calculated that the cost of travel, interpreters, and so
on, could amount to Ecu10 per employee a year, or several hundred thousand
pounds a year for larger companies.
But cost is not the main objection from Europe's employers. There is anxiety
about the vagueness of what 'consultation' will mean and about the number of
meetings that will, in practice, be required each year. IBM Europe says that
if any management proposal with 'serious consequences' for employees is the
criterion under which a meeting should be convened, more than 3,000 meetings
would have been needed last year.
But the biggest problem with the scheme, employers say, is its
inflexibility. Mr Alan Wild, employee relations director at Guinness, the
international drinks group, says there would have been far less hostility if
the Commission had demanded companies should inform and consult employees
but had left the method to the companies themselves.
'At Guinness, for example, we do not take decisions at a European level, so
we will have to create a new management layer to participate in the works
council discussions,' he says. A further anomaly will arise at GrandMet's
Burger King subsidiary, which includes Africa and the Middle East in its
European management responsibilities.
Mr Peter Reid, of the British Engineering Employers Federation, says central
management involvement in works councils at European level, when so many
experiments in consultation take place at local level, will be 'unhelpful'.
He rebuts the proposition that British employers are uniquely worried about
the legislation because, unlike their continental counterparts, they are not
familiar with statutory consultation systems. Mr Howard Davies,
director-general of the Confederation of British Industry, the UK employers
body, adds that the record of British companies in consulting their workers
is improving year by year.
It is not only UK companies which are complaining. Mrs Regine Matthijsen,
head of international industrial relations at Philips, the Dutch electronics
group, says: 'The directive is the wrong, static approach. It will certainly
slow down decision-making.'
But in its home base of the Netherlands, Philips has learned to value a
statutory works council system for negotiating with employees. That makes
Philips more relaxed about consultation than some of its UK rivals.
So are the fears of European employers exaggerated? The pending works
council legislation has struck a nerve because, unlike most social
legislation, it creates a high-level corporate structure rather than
refining existing systems, such as those which operate health and safety or
maternity provisions.
But the experience of the 35 European works councils which have been
established voluntarily in multinationals such as the German car group
Volkswagen and Bull, the French computer group, suggests they can be useful
forums for communication.
'It really does help us understand what the company is doing, and that makes
employees readier to accept management decisions,' says Mr Brian Revell, an
official of the TGWU general union. He is a member of the Nestle works
council, and recently attended the Swiss food company's annual meeting for a
overview of company strategy. He says the company has been responsive to
ideas arising from the councils, such as investigating how to get more women
into senior management.
Most unions, however, take a more sceptical view. They see consultation as
at best a means to delay unpopular decisions and do not expect to be able to
challenge management prerogatives. But in their current weakened state amid
high unemployment Europe's unions are happy to enjoy the 'institutional
presence' that the legislation will give them.
And, privately, many senior managers admit that the councils will be more of
a nuisance than a serious obstacle to their corporate plans. 'We will be
able to manage the system so that it has relatively little impact,' said
one.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940420

