FT942-15874

FT  13 APR 94 / Leading Article: Lancer's lot


The possibility that Lancer Boss, the last UK-owned maker of fork-lift
trucks, may pass into foreign hands will no doubt prompt the usual
hand-wringing in Britain over the disappearance of indigenous manufacturing
capacity. Yet a transfer of ownership overseas would in this case amount to
little more than repatriation. At the date of the last published balance
sheet, less than a fifth of Lancer Boss's Pounds 192m turnover was generated
in the UK. Of the 70 per cent or so that came from continental Europe, a
majority was from Steinbock Boss, the third-largest German lift truck
manufacturer which was acquired by Lancer Boss in 1983. The foreign tail has
clearly been wagging the British bulldog.
More interesting than the ownership question is the reason for the failure
to turn a domestic industrial success story into a durable international
operation. The fork-lift truck industry is, after all, a post-war
phenomenon. It has been more open than traditional areas of engineering to
new entrepreneurial entrants. Companies like Lancer Boss and Lansing
Bagnall, which was earlier taken over by the biggest German lift truckmaker
Linde, performed well in the earlier stages of the industry life cycle but
failed to establish themselves as robust independent entities in a period
when global capacity was being rationalised.
The strength of German mechanical engineering, the size of its domestic
market and the stability of the German economy are no doubt part of the
explanation for British  - along with French and Italian  - ineffectiveness.
Equally striking is that Lancer Boss, in order to make the transition to a
powerful internationally-based manufacturer, felt obliged to take a huge
risk by buying a troubled German company much bigger than itself. Against
the background of a less stable British economic environment it was
transforming the scale of its operations and magnifying the potential
financial consequences of any managerial weakness.
The risks were heightened by banking arrangements which appear to have left
maximum room for misunderstanding in a financial crisis. A national approach
to receivership in a pan-European group is a formula for preventing the full
value of the business being realised, given that the subsidiaries in Britain
and Germany were fairly closely integrated. Yet in a single market where
countries compete over the relative flexibility of closure arrangements to
attract inward investment, the politics of Euro-receivership look hopeless.
The story should nonetheless be seen in context. If stability in Germany is
a boon to mechanical engineers, Britain derives comparative advantage from
precisely the opposite phenomenon. Its overwhelming success in international
financial services stems partly from the need to deal with growing financial
instability. And that, of course, is a source of constant hand-wringing in
Germany.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940413

