FT942-12326

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (22): Certainty, and
there's no tax to worry about - National Savings / The Government savings
arm has two advantages / High Street Investment


   By BARBARA ELLIS


National Savings started the year at a fast clip pace towards its
Treasury-set target of Pounds 3bn.
Pensioners' bonds, launched at the end of January, had pulled in Pounds 906m
in mainly new money from 90,000 over-65s by the end of March. Another 16,300
investors are expected to switch a total of about Pounds 180m from NS income
bonds into the pensioners bonds after the end of this month, when their
three-months' notice is up.
Meanwhile, the Pounds 1m monthly jackpot on premium bonds, which will be
drawn from this month onwards, had attracted record-breaking net sales of
premium bonds totalling Pounds 424m by the end of March.
The Department for National Savings has two main advantages over its
traditional high-street rivals for savings, the building societies:
authorisation to pay interest gross to everyone, not just non-taxpayers; and
a greater range of tax-free or partly tax-exempt products.
Tessas and save-as-you-earn schemes available from the societies, but not
from National Savings, provide tax-free interest on maximum amounts of
Pounds 9,000 and Pounds 1,200 respectively.
The SAYE scheme, which is run by a handful of societies, including the
Bradford & Bingley, the Cheshire and the Halifax, at present offers a higher
rate of tax-free return (8.3 per cent over five years, 8.62 per cent over
seven years) than the National Savings 41st issue of savings certificates
and Yearly Plan, both paying 5.4 per cent compound if held for five years.
But it is clear that savers cannot look forward to any very strenuous
competition for deposit-based savings between building societies and
National Savings, unless house prices rise by far more than the 5 per cent
recently forecast for this year.
Andrew Longhurst, chief executive of the Cheltenham & Gloucester building
society, who is also chairman of the Council of Mortgage Lenders said the
C&G saw itself as competing with other societies rather than with National
Savings, which was in a different ballpark.
Yet, in July 1992, it was Longhurst who led societies in an attack on
National Savings' newly launched First Option Bond. Within two weeks, this
succeeded in forcing a rate cut from 7.75 to 7.25 per cent, after
threatening to raise mortgage rates.
Longhurst explained this as a 'blip' in which National Savings had been far
out of line with the rest of the savings market: 'Generally we would not be
fazed by the launch of one product, unless, as with the FOB, there were
something out of line that we thought would create a problem,' he said. 'In
that case, we would take the necessary action before it affected our
investors and borrowers.'
Societies made no threats of higher mortgage rates in January, when National
Savings launched the pensioners bonds. Paying gross monthly income at 7 per
cent a year, fixed for five years, the bonds are open to over-65s with
between Pounds 500 and Pounds 20,000 to invest - below the level of lump
sums that societies prefer to attract.
According to Anthony Nelson, economic secretary to the Treasury, the
pensioners bonds target just over half of Britain's 8.7m over-65s - those
estimated to have savings of Pounds 500 or more.
Chancellor Kenneth Clarke said of the bonds, in his budget speech:
'Pensioners will be able to invest their savings with complete security and
know exactly what income they will be getting month in, month out.'
But, as with most of National Savings' other products, savers are
effectively asked to lock themselves in for five years at what may be a low
point in the interest-rate cycle. The escape option on the pensioners bonds
is at a cost of 60 days' notice plus 60 days' interest.
In general, the security on offer from National Savings does not include any
protection against inflation. The exception is the 7th issue of index-linked
savings certificates, which offer a tax-free return equal to the change in
the retail prices index plus a guaranteed 3 per cent a year compound when
held for five years.
Premium bonds have always sold well during periods of low savings rates,
when holders feel they are sacrificing little for a shot at some of the 5.2
per cent prize fund. But buyers may not realise how lucky they need to be in
order to hit the Pounds 1m jackpot. With a maximum Pounds 20,000 holding, a
bond-holder currently has a one-in-165,000 chance of collecting Pounds 1m -
slightly more than three times the one-in-54,145 probability of dealing a
five-card hand containing four aces.
Anyone owning Pounds 1,000 of bonds (recently about the average purchase)
has a one-in-3.3m chance of winning the jackpot.
But for each single Pounds 1 bond - and the 4.6m people own just one - the
chance of winning Pounds 1m is one-in-3.3bn. And the more bonds that are
bought, the more remote the chance becomes.
Understandably, National Savings' promotional leaflet on premium bonds
mentions a rather more manageable figure: it cites only the one-in-15,000
chance that each bond stands of winning any prize at all each month.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

940429

