FT942-15540

FT  14 APR 94 / International Company News: Procter may sue Bankers Trust
over swaps losses


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


Procter & Gamble, the US consumer products group, has raised the possibility
that it will take legal action against Bankers Trust over losses it incurred
on interest rate swaps contracts designed by the banking group. P&G said it
has been forced to take an after-tax charge of Dollars 102m in the first
quarter to cover the losses.
The company said that although it has been using derivatives instruments
such as swaps to cut the cost of its borrowing and manage its exposure to
interest rate and foreign exchange for years, the losses were incurred on
two highly leveraged swaps contracts that were inconsistent with the
company's internal policy on the use of derivatives.
P&G said it lost money on the swaps because of the recent sharp rise in
interest rates. Mr Edwin Artzt, P&G chairman and chief executive, said:
'Unlike the other swaps the company has historically used, it turned out
that the two leveraged swaps in question were based on highly complex
formulas that multiplied the effect of interest rate increases. Derivatives
like these are dangerous and we were badly burned. We won't let this happen
again.'
Mr Artzt said that P&G was 'seriously considering our legal options relative
to Bankers Trust'. The company, however, would not discuss whether it was
considering filing a lawsuit against the bank.
Bankers Trust said that while it had entered into a number of derivatives
transactions with P&G, some of which were profitable, when market interest
rates began to affect the company's position adversely on some of the
contracts, the bank 'strongly and formally recommended that Procter & Gamble
limit its risks by unwinding all or part of the transactions'. However,
Bankers Trust said senior officials at P&G rejected its recommendations.
The two contracts that soured were designed to allow P&G to swap fixed
interest rate loans for floating interest rate loans, and assumed that US
and German interest rates would stay low.
P&G would not comment on whether any of its executives involved in the
derivatives transactions had been disciplined for buying swaps from Bankers
Trust that breached its internal policies, but the company admitted that
some of its officers had become involved in transactions they did not fully
understand.
The group said that its first quarter earnings, to be released later this
month, will show a gain of about 15 per cent, in spite of the swaps-related
charge.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940414

