FT942-14713

FT  19 APR 94 / UK Company News: NatWest checks cut risk on large company
loan book


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Editor


National Westminster Bank's policy of stringent and lengthy credit checks on
large companies seems to have resulted in a loan portfolio which is much
less risky than that of other large UK banks, according to research
published yesterday.
A report compiled by BZW, the investment banking arm of Barclays, based on
Dun & Bradstreet data covering 2.2m companies, found that NatWest had a
significantly lower proportion of high risk lending than its peers.
Although NatWest had the highest percentage of high risk lending to small
companies, only 14 per cent of its loans to large companies involved high
risk companies compared with 35 per cent for other banks.
This means that 28 per cent of its overall lending is to companies falling
in the two most risky categories of five bands devised by Dun & Bradstreet,
compared with about 38 per cent for each of the other big clearing banks.
The BZW research used a more detailed analysis of 41,400 borrowing companies
with Pounds 25.9bn in debt to conclude that NatWest's avoidance of credit
losses from large corporate failures in recent years was more than good
fortune.
It said a possible explanation was that it had resisted the trend towards
giving rapid decisions on loan proposals, retaining 'a relatively lengthy
credit assessment process'.
It added that the relatively high proportion of high risk lending to large
companies by the other big clearing banks indicated that they were relying
too heavily on the assumption that large company size was equivalent to low
risk.
However, BZW pointed out: 'Large corporate lending could be more risky than
is generally thought by bankers, and furthermore, it is unlikely that the
low margins on large corporate lending are approaching the levels required
to compensate for the risk.'
The report found that although there was an overall improvement in credit
quality among banks' loan portfolios in the second half of last year, their
books remained worse at the end of the year than at the end of 1992.
Among the large clearing banks, only NatWest had grown its share of the
lending market in the past two years. Barclays, Lloyds and Midland had all
lost share, while smaller regional banks had made significant gains.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940419

