FT942-12450

FT  29 APR 94 / Tories fail to reach truce on Europe


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Conservative efforts to forge a truce on Europe until after the European
parliament elections have broken down in the face of growing backbench
scepticism about the government's ability to roll back the tide of
federalism.
Rightwing backbenchers say a recent plea by Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign
secretary, for the party to end its 'lunatic' argument on the European Union
has been fatally undermined by a Euro-sceptic surge among constituency
activists.
Some say the shift was triggered by the retreat by the prime minister, Mr
John Major, on the EU's qualified majority voting system. Others say
Conservative activists are becoming concerned about the growing powers
delegated to the European parliament by last year's Maastricht treaty.
There is also concern about reports that France and Germany are backing Mr
Jean-Luc Dehaene, the federalist Belgian prime minister, to replace Mr
Jacques Delors as president of the European Commission.
Party leaders had hopedthe divisions would be contained by Mr Major's
promise to build a free-market Europe of nation states.
The promise, in an Economist article last autumn, was the basis for an as
yet unpublished compromise manifesto for the elections, which is intended to
heal the rift on Europe.
Rightwingers, however, say the party is moving away from Europe so fast that
compromise will be delivered only by an unlikely Tory triumph in the
elections.
Heavy Tory losses would put pressure on Mr Major to adopt an aggressively
Euro-sceptic stance, they say. 'The morale of the party faithful will be at
rock bottom, and our only hope at the next election will be to offer a
distinctive position on Europe,' said a leading Euro-sceptic.
The growing confidence of the Euro-sceptics appeared to lie behind reports,
dismissed as 'nonsense' by Downing Street, that Mr Major was considering a
referendum on continued British membership of the EU.
A well-informed rightwinger said the government was considering using the
threat of a referendum to head off further progress towards a federal Europe
at the 1996 intergovernmental review of the union.
Such a ploy would be welcomed by the right, which believes the other 11
member states would not bow to British doubts, and that Mr Major would have
to call a referendum.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940429

