FT941-12852

FT  28 JAN 94 / Call for end to embargo on Vietnam: Senate vote marks a big
step towards closer relations


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The US took a big step towards closer relations with Vietnam yesterday when
the Senate voted to urge President Bill Clinton to lift the US trade embargo
that has been in place since the fall of Saigon in 1975.
Led by a group of senators from both parties who served in the Vietnam War,
the Senate adopted by 62-38 a resolution that is expected to provide Mr
Clinton with the political support necessary for an early move to lift the
embargo.
Both the State Department's senior Asia experts and the military commanders
in charge of the search for the remains of US servicemen listed as missing
in action (MIA) have recommended lifting the embargo. However, such a move
remains anathema to many organisations representing veterans and families of
MIAs.
Vietnam's United Nations ambassador Mr Le Bang hailed yesterday's resolution
and urged US companies to to take advantage of investment opportunities once
the embargo was lifted.
The US has been edging towards more normal relations with Vietnam along the
lines of a 'road map' sketched out by former President George Bush, which
linked US diplomatic and economic concessions to the restoration of a
democratic government in neigbouring Cambodia and co-operation in accounting
for more than 2,000 MIAs whose fate is not known for certain.
Mr Clinton last year ended US opposition to lending by the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Senator John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat and decorated Vietnam veteran
who was one of the principal sponsors of the resolution, said the vote was
'not a test of patriotism', but a judgment on how best to achieve further
progress in accounting for MIAs.
'If we don't move forward we could lose the ability to get the accounting we
are getting today. The people in the field are saying to us: lift this
embargo; you will help us to get answers,' he said on the Senate floor
yesterday.
Mr Kerry was joined by other decorated Vietnam veterans from both parties,
including Senator John McCain of Arizona, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska,
Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota and Senator Chuck Robb of Virginia.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940128

