FT941-13056

FT  27 JAN 94 / Book Review: Pale males and predatory women


   By LUCY KELLAWAY


DISCLOSURE
By Michael Crichton
Century. Pounds 14.99
Thomas Sanders is a great guy: smart, well-liked and going places in his
Seattle-based high-tech company. Meredith Johnson is a bitch: manipulative,
ruthless and sexy. One morning he turns up to work late - having given the
kids breakfast while his lawyer wife throws a tantrum - to find Meredith has
been appointed his boss.
Once they were lovers but, since they split up 10 years ago, they have
barely seen each other. On her first day in the job she plies him with wine,
and leaps on top of him. He fights her off, escaping with a scratched chest
and a torn shirt. The next morning both claim they were sexually harassed by
the other.
Were Disclosure an ordinary airport novel the verdict would be simple: the
characters are cardboard cut-outs and the plot ludicrous. The book is none
the worse for that. The story races along, taking in sex, power, the
clashing cultures of two merging companies, virtual reality systems, CD-Rom
disc drives and telephones the size of a credit card.
In other circumstances you would read it, enjoy it, forget it. Yet Michael
Crichton - who caused something of a stir with his novel Jurassic Park - is
intent on getting more publicity out of this one. If the velociraptor was
frightening, meet the woman in the power suit.
Crichton wants Disclosure to be taken very seriously indeed. He claims the
book was a quasi-scientific undertaking, based on a true story and
substantiated by numerous interviews with experts in the field of sexual
harassment. He has suggested that part of the reason for writing it was to
explain to his four-year-old daughter what a bad old world it is out there.
It should not take his four-year-old long to work out that daddy has picked
a hot topic. Sexual harassment and male backlash are the great corporate
preoccupations of the moment: combine them in a story in which the woman
harasses the man, and bingo, the film rights sell for Dollars 3.5m and
feminists are furious.
Unless she has a good sense of humour, his daughter may not like the way
women are presented. Talented 'pale males' are passed over for jobs in
favour of less capable women. The only trustworthy females are dull and
ugly. Wise men never sit next to a female colleague on an aircraft for fear
she will accuse him of being unable to keep his hands to himself.
Yet for all that, Disclosure raises some interesting points. By reversing
the sexes of the villain and the victim, the author makes us question our
standard reactions to sexual harassment. The sight of a woman grabbing and
lunging simply underlines how obnoxious the men are who really behave in
this way. This is not Crichton's intention.
Instead he is trying to show that sexual harassment is not a women's issue.
Repeatedly he asserts that it has nothing to do with sex and everything to
do with power. In the words of Louise Fernandez, Thomas's shrewd lawyer:
'Sexual harassment is about power, and so is the company's resistance to
dealing with it. Power protects power. And once a woman gets up in the power
structure, she'll be protected by the structure, the same as a man.'
Nobody denies that women harass men. In the US some 10 per cent of the
22,000 cases filed each year are from men. In Europe there is also a small
but growing number of men who claim to have been harassed by women. Crichton
is also right to point out that companies tend to stand behind their senior
executives. But his argument that harassment is only a function of power,
that senior women are just as likely to be perpetrators as their male
counterparts, is tenuous at best.
Still more dubious is the notion that women use the same tactics in the
office as their male counterparts. The evidence from the UK, at least,
suggests they are more likely to wear their victims down, with constant
unwanted remarks and invitations, than pin them to the sofa. It is in this
context that the implausibility of Meredith-the-she-devil matters: if sexual
abuse of power comes as naturally to women as to men, we need a more
recognisable stereotype. But a Meredith who persecuted Thomas with words
might not be bestseller material.
Regardless of the sex of the victim, Disclosure makes both too much and too
little of the effects of sexual harassment. Too much, because the outcome of
the corporate merger is made to depend on whether he pounced on her or vice
versa. Too little, because the embarrassment, guilt, lost reputation and
damage to family life that come with sexual harassment cases are skated
over. When New Man Thomas comes through victorious, he appears to have been
emotionally unscathed by the incident.
Crichton's view is that sexual harassment claims are reaching their peak
level. He argues that society will have to form rules to cope with the new
political correctness: allegations are flying and nobody knows what
behaviour is appropriate any more. He shows how damaging the mere accusation
of sexual harassment can be, and rails against the 'contemporary climate
where men were assumed to be guilty of anything they were accused of'.
The press release that accompanies the book finishes with an unusual message
in heavy type: 'Disclosure illuminates the situation today and demands that
it be addressed before it gets out of hand.' Actually, the book makes no
such demand, neither does it give much account of how the matter could be
remedied. Fernandez, the lawyer, throws in her solution at the end of the
book, but it is left dangling: 'When women have 50 per cent of the executive
positions. That's when it will end.'
Some readers, enraged at the depiction of 'female chauvinist sows', and
irritated by the advertisements warning that women are even more deadly than
dinosaurs, might doubt whether the author agrees total equality is the
answer.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940127

