FT942-15297

FT  15 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Silver's bull run written off
as hedge funds sell


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


The 'audacious' foray into the silver market by the US hedge funds is coming
to an end, according to Mr Ted Arnold, analyst at the Merrill Lynch
financial services group.
The weight of physical selling of silver following its price rise and a fall
in demand in India, the biggest market for the metal, 'suggests that Dollars
6 to Dollars 6.50 (a troy ounce) silver are unattainable levels unless the
funds want to throw huge resources into the market.'
Recent evidence suggests the funds are doing the opposite and starting to
realise their profits, says Mr Arnold in Merrill's Weekly Futures Report.
He suggests the funds' physical silver holdings, built up over the past six
months, are probably in their books at an average of about Dollars 4.80 to
Dollars 4.90 an ounce compared with the average spot price for the period of
Dollars 4.95. Last night silver closed in London up 1 cent at Dollars 5.29
1/2 .
Mr Arnold points out that the average London spot price in 1993 was Dollars
4.29 after Dollars 3.94 in 1992. So many producers, smelters and
stockholders perceive Dollars 5.50 an ounce to be a high price and try to
sell when the price rallies above Dollars 5.50.
'Meanwhile, in Europe physical silver continues to flow into vaults from the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Middle East and, to a lesser extent,
from Asia.'
Mr Arnold said last night that 'a large nail in the silver bull's coffin'
was the revelation by Bankers Trust last Friday that it had moved all but 1m
ounces of its silver from New York Commodity Exchange warehouses to vaults
at Chase Manhattan Bank. Four months ago Bankers Trust had more than 25m
ounces of silver in Comex warehouses and since then total Comex stocks have
fallen by about 35m ounces. Some traders cited the fall in Comex stocks as a
factor in silver's rally in recent months to a 4 1/2-year peak.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940415

