FT943-12777

FT  22 JUL 94 / Markets Report: Buba fixes repo rate


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The Bundesbank council yesterday left German official interest rates
unchanged, but surprised the market by fixing the repo rate at 4.88 per cent
for the next four weeks, writes Philip Gawith.
By freezing the level of short term interest rates, the central bank has
allowed itself to depart for its summer recess without having to return to a
fever pitch of interest rate speculation. The council meets next on August
18.
The dollar held up well to the news, with analysts describing the price
action as noticeably more positive than recently.
The general consensus remains, however, that the dollar is enjoying an
upward correction, within an overall downward trend that remains intact,
rather than a reversal of the trend.
The dollar finished in London at DM1.576, more than two pfennigs up from a
low for the day of DM1.555. Against the yen it closed at Y98.685, from
Y98.76 on Wednesday. It strengthened in New York to end at DM1.5924 and
Y99.15.
The D-Mark remained little changed in Europe after the Bundesbank's
decision. It closed in London at FFr3.428 from FFr3.427.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank president, made clear that the purpose of
the fixed rate repo was to curb market speculation about the outlook for
rates.
Had this course not been followed, the next Bundesbank council meeting would
have been the subject of intense speculation about a fall in official rates.
With the repo rate currently at 4.88 per cent, 38 basis points above the
4.50 per cent discount rate, a few more weeks of 2 to 3 basis-point cuts
would have taken this margin perilously close to the 25 basis points minimum
which the Bundesbank likes to maintain.
Analysts pointed out that the council had essentially pursued a holding
action. 'They can go away and enjoy their holidays and come back with a
clean slate,' said Mr David Coleman, treasury economist at CIBC in London.
This was endorsed by Mr Tietmeyer, who said the fixed repo was not a signal
for rates in any direction.
Mr Jeremy Hawkins, chief economist at Bank of America in London, said the
move did not signify a bottom in German interest rates. Indeed, with the
Bundesbank signalling that it may consider changing the way it measures M3
growth to a monthly annualised change, the possibility exists that Germany
will see both M3 and inflation falling early next year (indirect tax
increases will fall out of the calculation in January).
Given that these are the two key monetary indicators that the Bundesbank
watches, there are grounds for still expecting lower rates.
Euromark futures traded briskly after the Bundebank meeting. The December
contract traded 50,000 lots to finish at 95.09 from 95.12.
The dollar had a better day in spite of the Bundesbank's decision to freeze
rates, which might have been considered bearish for the US currency. Dealers
attributed the improved price action to an absence of long term sellers.
Most investors with long dollar positions who wanted to sell had done so in
the course of the currency's sharp fall from DM1.67 to DM1.52.
Mr Hawkins commented: 'There are signs that, around the DM1.55 level, there
is a good deal of genuine support for the dollar. It is becoming more
resilient to bad news.'
Also contributing to an apparent shift in sentiment are the more explicit
statements of concern from leading financial officials about the dollar.
First up was Mr Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, who evinced more concern
than previously about the weakness of the currency during his Humphrey
Hawkins testimony.
He was followed yesterday by Mr Larry Summers, the Treasury undersecretary.
Presenting the Treasury's semi-annual report to Congress on foreign
exchange, he said a firmer dollar 'would have important economic benefits
for the United States'.
Reminding the Administration that their sins of omission and commission may
have contributed to dollar weakness was no less a figure than Mr George
Soros, the influential American financier. He said nervous world financial
markets reflected a lack of direction and concern by leading industrial
nations. 'It is time for the authorities to pay attention,' he added.
Mr Mark Austin, treasury strategist at Midland Global Markets, said the
Administration was probably more concerned about the impact of a weak dollar
on domestic financial markets, rather than the level of the dollar in
itself.
The Bundesbank's rate decision spilled over into the futures market, where
the December Eurodollar contract slipped on the Liffe to 94.15 from 94.24.
Sterling continued its recent pattern of tracking the dollar. The UK
currency shrugged off a good set of trade data to close lower at Dollars
1.5375 from Dollars 1.549. It was little changed at DM2.4231 from DM2.4259.
The Bank of England provided Pounds 552m assistance to UK money markets
after declaring a Pounds 700m shortage.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940722

