FT944-5812

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Management Buy-Outs (6): The road to the year's
biggest buy-out closes - Case study / National Parking Corporation


   By PAUL TAYLOR and SIMON DAVIES


Almost 45 years ago two men, one a former Westminster City Council trainee
surveyor, the other a 24-year-old ex-soldier, began buying up second world
war bomb sites and offering car parking space for 1s 6d (7.5p) a time.
As car ownership and demand for parking spaces in the UK's increasingly
congested inner cities grew, National Parking Corporation, the parent of
National Car Parks, flourished.
Today, NCP runs 600 car parks and owns all but 40 of them.
The average cost of parking is Pounds 2.20, although prices are higher in
some areas, particularly in London.
Bolstered by property profits, a coach-hire business and a rapidly growing
breakdown and recovery service, the group reported pre-tax profits of Pounds
50.5m - including Pounds 28.9m from car parking - in the year to March 25,
on turnover of Pounds 265.3m.
It is not surprising that the desire of the founders to sell one of the UK's
most successful private companies should have become one of the year's
hottest topics among venture capitalists.
But last Friday, the deal collapsed because the syndicate led by Prudential
Venture Managers (PruVen) was not prepared to pay the price the vendor was
demanding.
There is little doubt that the business will eventually be sold.
The only question is the identity of an eventual buyer.
With car parking revenues and profits rebounding after the recession, it is
an obvious target for venture capitalists. NPC's large and predictable cash
flows could support a high level of debt.
In addition, it is likely that if NCP and Green Flag, the fast-growing owner
of National Breakdown Recovery and Home Emergency Service, were sold
separately they would together be worth more than the parent company.
Most of NPC's equity is still in the hands of the group's two founders, Sir
Donald Gosling, now aged 65, and Ronald Hobson, aged 73, making it ideal for
a buy-out.
Structuring the deal was complicated by the fact that in 1986 about 28 per
cent of NCP's equity was placed with about 40 institutional investors at
155p-a-share.
Since then the stock has traded in the over-the-counter market under rule
4.2, and it fell from 550p to 450p, following last week's announcement.
The venture capitalists therefore had to negotiate with the vendors under
stock exchange takeover rules, something to which they are not accustomed.
In addition, existing institutional investors wanted to be offered the
opportunity to roll over their existing shareholdings into shares in the new
acquiring company.
Among the original institutional investors from the 1986 placing are Royal
Insurance, and the Prudential itself, which initially invested about Pounds
750,000 in the stock.
Despite the placing, Sir Donald and Mr Hobson, the joint chairmen, retained
tight control of the group and, together with charitable trusts of which
they are directors, still hold 73.2 per cent of the equity including
personal stakes totalling 68 per cent.
However, the issue of succession had become increasingly important to the
joint chairmen. They had taken a paternalistic view of the company they
created and were keen to ensure continuity for the management, including the
two deputy chairmen, Gordon Layton and John Flack.
Accordingly, they turned down the option of a share disposal, via a
flotation. Morgan Grenfell, NPC's financial adviser, also received several
offers from others. However, the joint chairmen reportedly felt more
comfortable choosing a venture capital consortium which included
institutions with which they were already familiar.
Discussions began at the start of the year and heads of terms were signed at
the end of June, prompting publicity-shy NPC to issue a brief statement to
the stock exchange confirming that it was involved in negotiations which
might lead to a bid.
The consortium members included Electra, NatWest Ventures, Charterhouse
Development Capital, Cinven, Montagu Private Equity and Royal Bank
Development Capital.
Due diligence was completed without problems - the only barrier to agreement
was money.
Many more of the British Venture Capital Association's 100 members have
expressed an interest, but, given NPC's size, only the largest operators
could consider the deal, and many of these had joined with PruVen.
The consortium would have provided around 50 per cent of the cost as equity,
with the remainder funded by bank debt, which would have been arranged by
National Westminster Bank.
NPC's solid asset base, quality of earnings and its strong cash flow from
NCP, could have supported substantially more debt.
But Prudential Venture Managers was keen that the buy-out should be
conservatively financed, so that the group could continue to expand without
being burdened with debt.
Early asset disposals were ruled out by PruVen, although a longer-term trade
sale of Green Flag and flotation of NCP would have been likely.
Under this scenario, equity investors would have had to settle for more
modest returns than they are accustomed to, in exchange for a lower level of
risk.
Enthusiasm among the banks for the proposed deal also underlines the shift
in the balance of power between equity and debt providers in the leveraged
buy-out market. The banks, shunned by cash-rich domestic corporate
borrowers, were said to have been falling over themselves to win a slice of
the deal, which raises the possibility of a more leveraged buy-out.
With PruVen out of the frame, Sir Donald and Mr Hobson will continue to run
the business and collect their dividends.
However, their intentions have been clearly signalled, and it is only a
matter of time before other institutions decide to join the negotiating
table.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941201

