FT942-15619

FT  14 APR 94 / Minutiae mask the big picture: Violence and symbolic
wrangles threaten to undermine the Middle East peace process


   By JULIAN OZANNE


After more than half a century of bloodshed in the Middle East, a new
beginning could have been celebrated yesterday. Israel was due to complete
its military withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho to
make way for Palestinian self-rule.
Instead, Israel missed the deadline and Hamas, the extremist Islamic
movement opposed to the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord, bombed a crowded
commuter bus deep in Israel. The bombing, which left five Israelis dead, was
the second attack in a week - another reminder of the escalating violence by
both sides which threatens to explode the fragile peace process.
On the Israeli side, attacks by settlers and the heavy-handed use of force
by soldiers continues. In the occupied West Bank, Israelis shot dead two
Palestinians - including a pregnant teenager - on Tuesday, imposed a rigid
curfew on the town of Ramallah and blasted a house with anti-tank missiles,
later destroying it with a bulldozer.
Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation,
bitterly criticised Israel yesterday, saying it had thwarted peace talks,
with its 'policy of mass killings, detention, imposing curfews and isolating
towns . . . supporting and encouraging the fanatic settlers to continue
practising the most horrible acts of aggression'.
Just seven months since the peace agreement was sealed on the White House
lawn with a reluctant handshake between Mr Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin, concerns are growing that the understanding is so flawed that
it has little chance of ending the conflict.
Months of tortuous delays in negotiations and bitter wrangling over details,
such as where to position the Palestinian flag at border crossings, has
created deep scepticism on both sides.
For many observers the problem lies with the agreement itself - the
Declaration of Principles. It creates a five-year interim period of
Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and the West Bank, and shelves sensitive
issues such as the creation of a Palestinian state, control of Jerusalem and
the right of Palestinian refugees to return. Later talks are scheduled to
address the question of a permanent solution for the Palestinians' political
aspirations - one of several grey areas open to interpretation and
negotiation.
The greyest area is the status of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories, which are to remain untouched during the interim period. Mr
Rabin shied away from the tough decision to begin evacuating the 120,000
settlers. The consequence was that weeks have been spent discussing the
complex security arrangements necessary to protect the remaining settlers.
But leaving these people, some of whom are religious ideologues, in the
thick of the Arab population of 1.9m has proved a recipe for violence, as
demonstrated by the February 25 Hebron Mosque massacre of 29 Palestinians by
one settler.
'The settlements are a self-destruct mechanism in the peace process,' said
Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, a prominent Palestinian who has resigned from the
negotiating team. 'They cause friction, are a blatant injustice to
Palestinians, fragment Palestinian land and prevent the emergence of a
geographically contiguous Palestinian entity. Leaving the settlements
untouched is like putting a flame next to a powder keg and saying:
'Coexist.' '
Mrs Ashrawi claims that Israel has imposed rigid security requirements on
the PLO, and denied the Palestinians the political sovereignty they expected
the peace process to deliver. She wants the declaration renegotiated and
says Mr Arafat must now consider suspending the peace talks if he is to
maintain his credibility with the increasingly disaffected Palestinian
people.
Many Israelis also believe the settlement issue must be faced sooner rather
than later. Mr Joseph Alpher, director of the Jaffe Centre for Strategic
Studies at Tel Aviv University, says the government should find the courage
to give both settlers and Palestinians a clear timetable and map for Israeli
withdrawal from the territories - otherwise more violence is in prospect.
The Israeli government, however, says the agreement can work only if it can
guarantee to its mounting domestic opposition that security for Israelis
will strengthen with peace. The Labour-led coalition government is firm in
its refusal either to open up the settlement question now or begin talks on
a permanent solution. 'We are negotiating an interim agreement and that
won't change,' said Mr Ephrahim Sneh, a Labour member of parliament. 'Now is
not the time to deal with the settlement question and, as more terrorist
attacks occur, the more difficult it will be to deal with the settlers in
the future.'
Mr Arafat, therefore, has a stark choice - to abandon the peace talks and
push, even at this late stage, for a renegotiation of the declaration, or to
try to convince sceptical supporters to implement what they see as a flawed
agreement.
Many Palestinians believe that if Mr Arafat presses ahead with the latter
course, he risks losing credibility to the point where the PLO may no longer
command majority Palestinian support. Walking out of peace talks, however,
would be difficult. All the reasons which forced the PLO to sign the
declaration - its lack of funds, its marginalisation in the Arab world and
the strength of Palestinian opponents in the territories - remain urgent
concerns.
Even if the Israelis made substantial concessions to strengthen his hand, Mr
Arafat faces a formidable challenge. Many Palestinians feel he has sold them
short by signing the interim declaration. After 27 years of Israeli
occupation, they seek an urgent improvement in living standards and a
significant measure of democracy in their political life - both of which Mr
Arafat has so far been unable to deliver.
'If Arafat does not bring democracy, there will be a revolution, not only
against his dictatorship but against the peace process,' said Mr Soufian Abu
Zaiyda, a PLO leader in the occupied Gaza strip.
Mr Zaiyda said the Palestinian authority to be established after the Israeli
withdrawal has to accomplish four urgent tasks to win credibility: enhance
the economic wellbeing of Palestinians, protect their security, convince
them their leaders are 'working for the people and not against them', and
establish democratic institutions 'far away from corruption, bureaucracy and
discrimination between people'.
As both Israeli and Palestinian negotiators prepare to sign a Gaza-Jericho
agreement to usher in Palestinian self-rule, and prepare for the
establishment of Mr Arafat and his entourage in Jericho, the question
remains of whether the PLO can shore up its dwindling support.
'We accepted Arafat to be the president of Palestine but he has accepted to
be the mayor of Gaza- Jericho,' said Hisham Elakra, a disappointed,
19-year-old refugee in the rubbish-strewn Palestinian Jabalya camp. 'He has
betrayed our struggle and we must fight against the peace process.'
Mr Arafat yesterday seemed to acknow-ledge his supporters' frustrations when
he warned that the settlement issue and conduct of peace talks 'will lead us
all to catastrophe which will kill any remaining hope, confidence and
credibility our Palestinian people . . . still have in the peace process.'
He appears to be banking on returning to Gaza-Jericho in a fanfare of glory,
and on using international aid to buy off political opposition and create
jobs. But even his supporters doubt these measures alone will secure his
political base.
'We have reached a moment of truth,' said Mrs Ashrawi. 'Israel's negotiating
strategy will continue to erode Arafat's support to the point where the
leadership may no longer be able to hold the people.'
Thus Israel confronts a dilemma. It does not wish to cede real power or
sovereignty to the Palestinians now, but it cannot afford to leave Mr Arafat
exposed to criticism from extremists bent on destroying the peace process.
Israel knows it must walk a difficult tightrope and, for better or worse,
must stick with Mr Arafat as its best negotiating partner. But many
Palestinians say Israel has been too stringent in its security requirements
and has left Mr Arafat with little ammunition to fend off his most vocal
opponents. The danger remains that if Israel does not heed Palestinian
demands for more substantial concessions, it may unwittingly play into the
hands of those extremists it most fears.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940414

