FT943-847

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Company News: Chevron upbeat on Tengiz project
 -The Kazakhstan scheme would virtually double the group's oil reserves


   By ROBERT CORZINE


Chevron, the US oil company, says it had no plans to pull out of its Dollars
20bn Tengiz oil project in Kazakhstan in spite of repeated failures to reach
an agreement on an oil export pipeline through Russia.
Mr Ken Derr, chairman, said that negotiations were continuing on the
proposed pipeline, 'but we have not been able to reach a satisfactory
agreement on the financial exposure' of the various parties in the Caspian
Pipeline Consortium.
This has not undermined Chevron's support for the Tengiz project, on which
it has spent Dollars 600m. Mr Derr said Tengiz was 'a one shot opportunity
to make a strategic, long-term investment' that would virtually double the
company's oil reserves.
The positions of Chevron and the Kazakh government, the joint developers of
the field, were 'completely compatible' according to Mr Derr. They have,
however, been unable to agree financial terms with Russia and the Oman Oil
Company, the other two consortium members. Mr Derr was optimistic, however,
that a deal would emerge 'sooner rather than later'.
Asked about recent statements from Moscow questioning the legality of
western oil deals in the former Soviet republics bordering the Caspian Sea,
Mr Derr agreed that Russia was taking 'more than a passing interest' in the
region.
But he believes it is in Russia's interest to see the development of
petroleum reserves in Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan.
That was because of the substantial pipeline revenues it would receive and
the economic stability which oil development would bring to the region.
He denied that Chevron had been rash to book Tengiz reserves without a
guaranteed export outlet. Only 1bn of the 3bn barrels of Tengiz reserves
attributable to Chevron under the 40-year deal had been booked. He said 1bn
barrels could be exported over the life of the project through swap deals
with Russia even if no dedicated pipeline materialised.
In recent weeks Chevron has increased its Tengiz exports to 50,000 to 60,000
barrels a day, almost double the original quota. But that is half of the
130,000 b/d capacity which Chevron will have in place early next year and
well below the planned peak of 700,000 b/d.
Mr Derr said Chevron's financial performance was likely to improve in the
second half of the year after a disappointing first, in which low crude oil
prices and operating problems at US refineries took their toll.
The sale of some of Chevron's oldest refineries and a Dollars 1bn
improvement programme at refineries in its home base of California would
place downstream operations in a 'very competitive position' by the end of
next year, he said.
Chevron's future, he added, 'lies in the international exploration and
production business' because so much of the US was off limits to oil
companies.
But the company saw no reason to split its international E&P business from
its domestic operations.
They were already separated internally, said Mr Derr, and the combination
gave the company a 'built-in balance'.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940927

