FT943-12853

FT  22 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Serb conundrum


The fate of the latest peace plan for Bosnia is unfolding in a predictable
way. Neither side likes it, but the Bosnian government accepted it in order
to avoid being blamed for its failure. The Bosnian Serbs have not accepted
it, but have played for time by demanding clarifications, in a manner
reminiscent of the IRA.
The authors of the plan - Britain, France, Germany, Russia and the US - are
agreed in finding the Serb response unsatisfactory, but not on how to react
to it. The US, backed on this point by the EU mediator, Lord Owen, is urging
the contact group to stand firm and penalise the Serbs as the recalcitrant
party. The Russians, backed by the UN mediator Thorvald Stoltenberg, believe
that peace depends on finding answers to at least some of the questions the
Serbs have raised.
No doubt there will be talks on these issues, formally or informally,
between now and July 30 when the contact group is due to meet at foreign
minister level. But the US is surely right to warn against falling for the
Serb tactic. Once again the 'international community' has a credibility
problem, which will only be made worse if, because of its internal
divisions, it allows yet another deadline to be ignored with impunity.
Part of the trouble is that the Bosnian Serbs are shielded by two levels of
intermediaries. First there is Serbia itself, in the person of President
Milosevic. Although he carries a heavier weight of responsibility than any
other single person for the whole Yugoslav tragedy, many people involved in
the diplomatic process, including notably Lord Owen, have convinced
themselves that he is now genuinely anxious for peace and able to bring the
Bosnian Serbs to heel if only he is given time and treated with respect.
This dubious proposition should not be taken on trust. If Serbia wants to
escape feeling the world's displeasure itself, it must either deliver the
Bosnian Serbs' assent to the proposed settlement or co-operate in visiting
the world's displeasure on them.
The second level is the Russians, whom many western leaders are anxious to
'keep on board' because of their supposed influence over the Serbs. Much the
same reasoning applies to them: if they cannot demonstrate their influence
by delivering Serb assent to the peace plan they have themselves helped draw
up, their objections to measures aimed at coercing Serbia into a more
co-operative attitude should be brushed aside.
Among those measures, lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia has become 'a last
resort' even for the US defence secretary. A more credible deterrent against
Serbia must be the threat to confine it indefinitely to the fringe of the
world community and the world economy, so long as it supports the forcible
exclusion of the Bosnian majority from their homes. Serbia may not be
defeated militarily, but it can be quarantined.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940722

