FT942-14330

FT  21 APR 94 / Hungarians queue again - for shares: The launch of a not so
massive mass privatisation programme


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


The queue, that symbol of communist mismanagement, is staging a comeback in
newly free-market Budapest. When Jozsef Ring 33 opened its doors on Monday
morning about 200 sleepy customers were waiting. The first had turned up
just after their Sunday lunch the day before.
Jozsef Ring 33 is a bank branch and it sells shares to the public. More
precisely, and alluringly, they are shares for which an investor only has to
pay over five years, and not at all if the securities do not perform.
For Monday was the first day of the small shareholder programme, Hungary's
belated answer to mass privatisation.
An advertising campaign has been building up to the launch for weeks.
Billboards proclaim to the public that 'Every single forint is working
capital.' Full-page newspaper adverts offer 'Property to the smart'. But the
advertising campaign is out of proportion to the size of the transaction.
Hungary's mass privatisation is distinctly unmassive.
The small shareholder programme begins with just one public offering, of
Soproni Sorgyar, Hungary's third-largest brewery. The State Property Agency,
the privatisation authority, is selling a 37 per cent shareholding, worth
Ft1.9bn (Pounds 12m) at the issue price of Ft3,800 a share. Three-fifths of
the issue is reserved for small investors.
Pannonplast, a plastics producer, is next in line. The privatisation
authorities have earmarked about 70 companies and state shareholdings worth
more than Ft100bn for possible inclusion in the scheme.
Even this tentative estimate pales in comparison with the Dollars 7.1bn that
foreign investors had ploughed into Hungary by the end of last year, about
half of which was connected to privatisation projects.
Nor does the small shareholder programme match the ambition of the Czech
Republic's voucher privatisation. The first Dollars 7bn (Pounds 4.7bn) wave
of the Czech project privatised more than 1,000 companies. A second phase
currently under way will distribute about Dollars 5.3bn worth of shares in
another 861 companies.
Mass privatisation was supposed, in its initial conception, to reach the
parts of the economy that foreign investors could not, or rather would not.
But the Hungarian scheme does little to extend privatisation to the large
industrial companies such as bus maker Ikarus which have languished,
disdained by private investors, in state ownership.
The small shareholder programme largely passes them by to focus on
profitable and stockmarket-ready concerns - consumer goods producers,
retailers, hotel companies and utilities.
While the Czech voucher scheme has given investment funds the corporate
reins, the Hungarian version will have minimal effect on corporate
governance. The privatisation authorities have picked, for the first
candidates at least, companies that already have foreign investors in the
majority or at least in control of management.
So why is Hungary engaging in 'mass' privatisation at all? Hungarians appear
to be markedly less enthusiastic about the basic principles of privatisation
and the market economy than the Czechs and other neighbours. A recent poll
put support for private ownership of large companies at just 50 per cent.
Foreign control won the backing of just 30 per cent of those asked.
One reason may be a widespread public feeling that privatisation has done
little more than enrich others and put up prices. Foreign investors
dominated privatisation at the start, accounting for 85 per cent of proceeds
in 1991. The balance has since tilted towards domestic investors but it is
company managers and entrepreneurs who have benefited rather than the
general public.
Hence the programme, even if it is symbolic, to create popular capitalism.
'It is privatisation not for the few but for the many,' says Mr Tamas Szabo,
privatisation minister.
And the many waited their turn at Jozsef Ring 33 yesterday. One middle-aged
woman said: 'Just look at how much money managers are getting under
capitalism and compare it with how much I earn. This is a kind of
compensation.'
Others will be more difficult to reach. Economics student and stockmarket
punter Jozsef Molnar displayed cynicism typical of modern Hungary. Casting
around for the motives behind the government's share give-away, he
eventually concluded: 'They are fools.' He is joining the small shareholder
programme anyway, of course, as are many of his classmates.
Or perhaps the government is not so foolish. The conservative Hungarian
Democratic Forum is trailing badly in the opinion polls and the first public
offerings on easy terms coincide with the run-up to elections on May 8.
Ministers deny any connection, but Mr Lajos Csepi, managing director of
state holding company AV RT, is disarmingly frank: 'This is part of the
election campaign, timed by coalition parties to convince the public that
privatisation is heading in the right direction.'
But the Forum is stuck still in fourth place on around 10 per cent in the
opinion polls and most observers doubt the share give-away will come in
time.
'It is too little, too late, to save them,' says Mr Molnar, waiting
patiently for his shares nonetheless.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940421

