FT942-12799

FT  28 APR 94 / Clinton is served with a Chinese recipe: Alexander Nicoll
reviews suggestions for a long-term, pragmatic trading partnership


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


Washington's annual agony over policy towards China should be ended,
according to a paper published yesterday by a US think-tank.
President Clinton must decide by June 3 whether, on human rights grounds, to
deny renewal of most-favoured nation trading status to Beijing. To do so
would increase prices for many goods in the US and seriously damage export
and investment prospects for US companies. But to renew MFN without
qualification would plunge him into deep water with Congress.
The paper, published by the Institute for International Economics, says the
US should drop this repeated self-torture. Instead, the US should work
towards bringing China into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade this
year and then grant permanent MFN status - as do all other large countries -
but make it conditional on Beijing's compliance with its Gatt protocol.
These steps would be part of a large-scale revision of US policy to cease
treating China as a communist pariah with a closed economy and instead
recognise its growing role in the world and its relative openness, the paper
says.
'US objectives in Asia are most likely to be accomplished by treating China
as a strategic partner rather than a backlash state, as President Clinton's
national security adviser labelled it,' writes Mr Nicholas Lardy, author of
the paper, China in the World Economy.
Mr Lardy, an expert on the Chinese economy, bases his argument partly on
refuting what he says are false US beliefs about China.
According to some western fears, China is about to become the world's
largest economy, will build ever larger-trade surpluses especially with the
US, and will do so while keeping its domestic economy closed.
How big is China? Mr Lardy puts China's per capita gross domestic product at
about Dollars 1,000, about three times the traditional World Bank measure
based on exchange rates, but well below some recent estimates based on
purchasing power parity.
Though Mr Lardy can see GDP growth averaging 9 per cent per year until the
year 2000 - barring political disruption - he forecasts that the dramatic
increase in Chinese productivity will slow and that the absolute size of the
economy will not match that of the US until 2040.
Even if the per capita growth rate were twice that of the US, income per
head would not catch up with that of the US for approximately 150 years.
China is still a poor country, but a big one whose role in the world economy
is growing rapidly.
It accounts for 2.5 per cent of world trade and is the tenth largest
exporter, compared with 0.6 per cent and 30th respectively in 1977, the year
before Deng Xiaoping's reforms began. It has probably absorbed more direct
foreign investment than any other developing country, is the biggest
borrower from the World Bank and raises significant capital on international
debt and equity markets.
That it should acquire such a prominent economic position while still run by
the Communist party raises particular problems for US policymakers. They
look at US trade figures and instinctively demand that China's market be
opened to US goods.
But this is based on misconceptions, argues Mr Lardy, as well as statistical
aberrations. The figures over-state the US deficit by several billion
dollars annually, he says, though not by as much as China claims. (The
differences result from treatment of goods passing through Hong Kong).
China has global trade and current account deficits, and the recipient of
substantial foreign capital - hardly supporting the contention that the
economy is closed. Mr Lardy believes the economy is more open than more
other regional countries, such as South Korea, which are at the same stage
of development.
Beijing's anomalous surplus with the US is partly the fault of the US itself
for deliberately limiting exports and restricting export credits and aid
programmes - policies which should be reversed, he argues.
Mr Lardy notes that the US, despite its desire to promote in Asian economic
co-operation, 'is the only country in the region that uses unilateral
economic sanctions rather than regional co-operation to promote human rights
and achieve other objectives'.
The US, he says, should rely as much as possible on multilateral sanctions,
including those which could be implied within Gatt, when China's behaviour
falls short of international accepted standards. Having China on the inside
is more effective than keeping it out.
Mr Lardy argues that revoking MFN without improving the human rights
situation would damage US interests as well as the prospects for further
market reforms which, he believes, offer the best hope for political
liberalisation.
His call for a change in the US mindset on China will be welcomed by those
in the US government who have already brought about a broadening in the
Sino-US relationship, evidenced by more frequent, wide-ranging and senior
bilateral discussions in the past few months. But it will be anathema to
those who argue that MFN is the only real lever which the US has over China
to prevent abuses of human rights.
China in the World Economy. Nicholas R Lardy. Institute for International
Economics, 11 Dupont Circle, NW, Washington DC 20036-1207. Dollars 16.95
(Pounds 14.99 outside US and Canada)

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940428

