FT944-11117

FT  08 NOV 94 / Rules tightened on 'going concern' statements


   By JIM KELLY, Accountancy Correspondent


Regulators yesterday moved to toughen rules governing auditors and directors
over public statements on whether a business is a 'going concern'.
The issue has been one of the most controversial in corporate governance and
accounting since the spectacular corporate failures of the late 1980s.
Investors complained that businesses which had been audited and presumed to
be going concerns failed soon afterwards.
But auditors fear the new rules might raise expectations that published
accounts are unable to meet. They want the public to realise that 'going
concern' is not a guarantee of survival.
The publication yesterday of the Auditing Practices Board's Statement of
Auditing Standards 130 overtakes guidelines which gave auditors a passive
role in scrutinising going concern.
The standards statement, which has the force of law, requires auditors to
take an 'active role' in establishing going concern and unlike the present
guidelines, removes the time limits on what constitutes the 'foreseeable
future'.
The standard requires auditors to register an adverse opinion if they do not
agree with the directors that a business is a going concern.
Auditors are required to qualify accounts if they believe the directors have
not taken adequate steps to satisfy themselves that the going- concern basis
is appropriate.
The board said the new rules should not make accounts preparations more
costly. The standard is effective for periods ending June 30 1995.
The working group on going concern, set up after last year's Cadbury Report
on corporate governance, has also published its guidance to directors of
listed companies. It dovetails with the auditing board's work.
Working Party Report. Chartered Accountants' Hall, Moorgate Place, London,
EC2P 2BJ. Pounds 4. Statement of Auditing Standards 130. Accountancy Books,
PO Box 620, Central Milton Keynes, MK9 2JX. Pounds 3.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

941108

