FT944-14496

FT  22 OCT 94 / International Company News: American Brands lifted by
cigarette operations


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


A big increase in profits from cigarettes helped American Brands, the US
consumer products group, lift net income 79 per cent to Dollars 152m in the
third quarter, the company reported yesterday.
Like Philip Morris, which reported earlier in the week, American Brands
benefited from a favourable comparison with a year in which US cigarette
makers were badly hit by a bout of price cutting in their domestic market.
American Tobacco, the group's cigarette manufacturing operation, contributed
operating profits of Dollars 49m compared with a loss of Dollars 35m last
time. The prior year's losses included a Dollars 30m restructuring
provision.
Earlier this year, American Brands agreed to sell American Tobacco to BAT
Industries of the UK, for Dollars 1bn, but the sale is undergoing an
anti-trust review by the Federal Trade Commission because BAT owns Brown &
Williamson, the third biggest US tobacco group.
Group revenues rose 11 per cent to Dollars 3.7bn and operating profits rose
39 per cent to Dollars 345.4m. Earnings per share rose to 75 cents from 42
cents helped by a reduction in the tax charge to 42 per cent from 47 per
cent.
Mr William Alley, chairman and chief executive, said the company had
experienced broad gains across most of its operations. Gallaher Tobacco, the
UK's biggest cigarette company, increased its contribution by 5 per cent
even though last year's third-quarter benefited from trade buying in advance
of an August 1993 price increase.
Non-tobacco operations increased their contribution to operating profits by
6 per cent to a record Dollars 182.5m.
The group saw double-digit increases from distilled spirits and from each of
the businesses described by American Brands as long-term growth operations:
hardware and home improvement products, office products and golfing
equipment.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

941022

