FT942-15295

FT  15 APR 94 / Markets Report: Buba cuts, dollar lags


   By PHILIP GAWITH


The surprise 25 basis point cut in official German interest rates yesterday
prompted a flurry of similar moves from other European countries, writes
Philip Gawith.
Switzerland, Austria, Denmark, Belgium and the Netherlands all eased credit
policy after the Bundesbank council cut both the Lombard and Discount rates
by 25 basis points, to 6.5 per cent and 5 per cent respectively.
Market reaction to the move was unexpected: the dollar weakened, the D-Mark
strengthened, and euromark futures suggested greater pessimism about a fall
in German interest rates than before the rate-cut.
The dollar's weakness was especially surprising given that, earlier in the
day, there had been rumours of the Bundesbank buying dollars to bolster the
US currency against the yen. Two US helicopters being shot down in Iraq
would also normally have lent support to the dollar.
Later rumours that the Bundesbank was selling dollars for D-Mark dampened
any further remnant of positive sentiment towards the US currency.
Dollar/yen provided an early focus of attention with the Bundesbank said to
be buying dollars heavily on behalf of the Bank of Japan (BOJ). The
resignation of prime minister Mr Morihiro Hosokawa has bolstered the yen,
with the market believing that a political hiatus aggravates the US/Japan
trade dispute.
The dollar closed in London at Y104.080 after opening at Y103.15. There were
also rumours of other central banks buying dollars.
Mr David Barrett, proprietary trader at Natwest Markets, said he believed
the BOJ had wanted to teach the market - which had very short dollar, long
yen positions - a lesson. He said Japanese exporters and car manufacturers
had been selling into rallies as they were very worried that the dollar was
not rising.
Analysts were bemused by yesterday's Bundesbank cut. No fresh data
supportive of a cut has appeared since its last meeting. Most observers had
expected a move on official rates at the next meeting.
The bemusement among analysts was matched by the indifferent response of the
market. The dollar closed at DM1.7088, down from DM1.7135. The D-Mark was
stronger across the board in Europe. It closed at FFr3.420 against the
French franc from FFr3.419. The peseta weakened to Pta81.30 from Pta81.01.
In the futures markets, meanwhile, there was a very mixed response to what
should have been seen as good news.
The June euromark contract finished three basis points higher at 94.63, but
the longer contracts lost ground. The June 1995 contract, for example,
finished at 94.91, four basis points lower than its opening.
Two rationalisations were offered for market pessimism. First, the scale of
the cuts - 25 basis points, when 50 is more common - led some to believe
that Germany was at, or near, the bottom of the interest rate cycle. Concern
was also expressed that the Bundesbank continued to cut rates when an
indicator it attaches great importance to - M3 money supply growth - is
growing far beyond its target range.
Few analysts believe German rates have bottomed. Ms Alison Cottrell,
international economist at Midland Global Markets, comments: 'To begin to
call the bottom of the German interest rate cycle already is a sure way to
lose money.' Midland, and others, are looking for the discount rate to fall
to 4 per cent by the end of the year, with a low of about 3.5 per cent some
time later.
Mr Avinash Persaud, head of currency research at JP Morgan (Europe)
commented: 'The Bundesbank is clearly expressing continued concern over the
poor performance of the bond market and that appears to outweigh its genuine
discomfort over M3 growth.'
Analysts believe the decline in official rates will encourage a fall in the
repo rate, used by the Bundesbank to set the level of money market rates.
The repo was cut by 3 basis points to 5.70 per cent on Wednesday. The market
is expecting a repo rate fall of 10-15 basis points next week.
Call money rates fell ahead of the council meeting to 5.60 per cent/5.70 per
cent from 5.65/5.75 per cent.
Sterling was fairly steady yesterday, with events elsewhere drawing
attention away from a good set of trade figures and Wednesday's announcement
of a new openness in the conduct of monetary policy.
The pound closed at DM2.5239 against the D-Mark from DM2.5275. Against the
dollar, it firmed to Dollars 1.4771 from Dollars 1.4751.
The Bank of England is not expected to follow the Bundesbank's lead with
rates. Although analysts anticipate a further cut in UK rates, it is not
expected until there is more supportive data, and evidence of the effect of
higher taxes on the economy.
In the money markets the Bank of England injected Pounds 552m liquidity into
the market against a Pounds 550m shortage.
In the futures market, the June short sterling contract finished three basis
points firmer at 94.64. The longer contracts, however, lost ground.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940415

