FT941-4253

FT  11 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: US funds 'turning to silver
market'


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Industry Correspondent


   KALGOORLIE


The US speculative funds that last year drove up the gold price have turned
their attention to silver, Mr Tim Green, consultant to the Gold Fields
Minerals Services consultancy group, said yesterday.
Talk in the market suggested they were targeting prices of USDollars 7,
Dollars 8 or even Dollars 9 a troy ounce, compared with last night's closing
London price of Dollars 5.37 1/2 , he added.
Mr Green pointed out that the US speculators were more 'at home' with
silver, which was a much more volatile market than gold. 'It is possible to
double the silver price in a year but that's not possible with gold. Also
there are no central bank sales to threaten the funds' strategy in the
silver market.'
He suggested at the Kalgoorlie Gold Conference that, because many
computer-based trading systems used by funds linked gold and silver prices,
any upward surge in silver would take gold along with it 'but not to Dollars
500 an ounce'.
Mr Green said the funds realised that the market was 'a good play' following
an astonishing rise in silver imports to India after that country
liberalised imports of the metal. This resulted in India importing 3,500
tonnes of silver last year, double the 1992 level and easily an all time
record.
Gold jewellery makers in the US were consuming 200 to 300 tonnes a year, or
double the quantity widely quoted in the industry, suggested Mr Jeffrey
Nichols, managing director of the American Precious Metals Advisors
consultancy organisation.
He said there was probably similar underestimation of gold jewellery
fabrication demand in other industrialised countries. 'This means that the
total world gold market supply demand balance is more bullish that can be
statistically documented,' he added.
Gold Fields Minerals Services' annual review of the gold market is the most
widely quoted statistical reference book and Mr Green said the organisation
had looked carefully when similar claims to Mr Nichols' had been made in the
past but it remained satisfied with its figures.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940311

