FT942-12586

FT  29 APR 94 / Treasury mandarins' cost controls strike home


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


The Treasury's mandarins are threatened with eviction from the grand English
Renaissance-style building that has been a symbol of their power for half a
century. They cannot afford to refurbish it.
The creme de la creme who run the most powerful of Whitehall's empires have
no one to blame but themselves. In their anxiety to impose financial
austerity on the rest of the government machine, the custodians of the
nation's finances have left themselves with an agonising choice.
They can spend tens of millions of pounds of taxpayers' money to refurbish
the run-down offices behind the elegant colonnades, porticos and domes which
face the House of Commons across Parliament Square.
Or they can practise the thrift they preach by selling up to a big City
institution or Japanese hotel developer and joining less exalted colleagues
in a 1960s concrete monstrosity.
Treasury civil servants gaze out on the most imposing sights in Westminster
and Whitehall. Their building, designed in English Renaissance style by one
JM Brydon, was completed in 1915 on five acres of the most prime land in
London.
It has Portland stone facades facing St James's Park, Parliament Square,
Whitehall and the adjacent Foreign and Commonwealth Office in King Charles
Street. The five entrance halls and staircases are built in Mezzaro marble,
the interior offices lined with forests of wood panelling.
But the grandeur of this perfect emblem of empire has been fading since the
Treasury moved in from more modest accommodation along Whitehall during the
last world war.
Workmen have been painstakingly patching up some of the superficial faults.
But one of those now notorious firms of private consultants has discovered a
battery of more serious troubles. Water is flooding the basement, miles of
electrical wiring must be ripped out, stonework is crumbling.
The consultants - and, yes, they are being carefully supervised to ensure
value for money - are to come up with a detailed series of options by the
end of the year. But more officials will have to move out anyway in 1996 and
the present assessment is that proper refurbishment could take nearly a
decade.
So the mandarins are facing up to the possibility of a permanent move. In a
saner world it would be quickly ruled out. Public buildings have a value
beyond the balance sheet. The FCO, after all, is just completing a Pounds
100m refurbishment.
But the Treasury is the promoter of market forces as well as taxpayers'
guardian. There is plenty of cheaper space to be had. With awful mistiming,
it has chosen to prove it is as tough on itself as it is on the rest of
government by launching a fundamental review of how to contain its costs.
You can already hear the sniggering in Whitehall's spending departments.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940429

