FT944-2952

FT  15 DEC 94 / Trafalgar House Stalks Northern Electric: A logical target
and digestible, but easy game? - Northern Electric


   By DAVID LASCELLES


Why, with 12 regional electricity companies to choose from, has Trafalgar
House fixed its sights on Northern Electric?
The choice came as no surprise to the electricity industry, where Northern
has long been seen as the prime takeover target.
Its relatively small size makes it readily digestible - though at last
night's stock market close it was worth Pounds 1.25bn - and a reputation for
lacklustre management would attract predators which think they can do
better.
Another reason could be that Trafalgar has a large presence of its own in
north-east England, which Northern serves from its base in Newcastle. But
the key question is whether Northern is really as vulnerable as the market
thinks.
Much of Northern's reputation is based on financial analysts' personal
impressions of Mr David Morris, the chairman, and his executives, who come
across as rather stuffy and remote.
The company has also been less aggressive than some of its southern rivals
in cutting costs, and though this week's results showed profits up 20 per
cent and the dividend up 16 per cent, this was only average in an industry
famous for spectacular numbers.
Northern has also bought back a chunk of its shares, and reduced its debt,
which puts it in a strong financial position. But, again, this is standard
practice in the industry.
Against that, though, Northern has taken a number of bold steps which have
marked it out from the pack, and caused some analysts to adjust their views.
The most conspicuous was its decision to expand outside its region and sell
electricity to big commercial and industrial customers.
Northern now has the largest supply business of any rec: it sells
electricity to nearly 200 Marks and Spencer stores around the country, for
example. In the last six months it boosted these profits by Pounds 10m.
Like other recs, Northern has also expanded into the gas business. But
rather than just act as a distributor, it went a stage further and bought a
share in a North Sea gas field in partnership with Neste, a large Finnish
energy company. With other recs now complaining that they are being squeezed
in the gas market, Northern has access to its own gas and could therefore be
in a stronger position.
In September Northern took another innovative step by offering to buy back
its shares through an agent rather than directly, a technique which could be
more tax advantageous for shareholders than the straightforward buy-backs
used by most other recs.
But Northern's efforts have earned, at best, mixed reviews. Critics
attribute the success of the supply business to the fact that electricity
generation prices have been capped by the regulator - but only temporarily.
When the cap comes off, Northern could find itself marooned by rising
prices. Similarly, some analysts are reserving judgment on the gas strategy
because of the uncertainties in the market, and on the tax credits until
they are approved by the Inland Revenue.
This suggests that while Northern may have polished up its act, it still
lacks the credibility enjoyed by some other rec managements who have
persuaded the markets that they really know what they are doing.
But Northern will fight a bid, and it clearly thinks it has done
sufficiently well by both its customers and shareholders to be able to count
on their backing.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941215

