FT943-13000

FT  21 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: UK needs effective opposition, not
petulant and petty outbursts


   From Sir COLIN CHANDLER


Sir, With Mortimer on foreign affairs, Brittan on economics and Rogaly on
politics, there's not much need to look elsewhere - congratulations on such
an excellent team.
But can I take issue with Joe Rogaly, whose recently expressed enthusiasm
for a change of government is perhaps ahead of itself? With almost certainly
two and perhaps three years to go before the next general election, should
he not be emphasising the need for an effective opposition party in the
interim? Otherwise the job will be left, as it increasingly has been, to the
less objective sections of the media.
And an effective opposition party depends not just on one person, its
leader, but on the whole team, and I for one have been disappointed with the
performance of most shadow cabinet members recently. One example was a
seemingly petulant and petty outburst by Dr David Clark, the shadow defence
secretary, on the government's recent announcements about agreed orders for
defence equipment.
This company benefited from a contract for 259 Challenger 2 main battle
tanks. Dr Clark dismissed this piece of good news for manufacturing industry
as old news dressed up for the parliamentary occasion. In fact, the
secretary of state for defence announced the government's intention to
purchase up to 259 Challenger 2 tanks on December 1 1993. Without detracting
from that announcement, I am sure that even Mr Malcolm Rifkind would agree
that statements of intent do not necessarily count for very much. What does
count, for the Army, for the taxpayer, for this company and its suppliers,
is the quantity of tanks, the specification, the delivery dates, the price
and the payment terms. To have agreed all of those in 7 1/2 months is
remarkable by any commercial standards.
If Dr Clark had instead said the decision was good news for industry but
should have been taken a long time ago, I would have more confidence that 15
years in opposition had been spent learning about the real world rather than
practising the art of empty slogans.
Colin Chandler,
chief executive,
Vickers,
Millbank Tower,
Millbank,
London SW1P 4RA

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940721

