FT941-5582

FT  05 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Scottish Power accelerates growth with
Clydesdale buy


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


Scottish Power believes it has accelerated its expansion into the English
electrical goods retail market by several years through the acquisition
yesterday of 50 out-of-town superstores from the receivers of the Clydesdale
Group, which collapsed at the end of January.
The deal, along with the sale of Clydesdale's rental book for Pounds 8.3m to
UK Consumer Electronics, part of Granada Group, means the break-up of the
Clydesdale chain which failed because of under-capitalisation, poor sales,
and a costly expansion programme in England.
Grant Thornton, the receivers, should realise up to Pounds 42m from the two
deals, and hopes eventually to achieve asset sales of about Pounds 70m.
Creditors are owed about Pounds 80m.
It said the bid from Scottish Power was the best of three substantial
offers.
The purchase of the superstores in the Midlands and the north of England is
part of a deal worth up to Pounds 34m under which Scottish Power will
acquire 36 superstores in England and 14 in Scotland. It will pay Pounds
16.9m for the stores themselves, and up to Pounds 17m for their stock,
subject to a physical check.
The deal means that Scottish Power will increase the number of its
superstores in England from two to 38, and in Scotland from 12 to 26. Its
retail operation, which includes a number of stores selling brown as opposed
to white goods, as well as 90 high street shops, made an operating profit of
Pounds 4.5m last year on sales of Pounds 90.2m.
Mr Duncan White, one of Scottish Power's two chief operating officers, said
yesterday that it had been proving difficult to secure the space it needed
for its expansion on retail parks. That problem was now solved, he said.
The company said it was not able to bid for the whole group because that
would have raised monopoly issues with the Office of Fair Trading, given its
market share in the Scottish white goods market, estimated at over 30 per
cent. It held discussions with the OFT prior to concluding the deal with the
receivers to establish what would be acceptable.
The receivers are negotiating with potential purchasers of Clydesdale's loan
book, which it hopes will realise Pounds 25m, and have received expressions
of interest for some of the high street stores.
Mr Allan Griffiths, one of the receivers, said the deals with Scottish Power
and Granada would secure the jobs of 600 of the 1,400 Clydesdale employees.
Consultations with staff on possible redundancies will begin on Monday.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940305

