FT944-10891

FT  09 NOV 94 / Delay puts Greek telecoms flotation at risk: The latest
hitch in efforts to sell part of the OTE monopoly


   By KERIN HOPE


It was always going to be difficult for Greece's Socialist government to
push through the flotation of OTE, the state telecoms monopoly, given the
strength of trade union opposition even to partial privatisation.
Yesterday's decision to postpone the flotation of 25 per cent of the
company, set for early December, marks a serious political setback for Mr
Yannos Papantoniou, the economy minister, who is leading the campaign to
modernise Greece's economy.
He hoped to raise at least Dr320bn (Pounds 846m) from the offering, which
would go towards reducing Greece's huge public debt, which amounts to more
than 110 per cent of gross domestic product.
Mr Papantoniou's underlying fear is that last year's failure to float OTE
may be repeated, with possibly calamitous results. The conservative
government collapsed a year ago following defections by parliamentary
deputies opposed to the planned sale of 49 per cent of the company.
The latest postponement came one day after parliament finally approved
legislation to permit the sale, restructure the company and increase tariffs
for domestic calls. The bill permitting all of this had already had a stormy
passage through parliament, with 12 deputies from the ruling Panhellenic
Socialist Movement (Pasok), mainly ex-trade union leaders, abstaining or
voting against it.
Although Mr Papantoniou insisted the flotation would go ahead early next
year, its future must now be in doubt. Parliament is due to vote for a new
president next April and the governing Socialists will be keen to avoid a
fresh confrontation over OTE.
Mr Andreas Papandreou, the country's ageing prime minister, had given his
backing to the economy ministry's plan to sell minority stakes in state
utilities and dispose of several state-controlled banks. But if, as
expected, he runs for the post of president of the parliament as a prelude
to retiring from politics, the privatisation programme is likely to be
placed on hold.
Potential foreign investors in OTE will be worried by the divisions within
Pasok over the company's future. The climate of political uncertainty over
the flotation has been poisoned anyway by recent threats from opposition
conservatives in parliament to take legal action against government
officials if the offering price is too low.
'The row in parliament shows just how contentious this flotation could
become. It's obviously going to have a downward impact on pricing,' one
analyst said.
The government was planning to sell 18 per cent of the company to
institutions in Europe, the US and Japan through a bookbuilding procedure,
and the remaining seven per cent to domestic investors. Greek television and
newspapers have already started advertising the issue and road shows for the
offering were due to begin next week.
However, underwriters are concerned about last minute changes in the terms
of the partial privatisation made after the parliamentary dispute erupted.
Although government officials stress that the restructured OTE will operate
like a private sector company, the unions have been promised that
redundancies will not be permitted.
Like other Greek utilities, OTE is stuffed with patronage appointees.
Trimming its 26,500-member staff is seen as crucial to improving
profitability.
The flotation's postponement also raises broader questions about the
Socialists' commitment to economic reform. Under the terms of Greece's
convergence programme, aimed at meeting the Maastricht targets for European
economic and monetary union, partial privatisations are projected to raise
Dr400bn in the next three years to offset debt.
After last year's failure to meet any convergence plan targets, confidence
remains low in Greece's ability to keep to the terms of a revised plan,
which was grudgingly approved by its EU partners in September.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941109

