FT941-4014

FT  14 MAR 94 / Portugal seeks compromise on power-sharing


   By DAVID MARSH, European Editor


Mr Anbal Cavaco Silva, the Portuguese prime minister, has held out the
possibility of a compromise this week to settle the power-sharing row which
could prevent Austria, Finland, Sweden and Norway joining the European
Union.
In an interview during a visit to London, Mr Cavaco Silva also urged Britain
to rejoin the exchange rate mechanism of the European monetary system it
left in September 1992.
He said he told Mr John Major, the British prime minister, in talks on
Friday that the UK should rejoin the ERM 'to persuade others to move in the
right direction' in progress towards economic and monetary union.
On the EU votes dispute, which pits Britain against most of its EU partners,
Mr Cavaco Silva said he hoped Brussels talks starting tomorrow would agree a
formula under which a minority of states could veto EU decisions in a
16-nation EU.
Most EU members want to raise the so-called 'blocking minority,' the
threshold for blocking decisions in the EU council of ministers, to 27 votes
from 23 at present. Britain and Spain, with some support from Italy, are
insisting on keeping the 23-vote blocking minority unchanged to avoid being
more easily outvoted in the enlarged EU.
Unless resolved, the row could scupper plans for the four members of the
European Free Trade Association (Efta) to join the EU next year.
Mr Cavaco Silva said a deal could set a combination of votes and numbers of
states able to block EU decisions. Since the UK government was 'keen' on
enlarging the EU, he did not think the UK would want the voting disagreement
to hold up accession by the four Efta states.
Mr Cavaco Silva said he agreed on Friday with Mr Major that enlargement
towards the Efta states should be agreed without opening a debate on
fundamental reform of EU decision making, which looks like topping the
agenda of the conference planned for 1996 to review progress of the
Maastricht treaty. 'It would be a mistake to open the institutional question
now,' he said. 'This would not stabilise confidence.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940314

