FT943-13336

FT  20 JUL 94 / Arts: Humidity brings out an epidemic of irritants -
Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


Is it the heat? Or perhaps the humidity? Whatever the reason, numerous
recent programmes have seemed abnormally irritating. Can I really have been
the only one who found the attempt to recapture the charm of The Three
Tenors concert mannered and naff?
It was not merely that the Dodgers' Stadium lacked the magic of the
Caracalla ruins, it was the calculated nature of the occasion. The Italian
concert in 1990 was chaotic, passionate and full of unrehearsed good humour.
The 1994 rerun had all the charm and spontaneity of a petrol pump clicking
up dollar totals.
As for the football which followed - why bother? Since FIFA continues to
spurn the Dunkley Revision, first advocated in this column 12 years ago
(double the width of the goal and scrap the goalie; that should banish all
this nil-nil nonsense and give us score lines of 45-28 or so), future World
Cups might just as well abandon all those tedious 90-minute defence
demonstrations and go straight for the penalty shoot-outs. That way an
entire World Cup competition could be televised in one day. Bliss.
It is not just a question of television's big events, either. At the other
end of the scale, in a matter as small as grammar, the summer programmes are
proving irksome. Maybe the second elevens are staffing the news and current
affairs departments while the senior people are on holiday. Or perhaps
Britain is reaping the whirlwind of barmy educational ideas sown in past
decades. Anyway, more and more television people speak poor English.
It seems there is nobody left in BBC News who understands the difference
between 'convince' and 'persuade', although the distinction is useful: I may
persuade you to lay down your arms without altering your conviction that you
are right. But BBC journalists are forever telling us that so-and-so
'convinced them to lay down their arms'. You persuade to, but convince of.
And what about the ludicrous phrase 'up to' as in 'Up to 600 demonstrators
took part'? Was it 590? Or three? The 'up to' phrase could mean either and
is therefore useless.
At 2.00am on July 12 the Sky News presenter said 'Police believe that up to
two shots were fired'. To say 'at least two shots' would tell us something,
but 'up to' tells us nothing. Irritating.
Of course, English useage is not such a small matter. US reporter Mary
Magistad, introducing herself at a front door in Cambodia during Frontline,
claimed 'I'm with the British 4th Channel'. If she cannot even get the name
of her employer right (referring to Channel 4 in that way is like telling
American teenagers to get their kicks on the 66th Route) then why should we
trust anything else she says?
This was, anyway, yet another of those programmes in which the reporter,
unable to obtain an interview with the chosen subject, this time Pol Pot,
pretends that the pursuit itself is the whole point. Nick Broomfield has now
tried the stunt with Eugene Terre Blanche and Margaret Thatcher and the idea
has worn very thin.
Apart from some anodyne statements from relatives, about Pol Pot having been
such a nice little boy, Magistad's programme told us nothing we did not
already know. John Pilger's programmes about Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge
were so much better, you wonder how anybody dared screen this one.
And what does Keith Floyd think he is up to in Floyd On Italy? He is as
entertaining as ever, even if he occasionally fails to say where he is, but
much of the cooking in this series would have to be described as
Anglo-Italian at best.
It is true that he has, so far, been in the north and rather more butter is
used there than in the south, but only a little more; olive oil still
dominates. Floyd keeps hurling in great wodges of butter in a most
un-Italian way. He also cooks his pasta far too long and then serves his
main meat course on top of it, a practice which I have never observed in 25
years of dedicated Italian eating from the Dolomites to Sicily.
Nor have I ever seen an Italian put Parmesan on a pasta dish containing
fish, or fail to serve the vegetables separately. Floyd ignores all this and
carries on English fashion . . . so what is the point of going to Italy?
Deeply irritating.
But of all last week's vexatious programmes the most niggling was the first
in a new batch of BBC1's tabloid science series QED. It offended
particularly because its pose was one of reasonableness, setting out as it
did to reveal the truth behind the recent 'Killer Bug Ate My Face' flimflam
in the tabloid press.
It is fashionable among television people to adopt an attitude of high
faluting superiority to mere newspaper journalism, and QED's thesis was that
the fuss over necrotising fasciitis was got up entirely by a bunch of
tabloid press wallies. QED was there to tell us that all we had seen in
Stroud was the coincidental occurrence of centuries' worth of nf within a
few weeks. Does that sound more likely than a breakdown somewhere in public
hygiene? (Remember Stroud's outbreak of meningitis in the 1980s?)
Who would be the people most likely to blame if this was not just some
thousands-to-one chance? Presumably the medical profession. So who did QED
interview? The medical profession. And what did they do? Pooh-poohed all the
press hysteria. Is this really what television regards as good journalism?
Very irritating.
The most bizarre programme of the week was surely the first in BBC2's series
Over The Edge. This seemed at first like a Monty Python satire on all those
transexual programmes where men earnestly explain how they spent years
knowing that deep inside they were really women.
In the case of Over The Edge, the men spent years knowing that deep inside
they were really amputees. The American in this programme eventually
achieved amputation by taking a shotgun to his leg, but his young English
admirer was still agonising over the unwillingness of the surgeons to lop
off a limb.
You have to pity such people, but what of the television service which
decides that, among all the world's appalling problems, this is the one that
deserves half an hour of national network time? Ex-tremely irritating.
It is clearly time to take a break from the idiot's lantern. Back in three
weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940720

