FT944-14632

FT  21 OCT 94 / London Stock Exchange: Early gains wiped out by US inflation
concerns - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


Another attempt at a rally in the UK stock market fell apart yesterday
afternoon when US markets and the dollar reacted badly when news of a
substantial rise in the October business index of the Federal Bank of
Philadelphia revived fears of serious inflationary pressures.
An early gain of 22 points on the FT-SE 100 Index was wiped out as Wall
Street opened, although the UK stock market just managed to hold in positive
territory at the close. At least two large trading programmes were caught in
the market's sudden downswing, provoking arbitrage trading between stock
index futures and equities.
At the close, the FT-SE 100 was 2.4 up on the day at 3,063.2 after peaking
at 3,083.2. The blame for the reversal of confidence was put squarely on the
Philadelphia Fed; its diffusion index more than doubled this month, with the
prices component also unexpectedly strong. US federal bonds declined sharply
and Europe soon felt the effect.
Of the day's two large trading programmes, one was a protected programme
which appeared to be unwound through the market before the details reached
the trading screens. The earlier programme was largely completed before the
market turned off.
Trading programmes are somewhat risky operations in the current market
volatility and there were hints yesterday that a UK investment bank planned
wide-ranging staff cuts. Rumours of another round of swingeing cutbacks in
the City of London have been circulating for the past month.
The session was alive with developments which could have affected market
trading, but dealers said other factors were brushed aside by the
Philadelphia bank's announcement. Comments by the president and the chief
economist of the Bundesbank on currency prospects were swamped by later
developments. On the domestic front, markets made little immediate reaction
to the resignation of a junior minister as the UK government faced a
political storm over allegations of improper payments. Domestic money supply
figures were also taken calmly.
Trading volume in equities, taking in the trading programmes, rose by 10 per
cent from the previous session's level to a total of 660.3m shares through
the Seaq electronic network. Non-Footsie business made up around 58 per cent
of overall business. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained 3.7 at 3,524.9.
The uncertainty over the US dollar that has become the chief feature of
stock markets over the past fornight showed itself yesterday in further
switching towards the UK financial sectors, which are seen as less
vulnerable to international currency factors. Bank shares registered useful
gains on a day when the final picture was somewhat gloomy.
The blue chip dollar stocks looked better at first and continued to hold up
until the London close, escaping the effects of comments from the US
Treasury that currency intervention was not planned. However, UK traders
expressed some nervousness when the dollar renewed its setback after the
close of the London market. The Dow Industrial Average, 23 points off in UK
trading hours, extended its loss later.
In addition to its worries over the dollar, the UK market this morning faces
a further test of confidence when the gross domestic product numbers for the
third quarter are published.
City forecasts are for a further rise of less than 1 per cent, compared with
the 1.1 per cent growth for the previous three-month period. A stronger
figure, and some estimates range up to 1 per cent growth, could cause some
nervousness as the stock market braces itself for the budget, planned for
the end of November.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

941021

