FT942-15679

FT  14 APR 94 / Companies expect sales to rise


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Economics Correspondent


Companies are highly optimistic about prospects for increased sales and new
orders in spite of fears that this year's tax increases might damage the
recovery, according to a new survey by Dun & Bradstreet, the business
information company.
Like many other business surveys, Dun & Bradstreet calculates its figures by
subtracting the percentage of respondents forecasting a decrease in a
variable, from those predicting an increase.
The balance of companies expecting an increase in net sales over the next
three months is 60 per cent - its highest level since the second quarter of
1989.
The balance of companies expecting an increase in net new orders, the
balance is 56 per cent, up from 41 per cent in the first quarter of 1994.
The survey also reveals a revival in the fortunes of the construction
sector. Of 200 construction companies surveyed, 70 per cent expect sales to
be higher over the next quarter.
Dun & Bradstreet's figures on inflationary pressure are somewhat
contradictory.
The balance of companies expecting to increase prices over the next three
months, at 23 per cent, has increased only slightly on the 20 per cent
recorded in the previous quarter.
More than six out of 10 retailers intend, either to keep their prices at the
same level, or reduce them.
However, among retailers, the balance expecting to increase prices over the
next three months was 34 per cent, up sharply from 23 per cent in the
previous quarter.
Mr Philip Mellor, senior analyst at Dun & Bradstreet said: 'Companies are
well aware that the recovery is too weak to pass increases in costs on to
the customer. Consequently, profit margins are being sacrificed in a bid to
offset price rises.'
In general, companies were less optimistic about profits than about sales or
new orders in the next three months.
A balance of 42 per cent of companies expected to increase profits over the
next three months, up only slightly from the 41 per cent recorded in the
first quarter.
On employment, a balance of 27 per cent of companies expects to take on new
staff, the highest figure since the third quarter of 1989.
Dun & Bradstreet questioned more than 2,000 managing directors between March
18 and March 28.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940414

