FT943-13210

FT  21 JUL 94 / Leading Article: A soft-shoe reshuffle


Mr John Major's new cabinet, announced yesterday, is not unlike the one that
preceded it. The significance of the reshuffle was greater in the
anticipation than the deliverance. Weeks of advance fanfare have been
followed by the quiet rasp of soft shoes. Three ministers who had long been
ready to leave office did so; one was dismissed for poor performance. There
was rather more changing of titles and offices in the middle and junior
ranks of the administration, but that is a standard way of keeping
backbenchers in a state of hope of preferment. It is a whip's stratagem.
This is not to say that the changes are a nullity. The new faces may be
better on TV than the old. Mr John Patten was hardly a success as education
secretary; Mrs Gillian Shephard, a former teacher, is likely to soothe the
profession and bed down the national curriculum. She may not be a creative
policymaker, but she should be a safe pair of hands. Mr Peter Brooke,
unexpectedly brought in from retirement to serve at national heritage, did
so with moderate distinction. His successor, Mr Stephen Dorrell, is one of
the brighter characters in the mini-drama. For him heritage may be a
disappointing ticket to the cabinet room.
The move of Mr Michael Portillo to employment will test both his
administrative abilities and the government's intentions on education and
training. He is as right-wing as his predecessor, Mr David Hunt, was left,
but the portfolio does not offer unlimited scope for demonstrating either
proclivity. He will team up with Mr Peter Lilley, rightwing secretary for
social security, to introduce the new Job Seekers Allowance.
Mr Portillo is succeeded as chief secretary by Mr Jonathan Aitken, another
Eurosceptic. Mr Jeremy Hanley, previously unknown, becomes chairman of the
party. He has taken over an institution whose performance can hardly
decline.
Lord Wakeham had outstayed his usefulness in the upper house. He deserved
his unofficial title of 'Lord Fixit' but recently too much legislation has
emerged from the Lords in a broken state. His job has been subdivided. One
of his successors, Viscount Cranborne, will bring a Cecil back to prominence
among Conservatives; another, Mr David Hunt, may become as adept as Lord
Wakeham was at smoothing troubled waters, arranging deals, spotting hazards,
fixing it. Mr William Waldegrave deservedly survives, and moves to
agriculture. At transport, Mr John MacGregor had for some time intimated his
readiness to retire; his replacement, Dr Brian Mawhinney, is good at
presentation.
At best, yesterday's change-around marks a small but discernible step in the
long battle by the prime minister to recover his administration's authority.
The previous steps are well-known. The government was blown off-course in
September 1992 when sterling was ejected from the exchange rate mechanism.
Stability has been restored, at the cost of ceding greater influence over
monetary policy to the Bank of England. The electorate is proving slow to
respond to the improved economic outlook, but it may do so in time. The
Conservative party's divisions over Europe have been papered over.
In short, the cabinet reshuffle may be taken as evidence that the government
believes it has passed through the nadir of its unpopularity. It probably
has. As part of the process of regaining poise, yesterday's moves are
unlikely to harm Mr Major. Nor are they likely to prove memorable. The prime
minister is doomed to continue the struggle to put a distinctive stamp on
his government.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940721

