FT944-6024

FT  01 DEC 94 / Growth in US revised upward to 3.9%


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The US economy grew faster than previously reported in the third quarter as
businesses invested more heavily in new equipment, the Commerce Department
said yesterday.
Real gross domestic product increased at an annual rate of 3.9 per cent
during the third quarter, the department said, rather than the 3.4 per cent
rate it had announced a month ago in its advance estimate.
This indicated only a modest slowdown from the 4.1 per cent pace of growth
in the second quarter, although economists caution the number could still
change substantially by the time the Commerce Department issues its final
third-quarter GDP figure next month.
Most of the change from the earlier figure was accounted for by a rise in
the estimate of non-residential fixed investment, which rose at an
annualised rate of 14.4 per cent in the third quarter, more than twice as
fast as originally reported.
Within this investment figure, capital equipment purchases by producers rose
at an 18.0 per cent rate, which should have favourable implications for
future productivity, and thus reduce the risk of inflationary pressures.
Although the pace of inventory building slowed from the second quarter, it
remained rapid and has added more than a percentage point of growth to GDP
in the first three quarters.
One of the difficulties economists have had in assessing the path of the US
economy this year has been determining the extent to which producers have
been increasing their inventories voluntarily, or have simply found
themselves stuck with excess stocks.
In another report that slightly eased worries about the build-up of
inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve issued revisions to its
statistics on industrial production and capacity utilisation over the last
three years.
The new data, which incorporate additional information from trade
associations and new estimates of industrial capacity, show that industrial
production grew more strongly in 1991 and 1992 than previously reported, but
slower in 1993 and 1994. This slower rate is attributed largely to the
introduction of new weights assigned to the computer industry to take
account of the sharp drop in the price of computing power over the years.
After the revision, the rate of industrial capacity utilisation in October
drops to 84.6 per cent, from the 84.9 per cent originally reported, while
the capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector drops from 84.7 per
cent to 84.0 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941201

