FT942-16048

FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (1): Small, scenic and flexible - The
most successful of the former Yugoslav republics is working towards
integration into western Europe


   By LAURA SILBER


The past is another country for the great majority of Slovenes. They feel
their country has emerged from seven decades as a minor player in the
Yugoslav drama to assume its rightful role as an independent, central
European state.
Nearly three years after breaking away from the Serb-dominated Yugoslav
federation, Slovenes bristle when compared to the war-torn republics further
south, while breathing a sigh of relief at having escaped the war which is
wrenching the lives of their former countrymen.
Over the past year, Slovenia has continued on its steady course, joining
international financial institutions and signing several free trade
agreements. By the end of 1994 it is likely to join the other post-communist
states of central Europe as an associate member of the European Union, and
has signed up for Nato's 'partnership for peace.'
Mr Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister, who heads the broadly-based coalition
government, outlines a modest, pragmatic programme for the immediate future.
'We will continue without making any spectacular moves, pursuing sound,
moderate policies of economic development and stability,' he says.
While these aims would be little more than a pious wish list for much of
eastern and central Europe, they are a practical reality for this scenic
Alpine country of 2m inhabitants lying between Italy, Austria, Hungary and
Croatia.
Politically, the country is striving towards stability. Mr Milan Kucan, the
president, a former communist who led Slovenia's drive for independence,
remains popular, with his support crossing party lines. At the same time, Mr
Drnovsek has gained ground, widening the distance between his Liberal
Democrats and their next challenger, the Christian Democrats. Earlier this
month his party merged with three smaller left-of-centre parties and now
holds one-third of the 90-seat national assembly.
In a small country, however, small storms can sometimes take on threatening
proportions. Debate has been raging over state security and allegations of
wire-tapping, in revelations much trumpeted by Mr Janez Jansa, the
controversial minister of defence who was ousted last month.
Economically, however, there is growing confidence that the worst of the
post-independence re-adjustment is over and Slovenia is set on the road to
prosperity. This confidence is borne out by statistics. For the first time
since Slovenia declared independence in June 1991, GDP has stopped
contracting. Independence was followed by a 10-day war against the Yugoslav
People's Army in which a handful of Slovenes, several Turkish truck drivers
and some 50 young conscript soldiers died.
After the violent break-up of Yugoslavia, Slovenia lost one-third of its
export markets in the other former federal republics. That was a serious
shock for an economy where more than 60 per cent of GDP is realised through
trade. It led to a determined search for new markets. Last year GDP grew by
1 per cent and similar growth is forecast for 1994. Inflation dropped from
92.9 per cent in 1992 (on an annualised average) to about 20 per cent last
year.
'There is a bit more optimism, because growth means there will be fewer
social tensions and Slovenia will be more stable,' says Mr Ali Zerdin, a
journalist with Mladina, the independent weekly.
Last year's resumption of growth ended a two-year slump. But consolidating
the recovery still depends on measures to reduce public spending and wages.
For in spite of efforts to freeze wages, incomes rose nearly 14 per cent
last year, to an estimated Dollars 6,050 per head. This is not only higher
than the other former Yugoslav states but also well beyond the level of
average incomes in post-communist states such as Hungary, the Czech republic
and Poland, which are competing with Slovenia for investment and jobs. A lot
of painful restructuring still lies ahead, especially among loss-making
heavy industry. The government plans to privatise many larger companies by
the end of the year - even though this will increase unemployment, already
at 15 per cent.
But the financial structure is also being over-hauled. Government experts
responsible for the restructuring of banks agree that there are too many
banks, and most of them are under-capitalised. As further restructuring
takes place, the authorities would like to see the numbers drastically
reduced from the present 32 to about six main banking institutions. They
claim progress in cleaning up the balance sheets.
On the monetary front, Mr France Arhar, governor of the central bank, says
that Slovenia will continue its highly restrictive monetary policy and keep
a strong national currency. Politicians agree. 'We will continue with our
restrictive monetary policies and our balanced budget,' the prime minister
confirms.
The results are already tangible. The tolar (the national currency
introduced in October 1991) has remained stable while hard currency reserves
have risen from virtually zero to about Dollars 1.7bn.
While the economic picture has brightened, the question of unresolved
foreign debt threatens Slovenia's credit rating. Government officials are
anxious to settle the allocation of Dollars 1bn debt owed by the former
Yugoslavia. They feel, however, that their creditors are expecting Slovenia
 -the most prosperous country born of the collapsed Federation - to shoulder
an inequitable part of the burden.
But until the fighting ends in the former Yugoslavia, Slovenia's full
potential will remain under-exploited. While nostalgia for Yugoslavia is
publicly absent, Slovene businessmen admit that they look back somewhat
wistfully to the old days when they had easy access to Serbia's cheap raw
materials, easier transport links, and the 22m-strong markets of the former
Yugoslav republics. All the latter are now depressed by plummeting incomes,
or cut off by war and the UN embargo on trade with Serbia. While still able
to trade with Macedonia, the UN ban on transhipment through Serbia and
blocked access to the Danube underlines the disruptive impact of the war.
Three years ago, these almost captive markets eagerly bought Slovene
products, in particular, light industrial consumer goods which were of
higher quality than most Yugoslav products, and less expensive than those
imported from Western Europe.
In the past, critics dismissed the prospects for Slovene independence
because of its small size and population. But this now appears to be an
asset. A diplomat puts it simply: 'Slovenia is small enough to be flexible.'
Furthermore, the volume of Slovene exports will never be large enough to
upset its neighbours, but if it is increased it will guarantee most Slovenes
a comfortable standard of living.
While the fighting continues in Bosnia, and until the Croats and Serbs
reconcile their differences, an independent Slovenia physically separates
the prosperous European Union from the Balkan imbroglio further south. It
sees its future as full integration into the EU and Nato. But Slovenes also
worry about the cultural and economic influence of their bigger neighbours,
Italy, Austria and Croatia, and how their ethnically homogeneous state will
manage to preserve a culture and language which survived five centuries of
Austro-Hungarian rule.
There is some ambivalence and fear over the pace of integration. For some
factory managers, for example, foreign investment is still tantamount to
foreign rule. But a confident Mr Drnovsek believes that Slovenia will
continue to 'develop as a stable European country' as the young state leaves
the past behind.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940412

