FT941-4057

FT  12 MAR 94 / Arts: Dame Kiri, the Housewife Diva - In celebratory mood,
Alastair Macaulay attends her 50th birthday concert


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Kiri at 50] Those of us for whom Kiri has been a part of our lives for more
than 20 years are all gratitude. As she said to us at her Albert Hall gala
celebration the Albert Hall on Thursday, 'Tonight I've encountered nothing
but love.' Also: 'Fifty is nifty.' What a gal]
We give thanks for her voice, her charm, her frocks, and - not least - her
hairdos. We loved the Pounds 5 programme most for the umpteen photographs it
bore of her: Kiri ash-blonde, Kiri deep brunette, Kiri bouffante, Kiri with
ringlets . . . We know her voice has even more lights than her hair, but we
think it is a close-run thing. And as for the slice of Jane Asher and
Sainsbury's birthday cake that each of us received, well, Kiri, thanks a
million.
For us, so many memories . . . We recall Bernard Levin proclaiming that the
word Kiri would be found written on his heart (and she sang the Countess's
first aria from Figaro, the aria that helped to propel her into legend). We
are haunted by Kiri's dress for the 1981 royal wedding (Kit and the Widow
likened her to 'an illuminated opal fruit'). We cherished Kiri's rugby
anthem; and we could never forget the TV special she began by with 'Mi
chiamano Mimi - but you can call me Kiri.'
For Dame Kiri is famous not only for her voice but also - like Dame Edna -
for her niceness. Edna is Housewife Superstar; Kiri is Housewife Diva. Clive
James, who joined her onstage at the end of Thursday's celebration, was
there to represent all her admirers. 'Your voice is from heaven,' he told
her, 'and your feet are on the ground.' Yes, that's our Kiri.
Possibly Kiri gets her niceness from being a Maori. On Thursday, to remind
us of her roots, she brought the whole Waihirere Maori Group to Britain, to
sing and dance for her at the Albert Hall. Then, after joining them in two
Maori numbers, Kiri sang them 'Climb every mountain': after listening
awkwardly to which they promptly departed.
Now, what is nicest about Kiri's niceness is how carefully she directs it to
the maximum audience. Don't fret if you weren't there on Thursday, for it
will be on ITV, and Decca will shortly release it on CD, cassette, and
video. The most interesting thing about being there live, in fact, was to
compare the actual Kiri to the magnified projection of her on screen. It
proved impossible not to keep turning to the projection, because Kiri kept
addressing the camera. Those dark eyes are stunning, but they would hardly
have registered on us mere paying mortals in the Albert Hall had we not been
able to see them via the camera.
And the same goes for her voice. It is still wonderfully lustrous, only
slightly less well-nourished than of old, rich with so many different
lights, glowing from deep within. It has changed remarkably little since the
first time I heard it, 21 years ago, when she was the offstage Priestess in
Aida; I had never, I thought, heard anything more beautiful. The main thing
that has changed is the way she projects it. It used a voice that made you
positively glad to be in the higher recesses of Covent Garden, for you felt
its impact all the more amazedly far away up there.
These days, however, it doesn't beam out with that kind of address; and on
Thursday Kiri was mainly addressing the microphones. As the evening
progressed, and as she moved - via Rodgers and Hammerstein and Kurt Weill -
to Lloyd Webber, she sang with the aid of more and more amplification. In
terms of audience effect, this paid off. In the first half, the house had
received her pretty and careful accounts of items from the classic rep with
only the merest spattering of applause.
Later, however, Kiri the crossover artist, voice flooding through the
speakers, eyes so gorgeously twinkling into the camera, began to rouse the
audience into life. She even gave us 'With one look' from Sunset Boulevard.
(Just think what a nice Norma Desmond she'd make.) It had glamour, it was
voluptuous . . . and it was even more pre-packaged than Patti Lupone's.
True, Kiri would not be our Kiri were she not an icon of popular culture as
well as of opera. (She would be merely Te Kanawa.) Still, as I marvel again
at that voice, I wish, not that she would tackle less, just that she would
make more of it. But the chances are that Kiri will never know what it is to
be fully awake as an artist, spontaneous and intense. Happy to be the nice,
lovely, arranged, ordinary media personality she knows how to be so well,
she is a sleeping beauty of our day - charming, guarded, and dreamy.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

940312

