FT941-5572

FT  05 MAR 94 / Economic diary - Forward events


TOMORROW: Moldovan referendum on independence and territorial integrity.
IGEDO international fashion trade fair opens in Dusseldorf (until March 8).
Raymond James & Associates holds annual investment conference in Florida.
MONDAY: Credit business (January). Housing starts and completions (January).
US consumer credit (January). Central bank governors hold monthly meeting at
Bank of International Settlements in Basle. European Union general affairs
council meets in Brussels. European Parliament in plenary session in
Strasbourg. Engineering workers in Germany due to strike. Nordic Council
meeting in Stockholm (until March 10). Mr John Laware, Federal governor, to
address Institute of International Bankers in Washington.
TUESDAY: Cyclical indicators for the UK economy (January-second estimate).
Index of production (January).
WEDNESDAY: US wholesale trade (January). Inaugural meeting of the European
Union's Committee of the Regions in Brussels (until March 10). Mr Warren
Christopher, US secretary of state, visits Tokyo. Results from BAT
Industries, RTZ Corporation and Standard Chartered.
THURSDAY: Details of employment, unemployment, earnings, prices and other
indicators. US retail sales (February). Meeting of Anglo-Irish
inter-governmental Ulster conference to assess progress of consultations
over framework for new inter-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland.
National People's Congress begins its annual session in Beijing. European
Unions ministers responsible for the single market meet in Brussels.
Informal meeting of the European Union social affairs ministers in Greece.
Results from Smith & Nephew and TI Group.
FRIDAY: Usable steel production (February). Balance of visible trade
(December). Construction output (fourth quarter). Capital issues and
redemptions (February). Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state,
arrives in Beijing on an official visit (until March 14).

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940305

