FT941-5561

FT  05 MAR 94 / World Stock Markets: New threat to turbulent US financial
markets - Renewed volatility after two years of relative calm is making
matters worse


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


After enjoying mostly plain sailing throughout 1992 and 1993, investors in
US stocks have encountered some rough seas in the past month.
The turbulence of the past few weeks has been particularly unsettling
because the year started so well. In January, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average climbed more than 200 points, or almost 6 per cent, to a record high
of 3,978.36. The Standard & Poor's 500, a broader measure of market
performance, advanced by 3.5 per cent to a peak of 481.61.
The end of January, however, proved to be the lull before the storm. In
February, share prices struggled to keep their footing. The Dow fell 150
points, or 3.7 per cent, during the month, and the S & P 500 declined by 3
per cent.
The sudden change in climate was prompted by the Federal Reserve's decision
on February 4 to raise short-term interest rates by pushing the Federal
funds rate up from 3 per cent to 3.25 per cent. It was the first tightening
of monetary policy in five years and, although a rate increase had been
expected on Wall Street, the timing caught investors off guard.
The move was seen as an attempt by the Fed to keep long-term interest rates
low by displaying its readiness to take pre-emptive action against the
threat of inflation. It was also partly a technical manoeuvre, designed to
bring real interest rates (nominal interest rates minus the rate of
inflation) back up from near zero to more historical levels.
The rate increase, however, has had a disastrous impact on bond and stock
market sentiment. Bond prices have tumbled, and yields have jumped amid
growing concern that the heady pace of recent growth is stoking inflationary
fires within the economy.
Some analysts on Wall Street are appalled at this mess. Ms Nancy Kimelman,
chief economist with Technical Data, says: 'There should be no question in
anyone's mind that the move in the funds rate from 3 per cent to 3.25 per
cent, intended to reduce inflationary expectations, failed miserably. Not
only has the bond market responded to the rise in short-term rates by
jacking up the yield on the long bond by 75 basis points, but markets around
the world, which have been rather complacent about inflation, are now
focused almost entirely on the prospect of renewed inflation. The question
is: will the Fed try this again?'
To make matters worse, financial markets also now have to contend with the
threat of a trade war between the US and Japan. On Thursday, President
Clinton reinstated the 'Super 301' provision to US trade law that allows the
government to impose trade sanctions against any country which employs
unfair trade restrictions on US goods and services. The bond market is
particularly fearful of a trade war because it could lead to a sharp rise in
the price of imported Japanese goods, which would only fuel inflation
further.
If declining prices have not been bad enough for investors, the return of
volatility is also making their lives miserable. While 1992 and 1993 will be
most remembered for the stock market's impressive performance, and the
unprecedented flows of investor cash into the equity market, those two years
also marked an extraordinary period of stability in share prices.
Mr David Shulman, the chief stock market strategist at Salomon Brothes in
New York, highlighted the unusual lack of volatility in the last few years
in a recent report. He found that share price volatility, as measured by the
percentage difference between the S & P 500's peak and trough of each year,
was remarkably low in 1992 and 1993, measuring 11.8 per cent and 9.8 per
cent, respectively. Both were record lows for volatility, and compared with
an average volatility in the S & P 500 since 1934 of 28.4 per cent.
Mr Shulman explains the sharp drop in volatility between 1992 and 1993 by
pointing to a decrease in correlation between the S & P 500 and its
constituent industry groups. While traditionally, the index's industry
groups have tended to move as one (when auto stocks do well, so do drug
stocks, when transportation stocks are weak, so are financials), in 1992
group correlation began to fall sharply as the different sectors started
dancing to different beats.
The main reason for this, says the Salomon analyst, was high share
valuations, which forced money managers to rotate holdings rapidly in a
continual search for sectors that were either cheap or had price and/or
earnings momentum. The end result was less correlation between industry
groups, so less volatility, because when one sector did well, another
performed badly. The two cancelled each other out, leaving the S & P 500
little changed.
In the past month or so, however, volatility has begun to return, with the S
& P 500 groups moving in tandem once again. This helps explain why, since
the February rate increase, the market has been up sharply one minute, and
down just as sharply the next - a consequence of many sectors moving in the
same direction.
Why is this happening? Mr Shulman ventures that it is both a statistical
regression to the mean, and the result of an economic recovery that is
finally beginning to look more normal. And when the economy returns to
normal, so does the pattern of share price movements.
The message in all this is that investors should expect more volatility in
coming months. This is a worrying prospect, because in the past, when
periods of unusually low volatility have come to a close, they have more
often than not been followed by a decisive movement in the stock market.
With share prices so high, Mr Shulman warns that the decisive movement this
time is likely to be downward. For investors, more stormy seas may lie
ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940305

