FT942-14898

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (13): Time for a breather
 -Insurance rates have peaked


   By RICHARD LAPPER


Buyers of motor fleet insurance have faced significant increases in their
costs in the last three years.
In response to heavy theft and accident losses on motor fleet business and
after suffering their worst overall losses in the history, in 1991 and 1992
the UK's biggest insurance companies increased rates sharply and reduced
their exposure to motor fleet insurance.
However, there have been signs recently that rates are beginning to fall as
competition returns to the market.
'Rates are holding at present levels or if anything getting cheaper,' says
Mr David Ney, executive director of Willis Corroon Risk Management, the risk
management arm of the the insurance broker.
Royal Insurance, one of the country's largest composite insurer, which
imposed rate rises of 24 per cent in 1992 and 15 per cent in 1993, said its
rates remained flat at the beginning of this year.
And at Lloyd's, underwriters say rates are dropping. 'There are definitely
lower rates around. The prices at which business is being underwritten is
tending to fall,' says Mr Martin Gibbins, underwriter for Wessex Motor
Policies at Lloyd's, part of the Wellington Group.
Mr Gibbins cautions, however, that the picture is uneven and that on average
his group renewed most policies at the beginning of this year with small
increases.
Although there has been some reduction in theft claims, partially reflecting
the introduction of security devices by many fleet managers, drivers of
company cars are still more likely to have an accident than drivers who use
their own cars.
Mr Ney says that accident frequency rates of 60 per cent, in which six
drivers out of every 10 insured have an accident, are typical for motor
fleets, compared with 20 to 25 per cent for private motorists.
Mr Ney cites some examples of accident frequency rates of more than 100 per
cent.
So why is fleet insurance becoming cheaper? One reason is that a number of
new insurers are chasing business.
Mr Gibbins says that up to a dozen Lloyd's syndicates are now 'dabbling' in
motor fleet business, compared with five or six syndicates underwriting the
business last year.
In addition, a number of companies who treated motor fleet business with
'disdain' a year ago are now rediscovering their appetite for the class.
Mr Ney suggests that rate competition in the personal motor market, which
has been fired by the growth of direct telephone-based companies such as
Direct Line, Churchill and The Insurance Service, is now 'bleeding through
to the fleet market'.
The implication here is that companies who are losing significant portions
of the personal market to their more technologically advanced competitors
are compensating by bidding competitively to win motor fleet business.
General Accident, the Perth-based composite, scaled back its involvement in
the market for larger fleets last march. Mr Nigel Lister, the company's
assistant general manager (UK), says he believes competition is now
returning to the market, making the class less viable than it was a year ago
and confirming his company's pessimistic assessment of the class. GA is
concentrating its efforts on becoming a market leader for mini or small
fleets of up to 25 vehicles.
GA carried out a detailed study of the market over the past 17 years and
came to the conclusion 'that at the end of the day there is nothing anybody
will be able to do unless the whole market says it cannot write risks at
these rates,' explains Mr Lister.
Mr Lister says that GA's operating ratios (claims plus expenses as a
percentage of premiums) were among the best in the market, indicating that
marketwide losses in the class are inevitable. 'There are always a few
companies who think they have got it right. The whole thing shifts gears,
moves sideways and just trundles along in the same old way,' he says.
'It is the same old merry go round. I'm absolutely convinced that nobody is
going to make money on large fleets.'
Mr Lister says that one of the main difficulties faced by motor fleet
underwriters is the long tail of liability claims, a problem which has
become more acute since most bigger fleets usually limit their insurance to
third party coverage.
Companies says Mr Lister is assessing its premium rates on the basis of a
claims history stretching back only three years. Yet many of the heaviest
claims can take up to five years to crystallise.
The implications of this rate competition could undermine efforts by
insurers to make fleet managers more safety and security concious.
Mr Gibbins says that even in current market conditions there is still scope
to press policyholders to introduce alarms, immobilisers and transponders to
their vehicles. Transponders, small electronic tag devices embedded in the
body of cars and lorries, allow the police to track the whereabouts of
stolen vehicles.
However Mr Lister and Mr Ney are less optimistic. Mr Ney says: 'Forward
thinking companies are always going to embrace risk management but for many
the motivation to improve risk is financially driven. If premium costs fall,
it makes the benefits of driver testing less attractive.'
General Accident introduced an arrangement which offered discounts for fleet
managers who sent their drivers on approved training courses, but Mr Lister
says that take-up was limited.
'In a surprising number of cases we just got a blank look. People would say
'we just can't afford to have a driver off the road'.'
Many people were just not interested 'despite all the hype', added Mr
Lister. Those companies that practise risk management are 'shining beacons.
They are very conspicuous indeed.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940418

