FT941-3506

FT  16 MAR 94 / Major says IRA cannot bomb its way to talks


   By DAVID OWEN and MICHAEL CASSELL


The IRA cannot bomb its way to the negotiating table, Mr John Major told MPs
yesterday, as the government stepped up efforts in a series of
behind-closed-doors meetings to co-ordinate a convincing response to the
latest wave of terrorist attacks.
A 50-minute meeting yesterday morning between the prime minister and Mr
James Molyneaux focused on the political talks process and security, with
the Ulster Unionist party leader calling for pressure to be put on Dublin to
crack down on terrorism.
This was followed immediately by a secret session of the cabinet
subcommittee on terrorism, chaired by Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, and
containing seven of his cabinet colleagues.
The prime minister is understood to have held a second short meeting with Mr
Molyneaux yesterday afternoon.
The UUP leader later released a toughly worded statement describing Dublin's
'updated' arrangements for dealing with terrorists as 'seriously flawed' and
the lack of results as 'quite scandalous'.
He dealt a blow to the government's hopes of pressing ahead with the
three-stranded political talks process, saying that institutionalised
structures for dealing with north-south relations - such as those advocated
by nationalists - would not serve any practical purpose and 'merely create
suspicion'.
Pressure for the government to ensure that a tougher line is taken against
terrorism will increase tomorrow when the Tory backbench Northern Ireland
committee meets.
Meanwhile, Downing Street hinted that moves might be put in train to stage
another meeting between the prime minister and Mr Albert Reynolds, his Irish
counterpart, before their next scheduled get-together in June. One informed
source said he was certain the two men would meet before June.
It was announced yesterday that in April Mr Molyneaux will lead a
four-strong delegation to the US to meet senior politicians and White House
and State Department officials. The visit follows criticism of the unionists
for not going to the US to state their case at the same time as Mr Gerry
Adams, Sinn Fein president.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940316

