FT944-2694

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (8): Award marks a
turning point - Profile, Iveco


   By DAVID LANE


For Fiat Group's Iveco commercial vehicles subsidiary, Maastricht is rather
more than the quiet Dutch city where the European Union treaty was signed 2
1/2 years ago. Although much less attention was paid to the Maastricht Bus
Show at the end of October, it was nevertheless an important event for Iveco
and for Europe's other bus and coachmakers.
At Maastricht, Iveco's EuroClass HD highdecker won the 1995 Coach of the
Year award. Giancarlo Boschetti, Iveco's managing director, said that the
bus sector was a core business of strategic importance to the company.
In spite of difficult market conditions over recent years, Iveco has
continued to invest in the bus sector, developing new vehicles and its plant
at Valle Ufita near Naples. The EuroClass HD, with its emphasis on safety,
use of non-corroding materials, low fuel consumption and conformity to tight
environmental standards, is a result of Iveco's commitment to the bus sector
Winning the award in Maastricht aptly winds up a year which has been a
turning point for the company. After a particularly bleak period, results
are at last improving. Announcing its half-year figures at the end of
September, Turin-based Fiat was able to point to Iveco's sales of 50,700
units, 13.7 per cent up on the figures for January to June 1993. Revenues in
lire were 17.6 per cent higher at L4,198bn.
Managers are confident that the company will break even this year. They
describe this as an enormous turnround. This is an understatement given that
Iveco, a Netherlands-registered company, recorded a loss of FL 592m (Dollars
339m) on sales of FL 8,437m last year. It was the second successive year of
falling revenues and third successive year of losses.
The company expected a difficult year, but it turned out to be worse than
anticipated. Indeed, Iveco was making losses at operating level, before
financial charges, during the first part of 1993. Cash flow for the year was
negative. At the year-end net financial indebtedness increased to FL 1,812m,
approaching the level reached in December 1984 at the end of the previous
recession.
It is a measure of the depths plumbed last year that Iveco's net sales were
only 1.6 per cent higher than those recorded in 1984, while losses were 49.9
per cent higher. 'The industry is feeling the effects of a pan-European
recession which has lasted longer and bitten more deeply than anyone ever
anticipated,' the company commented in its report earlier this year.
In its Italian home market, where more than one in two of new vehicles
exceeding 3.5 tonnes carries the Iveco badge and which absorbs more than one
third of the company's European sales, Iveco's volumes fell by a quarter
last year to 26,300 units. The company suffered steep declines in France
(down 18.5 per cent to 10,600 units), Germany (down 13.8 per cent to 13,200
units) and Spain (down 42.9 per cent to 5,100 units).
Only the UK relieved an otherwise awful European situation. Iveco was able
to benefit from the upturn in UK sales, beating the market's 7.8 per cent
improvement by increasing its volume by 22.4 per cent. Sales of 9,000 units
earned the company a 24.8 per cent share of the UK market for commercial
vehicles exceeding 3.5 tonnes.
Iveco's management notes that the company was particularly affected by the
recession because the market collapsed when its investment programme was
making heaviest demands. In its 1993 report, the company notes that the old
ranges have been phased out leading to 'complete renewal of the product
range'.
The EuroStar vehicles for long distance transport and EuroTrakker trucks for
heavy duty quarry and construction site work were introduced last year.
Earlier this year the EuroCargo range was joined by 4x4 vehicles for
off-road uses. Iveco's EuroCargo range of medium and medium-heavy 6-tonne to
18-tonne vehicles, launched in 1991, won the Truck of the Year award for
1992.
The company stamped its name on the European truck scene the following year
when it won the award again, the first constructor to win in successive
years. On this occasion the award went to its EuroTech 18-tonne to 26-tonne
medium-heavy to heavy range.
Research and development expenses reflect the efforts to renew the model
range. From 1988 to 1992, annual expenditure was between FL 470m and FL
560m. Last year, expenditure dropped to FL 363m, though the fall in sales
meant that research and development's share of revenues continued to be
above 4 per cent.
Investment in plant and equipment has also made significant demands on
Iveco's financial resources. When sales volumes and revenues peaked in 1989,
the company's gross new fixed investment was also peaking, the FL 1,000m
representing 8 per cent of net sales. Investment continued to weigh heavily
in the following three years, but fell to FL 352m (just over 4 per cent of
net sales) last year.
'The years of big spending designed to develop and to protect the business
are behind us. The level of investment in fixed assets has been falling
steadily since 1991 and has now been brought back into line with what was
spent on average in the years between 1983 and 1988,' the company noted
earlier this year.
Acquisitions are also a matter for the record rather than a strategy for the
future. Iveco undertook some important acquisitions between 1986 and 1992,
including Ford of Britain and Seddon Atkinson in the UK, and Enasa Pegaso in
Spain. Company managers say that no acquisitions are in sight, either short
or medium term, though joint ventures are likely to be a pillar for growth
outside Europe.
Parallel to its large investment programme, Iveco has been reorganising its
operations. Production costs have been cut and break-even points lowered.
Payroll has been slashed. Iveco had 41,300 employees on its books at
year-end 1991; the figure was 33,700 at the end of last year and is still
falling. White-collar and managerial staff have been most affected,
reorganisation trimming their numbers from 16,000 in 1989 to 10,000 last
year.
Lean and flexible are the watchwords. Rationalisation of internal procedures
has helped to reduce overheads, as well as pushing responsibility lower down
the hierarchy and encouraging workforce participation. At the same time, the
company has been examining how improvements to structures can help the
customer. A new figure, the field engineer, has been created, giving
customers a direct link to the factory.
Iveco believes that it is well placed to take advantage of the economic
upturn in Europe. The company is confident that its new models satisfy
market demands, while efficient manufacturing systems allow tight control
over production costs. Next year will not be easy, but managers forecast
that it will much better than 1994, and that Iveco will return to good
profitability.

The Financial Times


London Page III

941216

