FT941-4170

FT  12 MAR 94 / Phone watchdog levies record fine


   By ANDREW ADONIS


A company raising money for children's charities has been fined Pounds
90,000 by Icstis, the telecoms industry regulator, for running a
'misleading' premium-rate telephone competition.
The fine is the largest in the watchdog's eight-year history.
The Children's Support Foundation, a Birmingham-based company trading under
the name Lucky Numbers, advertised holiday prizes, including weeks in
Florida and Tenerife.
Readers were invited to phone an 0891 premium-rate number - paying 48p a
minute at peak rate and 36p a minute off-peak - to find out details. In fact
the prizes were highly conditional, in some cases involving winners buying
flights and/or accommodation.
Icstis received a flood of complaints about the competition. It said
yesterday that the fine took account of the call revenue made by the service
as well as the seriousness of the case. Baroness Dean, Icstis chairman, said
it was 'a clear-cut and serious case of the public being misled'. The fine
was intended to defer other companies seeking to 'hoodwink the public'.
Children's Support Foundation, which described itself as a non-profit-making
company raising money for registered children's charities, reacted angrily.
Ms Stephanie Weightman, a director, said competitors were not obliged to
phone the premium-rate number but could have participated by post. 'There
was no intention to mislead,' she said. 'We believe we are being made an
example of.'
Icstis is better known for its campaign against premium-rate telephone sex
lines, which British Telecom agreed to curb last year. However, it is
increasingly concerned at abuse of premium-rate lines for fraudulent
competitions and advertisements.
The Children's Support Foundation was using premium-rate numbers supplied by
Telephone International Media, one of 300 providers of premium-rate numbers.
Mr David Redmile, managing director of TIM, said he had checked the bona
fides of CSF before agreeing to issue numbers. He said it appeared to be
raising funds for charity and had offered previous phone competitions
without complaints.
Although Icstis is not a statutory body, it is recognised by BT and other
telecoms operators. Suppliers of premium-rate services are obliged to abide
by its code of practice.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940312

