FT941-5467

FT  07 MAR 94 / Heseltine initiative seeks to help UK groups compete


   By ROLAND RUDD


Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, is planning an ambitious
framework to co-ordinate government policies which could improve the
competitiveness of British companies.
He is drawing up a white paper on industrial performance which will cut
across several Whitehall departments. It is designed to give the Department
of Trade and Industry a bigger role in formulating policy.
While the paper has been planned for several months, the scope of its remit
may be seen as the latest attempt to raise Mr Heseltine's profile in the
event that the government's low standing in the opinion polls prompts a
leadership election.
Mr Heseltine yesterday made it clear, however, he did not believe there
would be a vacancy. After a week in which he distanced himself from
government policy over arms exports to Iraq, being investigated by the Scott
inquiry, and delivered a barnstorming speech to the Commons, Mr Heseltine
insisted: 'I believe John Major will lead us to win the next election and my
position is entirely that of a loyal member of his cabinet helping him to do
it.'
Mr Heseltine's decision to address issues such as long-term financing for
companies, education, training and infrastructure funding has irritated some
senior officials in other departments.
They have insisted the DTI should submit its paper to the cabinet office,
which has set up a committee representing civil servants from affected
departments. Nonetheless, Mr Heseltine has made it clear he has strong
backing from Mr Major and Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor.
While the paper is yet to be drafted, those involved in its preparation have
begun to focus on what they call 'factors of productivity' which influence
corporate competitiveness.
Mr Heseltine's advisers are understood to believe the City, for example,
does not provide companies with adequate long-term finance. The paper will
argue the government should build on the 1980s approach of privatisation and
deregulation by developing policies to support British companies in the
1990s.
His advisers are also looking at whether a single Whitehall department
should take responsibility for vocational and academic qualifications.
The paper will not be published until the Commons trade and industry
committee completes its own study into Britain's competitiveness, which is
not expected until the end of the month.
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry,
who first called for the white paper, said: 'The white paper is a one-shot
opportunity for the government to demonstrate its coherence in its approach
to economic policies.'
Talks with industrialists, Page 8
Observer, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940307

