FT942-14331

FT  21 APR 94 / Franc under renewed pressure


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


The French franc faced continued pressure yesterday, increasing uncertainty
about whether the Bank of France will lower interest rates at today's
meeting of its monetary policy council.
The French currency fell to FFr3.4386 to the D-Mark from FFr3.429 on Tuesday
evening, despite the 12 basis point cut in the German repo rate to 5.58 per
cent. The French currency recovered to close in London at FFr3.435, although
it remained close to its old narrow band European exchange rate mechanism
floor rate of FFr3.4305 to the German currency.
Economists were divided about the implications of the franc's weakness for a
cut in French interest rates. But most said they still expected a reduction
in the intervention rate, the key short-term interest rate, which currently
stands at 5.9 per cent.
Of greater concern is the rise of French bond yields. In the past week,
yields on 10-year bonds have climbed by 40 basis points to about 6.9 per
cent. The French government attaches particular importance to reducing
long-term interest rates, which, it argues, are more important for
industrial investment.
'The fall in the franc might lead the Bank of France to be more cautious,
but it will not want to show that it is concerned or that it is trying to
defend an exchange rate target,' said a currency economist at one French
merchant bank. He said the central bank was pursuing a strategy of gradual
interest rate cuts, following the German repo rate.
Other economists said that a reduction in French interest rates might
strengthen the franc by improving the prospects for economic recovery and
curbing the growth of unemployment, currently at 12.2 per cent and rising.
French economic officials said they were not concerned by the movements in
the foreign exchange markets, which they attributed to general instability
caused by the rise in US interest rates. They said the recent decline of the
franc should not affect the process of lowering interest rates in France.
They say a reduction in short-term interest rates is less important for the
economy, and argue that recovery, fuelled by exports and increasing consumer
expenditure, is already under way.
See Lex Column

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940421

