FT944-6039

FT  01 DEC 94 / Telecom Italia seeks to pay government less


   By ANDREW HILL


   MILAN


Telecom Italia, Italy's state-controlled telecommunications company, wants
to reduce the fee it pays to the government, to offset the consequences of
increased competition in the lucrative area of mobile phone services.
Late on Tuesday, the government gave the formal go-ahead to a consortium
headed by Olivetti, the Italian computer company, to build the country's
second pan-European digital mobile phone network.
The Omnitel-Pronto Italia consortium won the licence on the eve of the March
general election, but it has taken until now for the new administration to
agree the detail of the deal.
Telecom Italia is demanding that the government liberalise tariffs on the
existing analogue network, which already has 2m subscribers. The company has
a monopoly over this network, but claims that if prices are regulated it
will be at a disadvantage when competing with Omnitel's more sophisticated
GSM network.
Mr Giuseppe Tatarella, telecoms minister, has agreed that the relevant
ministries will discuss the problem, probably next week. But if Telecom
Italia persists, it is likely to aggravate its already tense relationship
with Omnitel.
Telecom Italia also wants to pay a smaller fee for having a monopoly over
other phone services. It would like the fee to come down from 3.5 per cent
of turnover to 0.5 per cent, over two to three years, and says the previous
government had agreed to reduce the fee.
The issue is particularly sensitive because the consortium defeated in the
bid for the new GSM licence included Fininvest, the media company owned by
Mr Silvio Berlusconi, now prime minister. Mr Berlusconi deliberately took no
part in Tuesday's cabinet discussion of the licence.
Tempers frayed at the weekend when Mr Francesco Caio, chief executive at
Omnitel, warned that the whole deal would be at risk if Telecom Italia, or
its state parent companies, Stet and Iri, attempted to delay government
approval.
Olivetti and its partners, which include Bell Atlantic of the US, will have
to invest heavily over the next few years to build a new GSM network. In the
past two years, Telecom Italia has built a minimal GSM network, but has been
prevented from marketing the service actively pending the arrival of a
second operator.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941201

