FT942-12317

FT  29 APR 94 / Jests and solemnity as Yeltsin treaty is signed


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


President Boris Yeltsin yesterday claimed that 'only peaceful,
constitutional methods' would now hold sway in Russian politics - after he
and a range of political and social leaders had signed a Treaty on Social
Accord at a Kremlin ceremony yesterday.
The treaty, bearing the mark of last-minute compromises and apparently not
seen in its final form until yesterday morning by many taking part, is
designed to produce a two-year moratorium on any efforts to provoke early
elections or change the constitution and to establish the 'general interest'
as higher than those of any group, organisation or region.
It was signed two days after the assassination of a member of parliament, Mr
Andrei Aizderdzis - an event which has the political world in a turmoil of
calls for law and order. It precedes May 1 rallies in Moscow organised by a
range of far left and right groupings. There are fears the rallies may
become violent.
Mr Yeltsin. looking grave but fit, put the signing ceremony in an epic
context by conjuring up the ghosts of Russia's civil war which followed the
Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. 'We have come to this agreement through long
years,' he said. 'Almost no one who took part in the civil war is left
alive, but there has been no reconciliation. The deep wound in the Russian
body has not healed. Confrontation still lives in our souls. For the sake of
our children's peace of mind, we must sign this treaty.'
His gravity had been undercut in advance by the jesting of Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky, the leader of the Liberal Democratic party, who told reporters
he would decide to sign only on arrival at the gorgeous Georgevsky Hall in
the Kremlin - on the basis of whether or not the president smiled at him.
Whether or not he received his smile, he did sign: but the pact was rejected
by the large Communist party, the Agrarian party and the centrist Yabloko
bloc. Mr Ivan Rybkin, the speaker of the lower house, also signed -
provoking Mr Gannady Zyuganov, the Communist party leader, to question his
right and Mr Sergei Baburin, a radical nationalist, to make a threat to his
continued holding of the office.
Outside of the parties, the pact was signed by leaders of nearly all the
autonomous republics and regions; of the main churches, including the
dominant Orthodox; by most of the unions and by women's organisations; and
by the two main Cossack organisations - the leader of one of which, Mr
Victor Rateyev of the Cossack Union of Russia and Abroad, was brought hard
up against the new era of peace by having to unhook his cavalry sabre before
gaining access to the signing ceremony.
The final text made significant concessions to the interest groups powerful
enough to extract them - especially the regions. They no longer have to
promise not to change their status, nor must they bring their constitutions
into conformity with the federal one.
At the same time, a commitment to secure individual rights as the highest
aim was changed to 'general' rights.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940429

