FT942-16018

FT  12 APR 94 / Leading Article: Video nasty


British MPs will today vote on a measure to restrict the distribution of
video films likely to harm children. It would make it a criminal offence to
supply such videos for private use or show them in a public place where
children under 18 are admitted. Despite the opposition of ministers, it has
strong cross-party support.
The restrictions, proposed by Mr David Alton, the Liberal Democrat MP, would
be popular. Public concern over video nasties has been mounting, fed by
allegations of copycat violence by children and young people. It would be
foolish to deny a connection between what people do and the images they see:
businesses spend huge sums on advertising because it changes people's
behaviour. Most children will not copy screen violence, but many child
psychologists believe that repeated exposure desensitises them.
The case for censorship is thus easy to make. Specifying what is to be
censored, however, raises insuperable problems. Mr Alton's measure defines
harmful videos as those presenting 'an inappropriate model for children' or
'likely to cause pychological harm to a child'. Broadly interpreted, this
could cover the majority of films currently restricted to children of 12 and
over, since they have already been judged unsuitable for some. Interpreting
any such definition leads to the legal arguments that brought book
censorship into disrepute.
Enforcing censorship in one country is also increasingly difficult. The
growth of foreign travel eventually undermined book censorship in the UK:
banned books by authors such as James Joyce could readily be bought in Paris
and other European cities. Videos banned in the UK will be just as easily
available on the other side of the English Channel. With satellite
television and video on demand through cable, foreign travel may not even be
necessary.
There is sense in tightening up on video shops that supply videos to
children without adequate checks on their age. More information on the
contents of videos would also help parents keep a closer eye on what their
children watch. But the Alton measure will prove unenforceable and will
bring the law into disrepute. MPs should reject it.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940412

