FT941-16983

FT  06 JAN 94 / Croats are warned they face economic sanctions


   By LAURA SILBER and ROBERT MAUTHNER


   BELGRADE, LONDON


Mrs Madeleine Albright, US ambassador to the United Nations, warned Croatia
yesterday that it could face international economic sanctions unless it
stayed out of the Bosnian war.
The warning, issued during a news conference in Zagreb, the Croat capital,
came as Moslem and Croatian negotiators in Vienna promised to make 'firm
efforts' to stop the war in central Bosnia at a top-level meeting in Bonn on
Saturday.
Mrs Albright said the US was 'very concerned' by the reported activities of
the Croatian military in support of Bosnian Croat forces. 'We have in a
number of ways warned the Croatian government and military specifically on
the subject,' she said.
Her statement followed statements by President Franjo Tudjman and his senior
officials that Zagreb might intervene directly to support Bosnian Croat
forces encircled by Moslem-led Bosnian troops in the central Lasva valley.
In spite of government denials, UN officers and Lord Owen, the European
Union's mediator on Yugoslavia, have claimed that Croatia has already given
military help against both Moslems and Serbs.
In an interview on Britain's Channel 4 television last night, Lord Owen said
the international community should react as strongly as it did to the
Serbian military intervention in Bosnia in 1992.
Mrs Albright's strictures coincided with harsh criticism of all the
participants in the Bosnian war from the Vatican, normally an unconditional
supporter of Roman Catholic Croatia.
'No individual, much less politicians, can resign themselves to allow people
to ravage each other and await a peace which would be the rotten fruit of
exhaustion, or the crushing of one side by the other,' a Vatican spokesman
said.
Meanwhile, the joint statement issued in Vienna by Mr Haris Silajdzic,
Bosnian prime minister, and Mr Mate Granic, Croatian foreign minister, said
their plan to halt hostilities would be put to their respective presidents
in Bonn on Saturday.
An agreement in Bonn is clearly a vital condition for progress at full-scale
negotiations, including the Serbs, due to take place in Geneva on January
18.
In Paris, the defence ministry said France was asking the US to help in two
proposed operations in Bosnia to relieve Serb pressure on Moslem enclaves.
It wanted air power and logistical support to lift the Serbian blockade of
Tuzla airfield in northern Bosnia and allow a Danish armoured column to
relieve the besieged town of Srebrenica.

The Financial Times


International Page 12

940106

