FT941-4048

FT  12 MAR 94 / Fashion (The Global Wardrobe - At a Wedding): The bride
wears white but the guests are a mess - In the last of our series on dress
codes around the world, FT writers attend a wedding / New York


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


The best thing about American weddings is that they can be held anywhere.
Forget boring old churches and town halls. In the States you can tie the
knot in museums, night clubs or back gardens, atop roof terraces, in
warehouse lofts or on beaches. This is not only a lot of fun, but for guests
it means you can be more adventurous when it comes to choosing what to wear.
That's the good news. The bad news, however, is that the traditional
white-wedding-with-frills has made a comeback across most of America, and on
many occasions guests are expected to turn up in traditional wedding gear.
For women, that means bright cocktail dresses in summer, or more
sophisticated evening wear for winter ceremonies. For men, it usually means
dark, bland suits with a white shirt and tie. Or, if it is a very formal
affair, tuxedos with white or black bow ties, this being one of the ugliest
of American traditions.
Fortunately, New Yorkers like to think of themselves as a different breed
from the rest of the country, so attending weddings in and around the
metropolis gives the guest a little more room to work with.
Women can wear sexier, funkier clothes - baggy men's suits remain popular
among the arty set - and in true New York style, female guests rarely bother
with the rule about not upstaging the bride.
Men, meanwhile, are allowed a dash of style or colour, whether it be in
their suits, shirts, ties or shoes, or in a combination of all four.
Waistcoats, or 'vests' as they are known here, are a particularly
fashionable way of expressing individualism at a wedding without upsetting
the bride's parents too much.
For the truly bizarre, however, nothing beats the recent wedding in a
Manhattan loft apartment. Because it was Halloween, surreal fancy dress was
the order of the day, with the lovely couple dressed as matching giant bugs.
The star of the show, however, was the female guest who turned up dressed as
 -guess what - a bride.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940312

