FT941-3593

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (10): Out of the spare room - In
profile: two publishers of business books


   By GAY FIRTH


Michael Becket, man-of-all-work at Flame Books, publishes business books on
a scale not so much small as tiny. He likes it that way.
'Mind you, it's jolly hard work doing absolutely everything yourself.
Especially running round the bookshops, selling. If you see a man with a
satchel full of books, complaining about his hernia, he's a small
publisher.'
In real life (which is to say, full-time profession) Mr Becket is the Daily
Telegraph's City news editor. He slots Flame Books into the category of
serious fun.
'I'm hard-nosed: you've got to be. Of the six books I've published, only one
has lost serious money. That was when I fell victim to Publishers' Disease.'
He says it in capital letters. 'Publishers' Disease is the book you think
ought to be published. That's where a small publisher can go badly wrong -
that, and the problem of working capital.'
Mr Becket argues that the time-gap between commissioning a book and actually
getting it into bookshops is the reason why the publishing industry is more
capital-intensive than it needs to be. Into that gap fall authors' advances,
editing and design costs, printers' charges (paper, printing and binding),
warehousing, sales reps, overheads - the bureaucracy of publishing. Nine
months is shorter than full term for the birth of a book. Michael Becket,
running his imprint out of his spare bedroom, laughs scornfully.
'I once got a book into bookshops a fortnight after the Budget, with the
Budget changes already in it. Why not? Flame Books is a microcosm of the
industry as a whole. Anyone can publish a book quickly.'
Most publishers, he says, think they are selling to readers. 'They're not -
they're selling to bookshop book buyers.' He runs through sales patter:
''This is the book you want.' 'You the rep?' 'I'm the chairman. This is the
book you want'.'
His signal success, How the Stock Exchange Works, has sold about 60,000
copies in editions updated every two years or so. Economic Alphabet, a
glossary of financial and business terms, launched on the back of the Daily
Telegraph's Money-Go-Round feature, has sold nearly 30,000.
'One day I was writing about sterling M3 without being quite sure what it
meant. So I phoned the Bank of England and got a definition. Then I wasn't
sure exactly what a discount house was - and when I checked it out with City
folk their answers ranged from 'er' to 'um'. Hence the book.'
The effort is in selling, distribution, and fighting for prime space on
bookshop shelves.
'For Flame Books it's still touch and go.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940315

