FT941-5618

FT  05 MAR 94 / Fears over housing after drop in loan approvals


   By ALISON SMITH and PHILIP COGGAN


The number of mortgage loan approvals - regarded as an important
forward-looking indicator for the mortgage market - fell in January,
compared with December, underlining the fragility of the housing market
recovery.
Seasonally adjusted numbers for loan approvals dropped to 74,000 in January
from 80,000 in December, according to figures published yesterday by the
Bank of England.
The total of loans approved, again seasonally adjusted, was flat at Pounds
4.3bn for both January and December. January figures for gross and net
lending by banks, building societies and centralised lenders were also down
on December.
Gross lending stood at Pounds 4.1bn (Pounds 4.8bn in December) and net
lending fell slightly to Pounds 1.56bn from Pounds 1.64bn.
There are signs, however, that building societies are regaining some of the
market share they have lost to the banks, which had success in promoting
fixed-rate mortgages last year.
According to the seasonally adjusted figures, building societies achieved 70
per cent of net lending in January, compared with 57 per cent in the last
quarter of 1993. The societies' market share of loan approvals was 65 per
cent in January, against 60 per cent for the last quarter of 1993.
Mr Adrian Coles, director-general of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, said
the lending figures were consistent with the house price rises being
reported at present, but showed there would be no return to boom conditions.
Lending by banks and building societies in January was even weaker than
previously estimated, according to the Bank of England, which has revised
its seasonally adjusted estimate for sterling M4 lending to the private
sector in January.
It estimated that lending was Pounds 100m instead of Pounds 200m. The
original estimate was well below City forecasts of Pounds 2.6bn. The overall
estimate for M4 growth, the broad measure of money supply, is unchanged at a
seasonally adjusted 5.5 per cent in the year to January.
The figures shed some light on dealings in the gilts market, which has been
falling since the start of the year.
Mr Don Smith, an economist at Greenwell Montagu, said the figures showed
that domestic institutions sold Pounds 396m of gilts in January, whereas
overseas investors bought Pounds 1.05bn. These figures referred only to the
cash market, he added.
The word on the street, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940305

