FT941-3375

FT  16 MAR 94 / International Company News: Microsoft regroups to get closer
to its customers - The world's most profitable software company is to
refocus on global marketing


   By ALAN CANE


Mr Bill Gates, co-founder and chairman of Microsoft, the world's largest
personal computer software company, has nightmares in which his competitors
outsmart and overwhelm him in his bid to dominate the software business in
the home and office.
That fear must have played a part in the decision, announced in the US last
night, to reorganise Microsoft from top to bottom.
A memorandum to employees signed by Mr Gates, Mr Steve Ballmer and Mr Mike
Maples, who collectively make up Microsoft's 'office of the president'
spells out the worry: 'We are trying to reach new customers and partners.
Competitors like Lotus, Novell and Electronic Arts are more focused.
'To continue to be a leader we need to innovate not only in our products but
in our sales, marketing and operations. We cannot just follow and react to
what others are doing.'
Lotus Development Corporation developed the best selling spreadsheet 1-2-3
and market leading software for workgroups 'Notes'. Novell markets the most
popular PC networking software.
What is striking about Microsoft's decision to reorganise is that, unlike
other companies forced to restructure because of falling sales or trading
losses, it remains the world's most profitable software company.
In 1993 it reported net income of Dollars 953m on sales totalling Dollars
3.75m.
Its success is based on a broad range of market leading software packages,
but especially on MS/DOS and Windows, the operating systems used by 90 per
cent of the world's 100m personal computers.
Microsoft says that if it is to continue growing, it needs a fast,
responsive organisation focusing on the customer's needs.
Among the changes called for in the plan are:
Microsoft's core technologies must be shared across the company to achieve
economies of scale and offer customers greater consistency.
The company's product strategy has to be simplified. The memorandum says:
'We are overloading the market with lots of complex messages. We need to
develop clear themes that pull together what we say about our products.'
This is taken to be a reference to confusion in the marketplace over
Microsoft's advanced Windows N/T operating system and its derivatives
codenamed Daytona and Cairo.
Products are to be grouped in seven divisions: personal operating systems,
business systems and workgroup applications, desktop applications, consumer
applications, software developer systems, advanced consumer technology and
on-line services.
Sales activities will be grouped into three customer units to give greater
customer focus: 'We will align all worldwide sales and marketing people with
one of three customer types: end users, organisations, or other equipment
manufacturers. People within these customer units will live, eat and breathe
with their customers,' the memorandum says.
A renewed focus on the competition: 'We must understand not only
competitors' products but also their sales strategies, marketing strategies,
localisation strategies and so on. We must be aggressive in taking
legitimate competitive actions.'
The memorandum goes on to say the company has to make decisions faster and
be more efficient in marketing, sales and support: 'It must be clear that it
is better to take action, make mistakes and be forgiven than to wait and ask
for permission.'
The memorandum makes clear the company is planning on a global basis.
In the past, product marketing groups were focused primarily on the US
market and subsidiaries had to develop their own marketing programmes.
'In the future we will create global marketing programmes that can be
efficiently deployed in local geographies.'
The company denied that subsidiaries would become less independent, arguing
that it would collect information from its subsidiaries in developing global
marketing strategies.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940316

