FT944-5905

FT  01 DEC 94 / Hopes for Bosnia peace hit as Serbs snub Boutros Ghali


   By LAURA SILBER and PHILIP STEPHENS


   BELGRADE, LONDON


Hopes of securing an immediate Bosnian ceasefire collapsed yesterday when
the defiant Bosnian Serb leadership refused to meet Mr Boutros Boutros
Ghali, the UN secretary-general, at the UN-controlled airport in Sarajevo.
The meeting had been set to revive the peace process by ending the political
isolation of the Bosnian Serbs. There were also hopes that it would revive
the strained credibility of the UN as a mediator in the Bosnian war.
However, Mr Boutros Ghali refused to hold talks with Serb leaders on their
territory.
Instead, the UN leader met only Mr Alija Izetbegovic, president of Bosnia,
who reaffirmed his acceptance of an immediate three-month ceasefire. In an
uncompromising mood, Mr Izetbegovic chastised Mr Boutros Ghali for refusing
to use his authority to support the 'legitimate government' of Bosnia.
'We are ready for negotiations when the Serb side says yes to the 'contact
group' plan,' he said in reference to the five-nation plan to divide Bosnia
roughly in half between the Moslem-Croat federation and the Bosnian Serbs.
The failure of Mr Boutros Ghali's Bosnian diplomacy came as Mr Robert Dole,
the incoming US Senate majority leader, sought to play down the rift in
transatlantic relations caused by the deepening crisis in Bosnia.
After talks in London with Mr John Major, the prime minister, Mr Dole said
he was concerned that the Nato alliance should not be damaged by the
differences in approach of the US and its European allies.
But British ministers indicated that Mr Major had told Mr Dole his recent
criticism of the peacekeeping role in Bosnia of France and the UK threatened
to derail last-ditch efforts to restore peace.
For his part, Mr Dole continued to press the case for a lifting of the arms
embargo on the Bosnian Moslems combined with Nato air strikes against the
Serbs. That view was backed strongly by Baroness Thatcher, the former UK
prime minister, who sharply criticised Mr Major's government for not taking
stronger action against the Serbs.
Before leaving Sarajevo, Mr Boutros Ghali warned that the UN would pull out
of Bosnia unless the warring parties agreed to a ceasefire and halted their
harassment of the peacekeepers.
Mr Jovan Zametica, adviser to Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader,
said he had refused to meet Mr Boutros Ghali at the airport because 'the
Serb side insisted on equal treatment for the warring parties'.
Kohl keeps ranks, Page 2
Work on new wing, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 24

941201

