FT942-12534

FT  29 APR 94 / Glaxo closer to Zantac court battle


   By DANIEL GREEN


Glaxo moved closer to a courtroom clash with one of its biggest rivals,
Swiss drugs company Ciba, by filing a lawsuit yesterday alleging patent
infringement by a Ciba subsidiary in the US.
Also named in similar suits were a Spanish subsidiary of Huddersfield
company Holliday Chemical Holdings, called Union Quimico Farmaceutica, and a
US chemicals distributor, Interchem Trading.
At stake are the fortunes of the world's biggest-selling drug, the ulcer
treatment Zantac. It has annual sales of Dollars 3.5bn (Pounds 2.32bn) -
Dollars 2bn in the US alone.
Last month Ciba said it had found a way round the patents protecting Zantac
that would allow it to launch a cut-price generic - or unbranded - version
in the US by the start of 1996.
This case is unlike previous challenges to Zantac's patents in that Ciba
wants to manufacture a version of the drug which has never been
commercialised and whose US patent expires at the end of 1995.
In the past, Glaxo has not tried to defend this 'Form 1' patent,
concentrating successfully on the patents covering Zantac - made from 'Form
2'. Forms 1 and 2 are chemically identical but with different crystalline
forms.
One effect of the legal action will be to postpone regulatory approval of
the Ciba drug by 30 months. That period can be changed by a judge, but if it
stands it would have the effect of extending patent protection of Form 1
until October 1996.
Glaxo said: 'We believe that the patent rights on Form 2 have been and will
be infringed. This is based on evidence given to us voluntarily and in
confidence by Geneva (Ciba's generics subsidiary).'
Ciba insisted yesterday that it remained confident that its method for
making Form 1 did not involve Form 2 in any way.
However, Mr Robin Gilbert, a drugs sector analyst with stockbroker Panmure
Gordon, said the involvement of a non-Ciba subsidiary - Union Quimico
Farmaceutica - as the manufacturer might have weakened Ciba's position.
Colorado-based Geneva and its co-defendants have a further 30 days to lodge
a reply to Glaxo's action in a US district court in New Jersey.
Lottery of life, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940429

