FT942-12773

FT  28 APR 94 / Treasury chief admits flaws


   By PHILIP COGGAN and ROLAND RUDD


Sir Terence Burns, permanent secretary to the Treasury, last night set out
his vision of the department's future and admitted that improvement was
needed in three areas.
Speaking at Durham University, Sir Terence said the Treasury needed to take
a more strategic role rather than become involved in day-to-day government
decisions; improve the morale of staff and have greater contact with the
outside world.
The key change involved 'rewriting' relationships with other departments. He
envisaged 'more emphasis on setting the agenda, on getting the framework for
policy right'. The Treasury should be 'less involved in detail and
second-guessing and more in setting the overall framework, objectives and
budget'.
According to a senior Whitehall official, the Treasury is to consider
abolishing its practice of individual sections shadowing other ministries as
part of its decision to stop monitoring and second-guessing the spending
programmes of other departments.
Sir Terence said the Treasury was often criticised for mismanaging the
economy, having an anti-industry culture and being penny-pinching,
short-termist and dictatorial.
However, speaking of one controversial former policy, he remarked: 'During
the 1980s it was difficult to leave the Treasury without being challenged
for failing to take advantage of the (exchange rate mechanism) when
evidently it could save the UK from all its problems; only to be later
accused of having stubbornly and perversely forced membership down the
throat of an unwilling business community.'
Staff morale had suffered because of recent criticism, Sir Terence said. He
admitted that a staff survey had shown that 'we are bad at avoiding
bureaucracy and having an open style of management'.
Sir Terence said the department was responding by improving the management
structure, budgeting, personnel systems and training.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940428

