FT944-14450

FT  22 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: Rocky ride for Eurotunnel - Should
shareholders sell, hold on - or even buy? Charles Batchelor reviews the
options


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


This has been an inauspicious week for Eurotunnel. The company which
operates the Channel tunnel was forced to admit it would miss this year's
revenue forecast by a wide margin, while a Eurostar train taking journalists
to Paris broke down before it even started.
Even so, travellers who make the trip in one of these sleek expresses, or in
the more spartan car shuttles, are in for a pleasant surprise. The ride is
extremely smooth, and the passage from the Kent countryside into the tunnel
marked by the gentlest of slopes.
Shareholders have had a bumpier ride. Floated at 350p in November 1987,
Eurotunnel's shares peaked at Pounds 11.64 in June 1989 and have see-sawed
between Pounds 3 and Pounds 5 for much of the subsequent period. (The bevy
of rights issues complicates comparisons. The adjusted issue price is 267p
and the peak 871p).
In recent months they have fallen steadily, dropping 19p in the past week to
209p yesterday - a recovery from Thursday's all-time low of 199p.
With some City analysts forecasting yet another fund-raising within the next
two years, should shareholders cut their losses and sell, hold on - or even
buy?
On balance, those who bought enough shares in the 1987 and 1990 issues to
qualify for concessions should stay put. Would-be investors should wait a
while because there are signs that the shares still have some way to fall.
Eurotunnel is at a tricky stage. The tunnel has been finished but the
company still has to prove it can operate a reliable service. In the
meantime, the additional safety requirements demanded by the British and
French governments, and the delays of such a massive project, have heaped up
a mountain of debt: Pounds 8bn out of total funds of Pounds 10.5bn.
Two rights issues have diluted the returns to shareholders and the official
starting date for the payment of dividends has been pushed out to 2004. Some
analysts believe it might take longer.
The delays to the start of services will reduce revenues this year and next,
bringing Eurotunnel perilously close to its financing limits. It is likely
that the company will be in technical breach of its covenants by the time
the banks come to re-assess their loan commitments next spring.
Yet, co-chairman Sir Alastair Morton is probably right in thinking that the
banks will turn a blind eye to this. They have no wish to bring the project
tumbling down.
Eurotunnel's forecasts depend on it persuading large numbers of people new
to the cross-Channel market to make the trip. It is also hoping to take away
half of the existing market from the ferries. Analysts doubt whether these
ambitious targets can be met.
Fears of a price war between the ferries and the tunnel have eased recently
but Eurotunnel's revenue forecasts would be hit if hostilities re-opened. It
also faces the problem that much of its debt is at variable rates, making it
vulnerable to any increase in interest rates.
On the plus side, the next few months should see the final solution to the
teething difficulties which have plagued the start-up of services. A rough
winter on the Channel could persuade road hauliers to desert the ferries,
while next spring and summer should see a substantial build-up of tourist
revenues. By the middle of next year, the tunnel will have shown whether it
is going to succeed.
In the absence of dividends, the main reason for existing shareholders to
stay with Eurotunnel is the free travel concessions. The company will not
announce its passenger shuttle fares until the middle of next month but last
January, when it was hoping for a May start to services, it announced fares
ranging from Pounds 125 for a two-day return to Pounds 310 for a mid-summer
peak weekend return.
Shareholders who bought 1,000 shares at 350p each in 1987 are entitled to
two free return trips annually for the 65-year life of Eurotunnel's
operating contract.
New investors are probably best advised to wait because there might be some
way for the shares to fall before revenues pick up next spring. But there is
still the prospect of dilution if the banks insist upon converting some of
their debt to equity in 12 to 24 months. Cautious investors may want to see
the shape of any new financial structure before committing themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page V

941022

