FT943-695

FT  28 SEP 94 / Arts: Adult choices made at the Prix Italia - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


Should grown ups really take much notice of television? Is there not
something inherently childish and third rate about a medium which lionises
Jeremy Beadle and Chris Evans? Flicking through Britain's four terrestrial
channels on the Saturday morning before I went to Italy I found American
accented rock and roll on the first, an American lecturing on the retina on
the second, American accented rock and roll on the third, and American
football on the fourth. No doubt the broadcasters would tell us that
Saturday mornings are for children and Open University students, but the
weekend is not the only time that you find this sort of four-pronged
Morton's Fork, and it is not clear why broadcasters assume the English
prefer all things American.
Happily the Prix Italia, held this year in Turin, has served, yet again, to
prove that however much pernicious rubbish is produced, however much
politicians insist that television must be dominated by the profit motive,
however depressingly popular such schlock as Gladiators and Neighbours may
become, there are still people around the world using television as a medium
for music and other arts, for grown up drama and - perhaps most impressively
of all - as a vivid and telling way of showing us what is going on in parts
of the world remote from us. What is more, according to the international
juries at this broadcasting festival - the oldest in Europe and therefore,
probably, in the world - a disproportionately large number of those people
are British.
There are three television categories: music and arts, drama and
documentary. From the 24 programmes submitted by 20 countries in music and
arts the jury gave the Prix Italia to Strange Fish, an engrossing, sad and
funny ballet, choreographed by Lloyd Newson for the DV8 company and produced
by the BBC. Co-producer was Reiner Moritz, a sort of late 20th century
renaissance prince of television who has spent his whole life putting his
money (and anybody else's that he can acquire) where his mouth is, in
furtherance of the arts on television. There is no one else in Europe quite
like Moritz, and it is gratifying to see his name associated with yet
another prize winner.
From 26 programmes submitted by companies in 20 countries, the drama jury
selected The Snapper as its winner. Another BBC production, this was written
by Roddy Doyle, is set in Dublin, and tells the awful but hilarious story of
Sharon Curley's unplanned, unwanted, and yet triumphant pregnancy. From 27
programmes originating in 21 countries the documentary jury chose Les
Lapirov Passent A L'Ouest from La Sept in France as their winner. But the
'Special' prize in this category went, yet again, to the BBC, this time for
Black Daisies For The Bride, a programme which combines Tony Harrison's
verse with documentary film from an Alzheimer's ward and moments of
dramatisation from the earlier lives of the victims, creating a mixture of
nostalgia and bleakness.
Out of six television prizes, the BBC won three and the rest of the world
three (one each for France, Germany and Sweden). Seen alongside so much
other material it should be said that the British winners did seem the right
choices, a fact which forces reconsideration of the thoughts expressed in my
opening paragraph. If Britain's 'third rate' television can look so good
alongside other people's, what on earth is it like living with theirs?. The
answer, I suspect, is much the same as with ours, because so much of the
material on the main channels, especially during peak time, is similar or
even identical. Gladiators is an American format, Neighbours an Australian
soap, Beadle's cringe television seems to have its counterpart in virtually
every other country, and everywhere television is looking to the hyperactive
jokesmith with a working class accent to carry those early morning and
evening shows which are aimed at a mass audience largely concerned with
doing something else while keeping half an eye on the box. Chris Evans is
not alone.
For the British viewer in Turin, having already seen the British winners,
the most interesting programmes were the other prize winners. A Fatal Affair
from Sweden won the Special Prize in the drama category seemingly for
reasons opposite to those required by the rules. Instead of recognising some
special quality (electronic wizardry perhaps, or an original technique) we
were told that the jury was 'particularly pleased to note that an entry of
such a standard, traditionally achieved by North American and British
producers, can be submitted by one of the smaller countries taking part in
the Prix'. In other words the Swedes have joined the ranks of soap and mini
series producers. Well whoopee. The winner of the Special prize for Music
and Arts was a good though conventional performance-and-biography programme
about a Swede - virtuoso trombonist Christian Lindberg - made by ZDF of
Germany.
For me, however, television suddenly began to seem dramatically better than
third rate and very definitely not childish on the afternoon when I saw Les
Lapirov promptly followed by the documentary De Overlevenden ('The
Survivors') made by BRTN Belgium. In the French programme Jean-Luc Leon
followed the Lapirovs, a family of Russian Jews, as they left the Soviet
Union in 1981 to emigrate to Los Angeles. Then, ten years later, with the
son grown from Russian boyhood to American manhood, Leon filmed them again
as they returned to Moscow to visit family and friends. It could not be the
whole story, of course, but this programme - which began before the fall of
the Berlin Wall and ended after - spoke volumes about the reasons for the
collapse of communism in eastern Europe.
To move from that to the Belgian programme was to move from Colditz to
Auschwitz. De Overlevenden shows Albanians returning to the camps where they
were incarcerated for 20, 30, even 45 years; where children were born and
raised (according to one almost incredible statistic in this programme, more
than half the Albanian population spent time in the camps). Most astounding
and most moving of all, those going back today find the camps still occupied
by former prisoners who can now find nowhere else to live. Most infuriating
of all, one cell, instead of being occupied by 15 or 20, contains just one
person: Nexhmije Hoxha, widow of the despot Enver Hoxha, still acting like
an arrogant aristocrat, refusing to answer the film crew's questions and
boasting of her service to her country.
Even the Prix Italia may not be able to show us anything in the way of
television material to compare with the work of Masaccio or Corelli, yet the
programmes screened at this festival cannot be dismissed as third rate or
childish. On the contrary: the 70 or so programmes on view here suggested
that there is as much serious, adult and demanding television being made
today as there has ever been. The programmes brought together in Turin
suggested that television is doing as good a job as any mass medium,
probably better, in offering the citizens of today's world the means to see,
and to a large extent understand, what is going on. Better still, the
general standard in this year's festival was as high and arguably higher
than at any time in the last 20 years.
We should thank the Italians (who, year after year, stoically take none of
the top prizes from this event) for showing yet again what television at its
best can be, and resolve to be more selective in our viewing.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940928

