FT943-762

FT  28 SEP 94 / Abacha moves military men into power


   By PAUL ADAMS


   LAGOS


General Sani Abacha yesterday tightened control over Nigeria by bringing key
members of the armed forces into an expanded Provisional Ruling Council
(PRC), and removing the remaining civilian members.
The new line-up reflects the uncompromising stance of Gen Abacha since
mid-August towards anti-government strikes and protests in support of the
presidential claims of the jailed opposition leader Mr Moshood Abiola.
A challenge to Gen Abacha's authority from within the regime during the
two-month oil workers strikes led to the dismissal of Major-General Chris
Alli as head of the army last month, and a number of changes in key posts in
the armed forces.
Gen Abacha has said he is preparing to hand over to a dem-ocratically
elected government, but he has banned political parties, closed newspapers,
arrested civilian critics and detained and charged Mr Abiola with treason.
Mr Abiola declared himself president on the anniversary of his unofficial
victory in last year's general election.
The evolution from a military junta with democratic sympathies into an
authoritarian regime in nine months became clear earlier this month with a
series of decrees which strengthened its unconstitutional powers and
declared it had come to power in a 'military revolution'. Last November the
military claimed that it was invited to rescue the country from anarchy.
Lieutenant-General Oladipo Diya, like Mr Abiola a member of the Yoruba tribe
from the south-west, survives the reshuffle as number two in the regime, but
has lost influence since the Abacha regime took control in November 1993.
The 25-man PRC is dominated by officers from the Hausa speaking north which
has held power for more than a decade. The PRC has never functioned as a
policy-making body, and decisions have usually been taken by Gen Abacha with
small groups of advisers.
Although this is likely to continue, the new body includes officers who are
seen as either loyal or indispensible to the survival of the regime.
The chief of defence staff and chiefs of the the army, navy and air force
and police are joined in the PRC by the commanders of the four main infantry
divisions which form the backbone of the army.
Other new members are commander of the Lagos garrison, the heads of the
military intelligence services which have been vital to Gen Abacha's tenure
of power, and the commanders of the leading staff organisations - the
military academy, the staff college and the war college.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940928

