FT944-6037

FT  01 DEC 94 / Ruling sets back Italian graft inquiry: Milan's crusading
magistrates ordered to hand over their investigations to others


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


The crusading anti-corruption investigations of Milan's magistrates that
have helped change the political face of Italy suffered a serious reverse
yesterday as a result of a decision by the country's appeal court.
The decision switches to neighbouring Brescia magistrates the investigations
and subsequent trials of all those involved in Milan's inquiries into
corruption in the Guardia di Finanza, the financial police. This has become
one of the most sensitive investigations in the past six months and last
week involved Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the prime minister, at the time that he
was running his Fininvest business empire.
The full judgment of the appeal court has yet to be published and it is
likely to be challenged in the courts by the Milan judiciary. But the
immediate effect will be to slow down investigations and trials - not least
the questioning of Mr Berlusconi which was postponed at the weekend and is
due to take place this week. Brescia magistrates said yesterday they were
hopelessly understaffed to cope with the extra workload.
Members of the government welcomed the decision as a sign that public
concern that Milan magistrates were abusing their authority had finally been
recognised. However, the opposition expressed grave concern over what it
perceived as a deliberate move to undermine the principal judicial team in
the 'clean hands' anti-corruption drive. Mr Eugenio Scalfari, editor of the
daily La Repubblica, insinuated in an editorial that Mr Berlusconi had
delayed his interrogation to benefit from this impending decision.
The appeal court action stemmed from a case brought by General Giuseppe
Cerciello, who has been in a military prison since July 9 on charges of
allowing a well organised system of bribes over company tax inspections
within the Guardia while he was head of tax inspection. The investigation
has led three members of the Guardia di Finanza to commit suicide, and the
general was due to go to trial on December 5, along with 48 businessmen and
policemen.
Gen Cerciello complained he could not obtain a fair hearing because the
Guardia di Finanza was being used to investigate corruption allegations
inside the corps. He further highlighted the unusual circumstances in which
members of the Guardia di Finanza, used by Milan to investigate other cases
of corruption, were now being accused of corruption. At least one Guardia di
Finanza member used heavily by Mr Antonio Di Pietro, the best known
anti-corruption magistrate, is in prison having admitted taking bribes over
company tax inspections.
These complaints were rejected on two occasions by civil liberties courts.
However, they are the subject of a current inspection of the conduct of the
Milan judiciary ordered by Mr Alfredo Biondi, the justice minister.
Meanwhile, Gen Cerciello's lawyer is himself under investigation for
allegedly putting pressure on one of the accused Guardia di Finanza
officials to retract accusations against the general.
Although the appeal court judgment appears to be founded on sound legal
argument, in the present highly charged political climate it is
automatically seen by the government's opponents as directed against the
Milan magistrates. Over the past three decades Italian justice has seen many
cases removed from one magistrature's jurisdiction to waste time and confuse
issues. The government will be hard pressed to demonstrate the contrary now.
Mr Berlusconi himself has been open in his attacks on the politicised nature
of the Milan judiciary, which is investigating him for alleged corruption
relating to the payment by Fininvest companies of bribes totalling L330m
(Pounds 130,000) to the Guardia di Finanza between 1989-92. It is also
unusual that a government should order an inspection of a branch of the
judiciary about its conduct of investigations while those same
investigations are still continuing.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941201

