FT943-895

FT  27 SEP 94 / Cheaper books are signalled as Hodder rejects price pact


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Mr Tim Hely Hutchinson, chief executive of Hodder Headline, withdrew his
company from the net book agreement yesterday, dealing a blow to the
voluntary pact which allows publishers to set minimum prices for most books
for six months after publication.
Authors such as John le Carre and Stephen King are likely to be in the front
line of discounting and might be available in hardback from as little as
Pounds 10 by December 26.
Mr Hely Hutchinson, one of the UK's more iconoclastic publishers, is the
second publisher to leave the agreement.
Reed Books, the publishing arm of Reed Elsevier, already publishes its books
'non-net' and says market share has increased as a result. 'I have been an
abolitionist since my first working day in publishing,' said Mr Hely
Hutchinson, who believes that price is an essential weapon in increasing
book sales.
After Christmas the company will offer 25-30 per cent discounts in return
for firm sales of top novels and biographies.
The Hodder Headline action surprised the Publishers' Association, whose
council last week decided unanimously to defend the net book agreement
before the Restrictive Practices Court.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, has asked the court to
look at the agreement to see whether conditions have changed since it ruled
more than 30 years ago that the agreement was in the public interest.
Mr Clive Bradley, the association's chief executive, said last night that he
was 'very bullish' about the level of support for the agreement and said it
would be defended in court.
The association argues that the agreement helps to ensure that the widest
range of titles are published, keeps prices generally down and helps small
independent booksellers.
Most large publishers are believed to have renewed their support for the
agreement, but that might change if both Reed and Hodder Headline are seen
to be gaining market share.
Mr Matthew Evans, chairman of Faber & Faber, the independent publisher, said
last night: 'I will be very surprised if this is not the end of the NBA.'
Editorial Comment and Observer, Page 19
Hodder profits rise, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940927

