FT942-12198

FT  30 APR 94 / Major urges Tories to sink their differences for EU poll


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Mr John Major yesterday sought to cover the latest cracks in the
Conservative party over Europe by pledging to promote the cause of
'Euro-realism' in the run-up to the June elections for the Strasbourg
parliament.
His attempt to rebuild a facade of unity between the party's enthusiasts and
sceptics was accompanied by a renewed warning from Mr Douglas Hurd, the
foreign secretary, that the party could not go back on its historic
commitment to Europe.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, meanwhile accused
the party's sceptics of 'undermining the prime minister' and damaging the
Conservatives' chances in next week's local elections. He said party workers
would be appalled at the behaviour of some Tory MPs.
In a clear message to those on the Tory right at Westminster who have
suggested Britain could disengage from the European Union, Mr Hurd said that
talk of withdrawal was 'out of touch with reality'. He told a Conservative
meeting in Plymouth: 'Our party took Britain into the European Community in
the 1970s. Anybody seeking to reverse that decision now is out of touch with
reality, and with all the questions of politics and security which western
Europe will have to tackle in the years ahead.'
Mr Major offered the same message on a local election tour in Bury when he
underlined the economic and security interests tying Britain to the EU.
But refusing to be labelled either a Europhile or a Europhobe, Mr Major
stressed that a commitment to a leading role for Britain in the EU did not
mean accepting every suggestion or plan from Brussels. Instead Britain would
argue the case for Euro-realism.
As both men laid out a strategy designed to unite all but the most extreme
anti-Europeans, Mr Hurd stressed also that the Conservatives were the only
party opposed to a centralised federal Europe.
Mr Hurd, dismissing suggestions that Mr Major had sought to appease the Tory
right by giving the election manifesto a more sceptical tone, suggested that
90 per cent of the Tory party would offer whole-hearted support for the
government's platform.
Trailing the party's manifesto for the June campaign, Mr Hurd said its
belief in a free trading, decentralised, outward-looking Europe was
reflected increasingly in the mood in the rest of the EU.
He said the Liberal Democrats, the main threat to the Conservatives in
south-west England, were, like the Labour party, wedded to the Brussels
centralism which would lead to a European superstate.
But ministers acknowledged that the attempt by Tory Euro-sceptics to seize
the initiative threatened a constant series of potential upsets in a
campaign which could be critical to Mr Major's future as prime minister.
Tories 'score election own goal'Page 5
Clock starts to tickPage 6

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940430

