FT942-12319

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (29): Perambulations
around blue chips - Serious riches / Michael Abram, who won an important
Mothercare contract, had suffered early poverty. He learned about shares 'by
watching my father having the wrong ones', and favours Footsie companies for
his UK portfolio


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


Many of the people you interview are not what I would call seriously rich,'
says Michael Abram. As the man who built up Restmor, the pram business which
became the main supplier to Mothercare and floated on the stock exchange,
Abram knows what it is to have made money.
He also knows what it is like to be poor. When his father was sent to a
Siberian labour camp in the 1930s and then expelled from Russia as an
undesirable alien, Abram was a small child. He and his mother were forced to
leave their native Tashkent. His mother worked as a cleaner to pay for what
turned out to be a four-year journey across the Middle East and Europe, to
rejoin his father in England in 1936 when Abram was eight years old.
He now has several share portfolios, which are run solely for capital gain
and not for income; various members of his family are happy to let him look
after their portfolios, too. Abram takes an enthusiastic interest in the
market, speaking to his portfolio manager, Hugh Giltrow of Kleinwort Benson,
several times a day and even keeping in touch via the telex when he is
travelling.
He is not happy to allow total discretion. 'I've allowed that twice in my
life and I've lost a lot of money, but I've done quite well with Kleinwort.'
Abram learned about stocks and shares 'by watching my father having the
wrong ones', and confines his interest to the UK, leaving the management of
the overseas holdings to Giltrow. He places great faith in blue-chip
companies, and most of his portfolio is invested in FT-SE 100 companies such
as BTR, Hong Kong & Shanghai, Granada, Land Securities. 'Blue chips can go
down a lot, but at least they recover,' says Abram. 'It is very seldom that
they don't recover at all, although there are some, like Rolls-Royce, which
you never thought would go broke. In general though, if you are with the
banks or a company like Glaxo, they will pick up.'
Abram studies the monthly valuations sent to him by Kleinwort Benson, and if
he finds a stock which is not moving, or which is making a loss, he consults
Kleinwort to see whether they should be doing anything about it. 'If we feel
that something is not going to recover, we get out either with a small
profit or a loss - it doesn't matter,' says Abram. 'If we take a loss, we
forget about it and decide how we are going to make it up. Recently we've
used BTR warrants very successfully to make up the losses on other stocks.
In addition to suggesting FT-SE 100 companies, Kleinwort has also
highlighted a number of medium-size companies, such as M&G and Wessex Water'
Abram tends to shy away from smaller companies unless he knows the
management. 'I have made money on second- and third-liners but only when
I've known the industry or the management. But where I've gone blind into
smaller companies, I've found them very risky.'
Tips can be another danger. 'I went into Brown & Jackson about three years
ago on a tip, because I was in textiles - it was my idea, not Hugh's. The
shares were about 27.5p. I could have got out earlier this year with a loss
of Pounds 3,000-Pounds 4,000 but didn't and they fell to 3p. So sometimes it
really is a gamble.'
Trading is not frequent, despite the keen eye kept on the portfolio, but
since it is run for capital growth, some sales are made to mitigate any
capital gains tax liability.
The overseas exposure is through unit and investment trusts, with an
allocation of about 13 per cent in the Far East and 10 per cent in Europe.
The UK holding is 60 per cent. The remainder is held in cash and gilts,
although this figure is higher than normal given an earlier decision to
reduce the family's exposure to one large historic investment. Overseas
funds include Kleinwort's recent European privatisation investment trust and
Baring Eastern, a Far East excluding Japan unit trust.
Abram spoke no language well other than Bukharian when he came to England,
and as soon as he had settled into school the second world war broke out,
which led to his being evacuated.
'I got into grammar school and then Leicester university, but I wanted to go
into business. My father was in the jewellery trade but he always thought it
was dead trade so would not take me.'
Abram's first job was with Anglo-African shipping company, a confirming
house, when he was 19 years old. 'They were very poor payers. The only
reason I could exist was that I was living at home and my father insisted
that I save. I started off on Pounds 4 a week and ended up on Pounds 10.
They could not pay me any more because a senior buyer, who had been with
them since before the war, was on Pounds 12 a week.'
After five years with the company, he decided to start his own business with
a colleague, David Seymour, as partner. Texmore trading company dealt in
wholesale textiles - sheets, curtains, blankets - and was initially run from
a mews house in London's Mornington Crescent. The company grew large enough
to start buying shops, but 'we had no idea how to retail. We were good at
wholesaling but hopeless at retailing.' The two partners moved on in 1962
into the pram business, with Abram as managing director of Restmor and David
Seymour as works director.
The big break came just four months later, after a chance meeting with Selim
Zilkha, the man who founded and built up Mothercare before its sale to
Terence Conran's Habitat group. 'Zilkha had started a year before I met him,
and asked me whether I would make a pram with his own design. I said we've
only got the one shape - they were coach-built prams in those days - our
cane goes this way but I'll make yours go the other way. Then he said, and
will you put my emblem, the 'M', on? So I said, why not? He said you are
just the man I want.'
working relationship culminating in Restmor supplying Mothercare with over
60 lines, including bouncing cradles and baby carriers. Abram acknowledges a
deep debt of gratitude to Zilkha. 'He is the most brilliant businessman I
have ever come across. We would agree twice a year on prices, we'd argue a
little bit and then he'd say jokingly, 'charge me what you like. If I don't
sell it, you suffer' - he was so clever, but always wanted Restmor to make
profits.
'I was 12 to 13 per cent of Mothercare's business but he was 75 per cent of
my business, so that if he dropped me, I would be out. We agreed to give
each other two year's notice but we did not write it out, we just shook
hands on it. When other people went to him when he had 90 to 100 shops, he
kept his word and would not buy from them, because they would not supply
Mothercare at the start.
'He taught me not to be afraid of letting people come into my factory and
going to other people's factories. You learn from each other that way - he
just wanted efficiency. That was also why he and his buying director dealt
directly with the heads of the companies he was involved with; he never left
it to other people.'
Restmor floated in 1969 and was finally sold to BSG Holdings, the consumer
products manufacturer, at the end of 1986 for Pounds 14.9m. Abram stayed
with the company for two years as a consultant before retiring.
He dabbles in the market 'because I just love stocks and shares - I don't
need the money. I've got a nice home and family, and a good golf club. So
long as I can travel, I'm happy.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXVIII

940429

