FT941-16945

FT  07 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Small operators benefit from Greek
deregulation


   By KERIN HOPE


   ATHENS


The success of Virgin Atlantic's first franchise operation, flying between
London and Athens, underlines how deregulation has opened up opportunities
for small airlines in Greece.
Until last year, Olympic Airways, the Greek state carrier, held a monopoly
of both international and domestic passenger services based in Greece. Its
subsidiary, Olympic Aviation, controls routes to the Aegean islands.
The Greek franchise-holder for Virgin Atlantic is South East European
Airlines, an Athens-based carrier set up three years ago to fly cargo and
small groups of tourists between Athens and the Aegean islands.
'Virgin provides the brand name and training to reach their standard of
service, and we operate the flight with our own crews,' Mr Tassos
Pantazopoulos, SEEA's chairman, said. 'To my knowledge, its the first
extension of franchising to the airline business.'
SEEA uses a leased Boeing 737-400 painted in Virgin livery for the daily
flight, timed to compete with departures by British Airways and Olympic.
Fares are 15-20 per cent lower than on the other carriers.
Mr Pantazopoulos said the passenger load factor averaged 80 per cent in the
first six months of operation, with 'a substantial percentage of regular
business travellers.'
The relationship with Virgin Atlantic has also given a boost to SEEA's plans
for growth. The company intends to start a new route from Thessaloniki to
Rome early next year using a Fokker 50 aircraft, to be followed by a
Thessaloniki-Bucharest flight.
Mr Pantazopoulos says that other destinations in the Balkans and former
Soviet Union, with flights originating in Thessaloniki where the airport is
less congested than in Athens, 'are the obvious option.'
Greece's only other private carrier, Cretan Airlines, has similar hopes of
becoming a regional airline, focused on the southern Mediterranean and the
charter market.
Set up last year by a group of hoteliers and tour operators on Crete, the
airline operates two Airbus A300-20, leased from Adria Airlines of Slovenia.
Cretan began regular charter flights last spring from several cities in
Germany, the main source of tourists.
The medium-term prospects for both airlines will depend on the outcome of
Olympic Airway's much-delayed plans for restructuring.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940107

