FT942-16376

FT  11 APR 94 / The Monday Interview: Fortune hunting in east Europe - Gabor
Varszegi, former rock star and diamond trader, tells Nick Denton how he
became the region's richest man


   By NICK DENTON


Gabor Varszegi, chief executive of Hungary's Fotex retailing group, likes to
show off the view from his penthouse office. The Fotex Plaza, the company's
imposing post-modern headquarters in the Buda foothills, towers over the
commercial centre of Pest.
It is lonely at the top. No nearby building reaches even to the Fotex
Plaza's knees. Nor does anyone come close to rivalling Gabor Varszegi as
eastern Europe's richest individual.
A 23 per cent stake in the Fotex group and other interests add up to a
personal net worth of well over Dollars 100m. Some investment bankers call
Fotex 'the best private business in eastern Europe'. Its subsidiaries
dominate a whole swathe of retailing in Hungary from household goods and
cosmetics, to furniture, photograph developing and optical products.
That is just the start. Varszegi is today in Paris as part of a roadshow to
finance further expansion by raising Dollars 100m through eastern Europe's
largest ever international equity offering.
'Here you can build a serious empire in five to 10 years,' says Varszegi. He
began business in 1985 with a Dollars 200,000 investment in a one-hour
photograph developing shop and has expanded his empire by buying companies
which the state is privatising. 'It's a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Part
of the world is on sale. It never happened before and it will never happen
again.'
But many east European entrepreneurs have botched this chance. In Hungary,
where private business has been establised the longest, most of the stars of
four years ago have fallen as meteorically as they once rose.
Gabor Varszegi is a rare exception, and not just because he has survived.
The stereotype of the showy, fly-by-night, vaguely criminal east European
entrepreneur is all too often true. By contrast, Varszegi is proud to call
himself 'conservative'.
'I was born this way,' he says.
Not that there is anything drab about Varszegi's past. He made his first,
modest, fortune as a bass guitarist for Gemini, a 1970s Hungarian rock band.
But Varszegi, now 46, says he was always a better manager than a musician.
'I was a conservative rock musician,' he says. 'I always had short hair.'
Since his days in the music business, Varszegi has avoided the spotlight. 'I
never give interviews to Hungarian newspapers.' Few recognise his face; he
avoids social events and photographers.
He cites fear of the Russian mafia; but, like many east European
entrepreneurs, Varszegi is also Jewish. Prominence invites attention from
nationalist groups and fuels their fantasies about the international Jewish
conspiracy.
His caution can be seen too in Fotex's avoidance of expensive debt financing
that fuelled and then crippled many growing east European businesses. 'We
followed a very different philosophy. We discovered early on that credit is
the highest risk.'
Another vital ingredient of Varszegi's achievement is ruthlessness.
Colleagues describe the Fotex boss as 'brutally realistic'. When a cold-eyed
Varszegi prefaces a sentence with 'I like you very much as a person', as he
often does, you know that he is coming in for the kill.
Varszegi's uniqueness owes something to his time in the west. He gave up
music to emigrate to the US in 1980, worked as a diamond trader in New York
and has retained his US citizenship. 'I came back as an American to do
business,' he says.
A Fotex prospectus once appositely called the group 'an island surrounded by
Hungary'. Fotex unashamedly targets what its chief executive calls Hungary's
'high society', the tenth of the population which he reckons controls half
of the disposable income. Fotex offers the elite everything from gold
Cartier spectacle frames to mobile telephones: an 'infrastructure' for the
rich. 'We don't wish to deal with the average public,' Varszegi once said.
The Fotex boss sniffs too at east European manufacturers - unless they are
companies within his group: 'Either we have to make products ourselves or we
have to import them.' Fotex prefers western institutional investors to
fickle Hungarian stockmarket punters. Since it is not practical to import
labour, Fotex hires staff in their twenties, uncontaminated by communism.
But success can go to the head of even the most westernised businesses. Some
of the warning signs are there. Until recently Varszegi worked shared an
office with his secretary in a villa whose modesty must have appealed to
Fotex shareholders. Now he has built Hungary's most luxurious corporate
headquarters.
And he has begun to indulge in 'the usual tycoonery', as an adviser terms
it: a Bell helicopter to lift him from the roof of the Fotex Plaza, a
Beechcroft turbo-prop for longer journeys and a yacht for the occasional
bout of intense relaxation.
Varszegi has enlarged his ambitions too. He who once eschewed grandiose
plans, dreams of building a Dollars 1bn-a-year company by the year 2000 and
says: 'I hope that one day you can say what is good for Fotex is good for
Hungary.'
But Varszegi has not gone soft yet. The Fotex Plaza may be a prestige
building but it is also fully let at some of Budapest's highest rents while
other developments stand half-empty.
It is said that Varszegi has taken to calling acquisition his hobby but he
does usually draw back from the brink of over-diversification, says Paul
Greatbatch, a financial adviser to Varszegi: 'He knows what he is good at.
Basically he is a retailer and he always comes home. He hasn't made a
mistake yet.'
Nor has the excitement of deal-making dampened the tycoon's enthusiasm for
the essential detail of retail. He takes seriously the 'quality' slogan. And
he jumps over to his desktop computer to recite the exact number of
customers at his stores (378 at the last count) in the previous month:
1,187,016.
Of pride coming before a fall, Varszegi says he needs no reminder: 'If you
get richer and richer, sooner or later you lose your self-control.' In any
case, the moment of truth remains distant; the next downturn is probably a
long way away.
And then there is the yacht and the other little luxuries. Fotex's strategy
was to enable the rich to be rich. Now, Varszegi has begun to listen to his
own pitch. Eastern Europe's wealthiest man is allowing himself a little bit
of conspicuous consumption.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940411

