FT943-12987

FT  22 JUL 94 / Telegraph chairman in sharp attack on Cazenove


   By RAYMOND SNODDY and ROBERT PESTON


Mr Conrad Black, chairman of the Telegraph group, has launched an
unprecedented public attack on Cazenove, the most discreet and illustrious
of British stockbrokers, for the manner in which the firm withdrew from the
Telegraph account.
Mr Black described Cazenove's abrupt resignation last month as broker to the
Telegraph as 'scandalous and dishonourable'.
The resignation followed the row over Hollinger, Mr Black's Canadian company
that controls the Telegraph group, selling Pounds 73m worth of shares to
institutions in May, a month before the weekday cover price of the Daily
Telegraph was cut.
On the day the price cut was announced, Telegraph shares fell by 191p to
349p, enraging investors who had bought the shares through Cazenove at 587p
barely a month before.
The Stock Exchange has cleared Mr Black of any impropriety. Mr Black says he
was given two hours' notice of Cazenove's decision even though he believed
after talking to senior Cazenove staff they would 'not do anything
provocative' and would not withdraw abruptly. He believed there would be a
natural parting of the ways once the dust had settled.
Cazenove had a great name, Mr Black said, but on this occasion the firm's
behaviour had been 'absolutely outrageous'.
Mr Black's comments were put yesterday to the stockbroking firm's new senior
partner, Mr Mark Loveday, who said he would not respond to any of the
allegations.
Apart from the abruptness of the decision, Mr Black is angry that an unnamed
senior Cazenove official told the Financial Times that it was the first time
in recent memory the firm had voluntarily resigned as stockbroker to a
company.
This, Mr Black said, had the effect of 'poisoning the wells' and of
'inflicting the maximum damage on the company's reputation.' Mr Black added:
'They took the line of least resistance and scurried out the back door into
the tall grass.
'Any company using Cazenove as a broker or an adviser should take note of
this. The fact is in this business you have to have some reasonable level of
reliability from people you are paying to serve you.'
Cazenove, which concentrates on providing advice to companies on share
issues rather than becoming a more broadly based investment bank, is widely
regarded as successful.
Lex, Page 16
Black reveals anger, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940722

