FT942-15280

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Turkey (3): A shock for the secularists - Election
setbacks for the main parties may lead to political realignment


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


Last month's municipal elections may well prove to have been a watershed in
Turkish politics.
The historic victory of the Islamic-based Refah party (RP), both in
Istanbul, the largest city and in Ankara, the capital, has shattered the
cosy complacency of the secularist establishment. The continuing collapse of
the leftwing vote, with the three centre-left parties together polling
little more than 25 per cent, has further underlined the point.
What was also alarming for Turkey's western friends was the growing
popularity of the neo-fascist Nationalist Action party (MHP) which polled
8.8 per cent, more than trebled its 1989 vote and took control in several
municipalities in eastern Turkey.
Mrs Tansu Ciller's True Path (DYP)party won the election by a slither from
its rightwing rival, the Motherland party of Mesut Yilmaz. But it was the
Islamic vote that caused the stir. With just one shift in the prism, a deep
shadow has been cast over Turkey's political scene.
Some Turks are putting a brave face on developments. The result, they say,
will act as a catalyst for a long- overdue realignment of Turkey's fractured
political landscape - on both right and left. A more alarming analysis is
that this marks Islam's political coming of age, an event which could change
the whole course of Turkey's pro- western democratic development.
The RP has control of 28 of the country's 76 city councils, prompting Mr
Nemettin Erbakan, its leader, to boast that 66 per cent of the population
will now be under his party's administration. The party's performance,
doubling its vote over local polls in 1989, is likely to have a considerable
fall-out. Mainstream parties will be forced to reappraise their strategies.
The army, as the self- appointed guardian of Turkey's secular pro-western
identity, will be watching events with particularly close interest. Turkey's
western allies will be asking if the country is going the way of Algeria,
where Islamic extremists seemed poised to take power by the ballot box until
the army intervened to suspend the elections and arrest the activists.
From Turkey's mainstream parties, a variety of responses seems possible.
Firstly, the splintering of traditional voting patterns is certain to revive
the debate about the need for electoral reform, to counter the Islamic
challenge.
After all, as many secular Turks will point out, the RP only polled 18 per
cent of the national vote, coming third, yet took control of more city
councils than both the DYP and Anap put together. This fact alone may force
the right wing to reconsider the logic of a merger.
Electoral reform would, of course, require a two-thirds majority in the
450-member parliament. Judging from the lack of consensus on most
legislative issues to date, this may be hard to achieve.
One option is to introduce a two-tier system, modelled on the French system.
The Turks have already tinkered end- lessly with the current arrangement,
most recently in 1991, when the then Anap government introduced changes in
the barrage system to discourage fringe and regional parties. To look at the
line-up for last month's local polls, the safety mechanism would appear to
have come undone.
The proliferation of parties is bewildering. In all, the Turkish electorate
had to choose between 12 parties, encompassing centre, right and left,
social democrat, and the extremes of neo-fascists, Socialists and Islamic
radicals. The notable absentee was the Kurdish based Democracy Party, DEP.
Its withdrawal from the election was in some part responsible for RP's
strong showing in the Kurdish-speaking south-east.
In Turkey party distinctions often appear highly artificial, and frequently
have more to do with personality than policy, something which is
particularly true of DYP. For more than three decades the DYP and its former
incarnation, the Justice Party, has been in the gift of one man, Suleyman
Demirel.
It was Mr Demirel's bitter rivalry with his one-time economics adviser,
Turgut Ozal, the former president and Anap founder, which kept the parties
apart. With Mr Demirel's accession to the presidency last June and Mrs Tansu
Ciller's emergence as DYP leader, many commentators are wondering whether
the way is now open for a merger on the right.
The election will have created even more urgency. The RP has stolen votes
from DYP and Anap, both of which once represented a broad church, a fusion
of the strands that make up the rightwing vote in Turkey from Islamic
conservatives, to hardline nationalists and laissez-faire liberal
progressives.
Another possibility is that both conservative parties will ignore the logic
of creating a merger and merely move to the right in a bid to accommodate
the Islamic vote and undercut the RP.
The prospect of a merger of left-of-centre parties seems more distant. All
the parties - the SHP, the Republican People's party (CHP), and the
Democratic Left party (DSP) of former prime minister Bulent Evevit - claim
to be the true torch-bearers for the secular reforms introduced by Turkey's
founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, after he abolished the caliphate.
The SHP, with more to lose after its sweeping win in 1989, took a
particularly severe drubbing, losing Izmir and Adana, in addition to
Istanbul and Ankara. The DSP polled just 8 per cent nationally while the CHP
managed only 4 per cent.
Whatever happens, the long-term survival of the current coalition must be in
doubt. At a personal level, Mrs Ciller, the DYP prime minister, has little
in common with Mr Murat Karayalcin, the leader of the secularist SHP.
The coalition appears to have outlasted its usefulness. For one thing, the
alliance had nothing to do with the current leaders of the respective
parties. It was largely the creation of Mr Demirel and Prof Erdal Inonu, the
former deputy prime minister who stepped down as head of SHP in November,
paving the way for Mr Karayalcin's election.
Divisions over policy - whether it is the Kurds, the economy, or the place
of Islam in society - have strained an already uneasy cohabitation.
Ironically, the one issue where the SHP stood its ground was over the draft
for the new anti-terror draft law. In this case, negotiations broke down
over DYP's refusal to include crimes against the secular nature of the state
as treasonable. Both parties were in agreement over the hardline remedy for
separatist offences.
The divisions are certain to widen. Mrs Ciller has already issued what
amounted to an open invitation to Mr Yilmaz to start merger talks. However
the immediate question is how will Mrs Ciller accommodate the Anap leader.
More than most of the mainstream party leaders, the clever but humourless Mr
Yilmaz has been badly wounded by the election results. But given the state
of the economy, he may be reluctant to join forces, fearing to get tarred
with the same brush as Mrs Ciller.
Municipal polls, of course, have no direct bearing on party strengths in
parliament, although according to one expert, the RP vote would translate
into around 150 seats in parliament at the next general election. The party
currently has 40 MPs.
Much will depend on how well the RP does in managing the affairs of
Istanbul, a city which has proved a notorious graveyard for the reputations
of many parties - most recently the outgoing SHP administration.
The central government's ability to make life difficult is not
inconsiderable. New cash constraints can be imposed. The near-bankruptcy of
many administrations today can be traced to the face that many were forced
to borrow, some on international markets, with the result that
municipalities are today facing severe ongoing debt service problems.
If RP comes unstuck, Turkish voters are unlikely to turn out in their droves
at a general election for a party that cannot put water in Istanbul's taps
or keep Ankara's municipal rubbish dumps at a safe distance from the city
centre.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940415

