FT943-13200

FT  21 JUL 94 / Former Burton finance director moves to Bass


   By ANDREW BOLGER


Bass, the UK's biggest brewer, has appointed as its finance director Mr
Richard North, 44, who two weeks ago left Burton Group, the fashion
retailer, with a non-contractual bonus of 12 months' salary - close to
Pounds 250,000.
Bass said Mr North intended to fulfil a Pounds 60,000 contract to do 12
months' consultancy work for Burton, awarded when he left. But the contract
could be ended should pressures on his time prove too great. Bass declined
to disclose Mr North's new salary.
He takes over the role of finance director vacated by Mr Philip Bowman, 41,
who is being given operational experience as chairman and chief executive of
Bass Taverns, responsible for the group's 4,200 pubs and 120 Toby
restaurants.
Analysts welcomed Mr North's arrival, saying his strong retailing background
would benefit Bass, which also includes Holiday Inn hotels, Britvic soft
drinks, Coral betting shops, bingo and 10-pin bowling.
Mr North, hired by Burton in 1991 from Coopers & Lybrand, left the retailer
because he said he had completed his task of sorting out the group's
problems as finance director. During his three-year stint, Mr North reduced
Burton's debts from Pounds 800m to Pounds 50m, and gearing from 100 per cent
to 6 per cent, through two rights issues, the sale of Harvey Nichols in
Knightsbridge for Pounds 60m, and other property deals.
Analysts said Mr North might emerge eventually as a possible candidate to
take over as chief executive if Mr Ian Prosser, 50, were to spilt his role
of chairman and chief executive.
However, the decision to give Mr North's predecessor operational
responsibility for Bass's biggest profit centre means that Mr Bowman - as
the youngest member of the Bass board - is even better placed, should his
new role prove a success. Profits from brewing are expected to increase only
slowly over the next few years, but pub retailing is thought to have
considerable potential for growth.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940721

