FT943-13155

FT  21 JUL 94 / International Bonds: Lukewarm reception for US bank's
Dollars 1bn offering


   By GRAHAM BOWLEY and ANTONIA SHARPE


Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) failed to set the international bond market
alight yesterday with the launch of its anticipated inaugural Dollars 1bn
offering of global bonds. The indicated price range on the two-year bonds
was 9 to 11 basis points over five-year Treasuries, in line with market
expectations.
Syndicate managers said although FHLB had worked hard to raise its profile
with investors outside the US, demand from Europe and Asia was muted and
they expected most of the bonds to flow back into the US. However, joint
lead managers Lehman Brothers and Morgan Stanley said placement was evenly
split between the regions.
The bonds are likely to be priced this afternoon to yield 10 basis points
over Treasuries. Yesterday's sudden sell-off in the US bond market was not
expected to hamper the deal, indeed a potential coupon of close on 6 1/8 per
cent as a result of the weakness was likely to attract more buyers.
With FHLB's deal out of the way, the calendar of new eurobond issues is
looking thin, though the European Community is expected to invite bids for
its seven-year Ecu300m issue early next week.
Syndicate managers welcomed the slowdown in new issues business which would
give the market time to digest the recent flood of supply.
Among yesterday's other offerings, General Electric Capital followed hard on
British Telecom's heels raising Pounds 100m through an offering of five-year
eurobonds, taking advantage of improved conditions in the sterling bond
market and the greater demand from European investors.
The bonds were priced to yield 20 basis points over the 6 per cent UK
government bond (gilt) due 1999, which dulled their appeal to institutions
somewhat. Indeed, some syndicate managers said when compared with a gilt
with a more comparable maturity, the spread on the bonds was closer to 14
basis points.
However, European retail investors were strong buyers. The funds raised were
swapped to floating-rate sterling.
Nestle Holdings followed up on the success of its Dollars 200m eurobond
issue in June when it increased the three-year offering by a further Dollars
100m yesterday. Lead manager CS First Boston said the bonds were aimed
mainly at Swiss retail investors. The new tranche was priced to yield 5
basis points over the yield on the 6 1/2 per cent Treasury due 1997.
Given Nestle's high standing among investors, the spread is expected to
tighten further and eventually trade below Treasuries. Late yesterday, the
spread was unchanged.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940721

