FT943-828

FT  27 SEP 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Swedish group lifts newsprint
prices 20%


   By ALISON MAITLAND


Stora of Sweden, Europe's biggest pulp and paper group, will raise prices of
newsprint by 20 per cent next year following sharp increases in pulp prices
and a recovery in European demand for paper.
Mr Lars-Ake Helgesson, president and chief executive officer, told analysts
in London that the company had achieved an increase of only 3 per cent this
year. Even after a further 20 per cent increase, 'there will still be some
way to go to reach the level of the late 1980s,' he said.
Newsprint prices have lagged behind increases for pulp and other types of
paper because negotiations with customers take place only once a year. Mr
Helgesson said prices had fallen by about 30 per cent during the severe
cyclical downturn from which the industry has been rebounding this year.
The Stora increase is in line with that proposed by other Nordic paper
groups.
Mr Helgesson declined to say whether Stora would increase pulp prices again,
after a series of rises that lifted prices by 80 per cent to Dollars 700 a
tonne this year.
But he said the fact that spot prices for pulp were higher than 'regular'
prices pointed to the likelihood of further increases. Spot prices were
consistently lower during the downturn.
The latest rise in Nordic pulp prices earlier this month was caused by
growing shortages of wood and a huge increase in demand for fine paper.
Mr Helgesson said non-integrated suppliers of fine paper in Europe 'will
obviously suffer as (pulp) prices go up,' but added: 'They've been able to
put through price increases faster than I expected'.
Stora has also just announced increases of 10 and 20 per cent for coated and
uncoated magazine paper, following 8 to 12 per cent rises for fine paper.
Despite this, he said, 'our average prices are somewhat lower than in 1993'.
The group would need to increase present capacity of 7m tonnes by at least
200,000 tonnes a year to hold its share if the market continued to grow by
3-4 per cent a year as predicted, Mr Helgesson said.
'We can do this either by building new machines or acquiring capacity and we
will see a combination of that in the future,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940927

