FT943-759

FT  28 SEP 94 / Keating party backs sale of airports


   By NIKKI TAIT


   HOBART


The Australian government will go ahead with the sale of 22 airports owned
by the Federal Airports Corporation after the ruling Labor party backed a
compromise sell-off proposal at its party conference in Hobart yesterday.
But the government has been forced to make concessions over the shape of the
sale and place significant constraints on bidders, to secure support from
left-wing factions.
These could affect the proceeds received from the sell-off. Estimated sale
revenue had previously been put at about ADollars 2bn (Pounds 938m).
The deal approved by the ALP conference requires that the airports are sold
on leases of 50 years, rather than as freehold.
A controlling interest must remain in Australian hands. Airlines, or their
associated interests, will be unable to acquire more than a 5 per cent
equity interest.
Measures will also be taken to prevent ownership concentration in the key
east coast area.
'Bundling' of airports for sale, especially across state lines, will be
minimised and, where possible, the airports will be sold individually.
Existing 'award' employment conditions for staff of the Federal Airports
Corporation must also be maintained.
Finally, control of airport pricing and supervision to ensure competition
between the properties will rest with the Prices Surveillance Authority and
the Trade Practices Commission respectively.
The ALP's hope is that local institutional investors will step forward as
bidders, although the motion passed by the conference yesterday stated that
state and local government bodies would also be encouraged to become
involved.
But to date the most heavily publicised interest in the airports has come
from international operators, such as BAA, the British airports group.
The federal government will also refinance some smaller regional airports,
at present loss-making, to make them attractive sale candidates.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940928

