FT942-15362

FT  15 APR 94 / Whitehall roles under scrutiny: Pressure grows to move
insurance regulation from DTI to Treasury


   By ALISON SMITH


The Treasury is actively looking at taking over responsibilities from other
Whitehall departments in order to create a single administrative structure
covering investment and financial regulation.
It would involve taking on the Department of Trade and Industry's role in
prudential supervision of the insurance industry.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, is also eyeing the Department of Social
Security's responsibility for personal and occupational pensions policy.
'The issue is on the agenda,' one official admitted. The last shift of
responsibilities in this area came in the summer of 1992, when the Treasury
took on the oversight of financial services.
The argument behind the move then was that it made sense for the regulation
to come within a single department.
But there was some criticism at the time that it still left companies
dealing with more than one ministry.
Recent lobbying about the future form of regulation in retail financial
services, for example, gave life companies an opportunity to try to play off
the DTI against the Treasury - which is strongly committed to the new
Personal Investment Authority.
One of the factors in the revival of the issue is the current inquiry by the
cross-party treasury and civil service committee of MPs into financial
regulation.
The committee raised the continuing division of responsibilities when it
took evidence from Mr Anthony Nelson, the junior Treasury minister, last
year.
Officials believe it is likely to recommend the change when it makes its
report. Though work is in hand on the implications of possible changes, no
transfer would take place without the consent of Mr Michael Heseltine, trade
and industry secretary, and Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary.
The timing of any move in relation to the DSS would also be complicated
because of the changes as a result of the report of the Goode committee on
occupational pension law reform.
Legislation on this is expected to be brought forward in the parliamentary
session that begins in the autumn.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940415

