FT943-12988

FT  22 JUL 94 / Blair wins mandate to push Labour into centre ground: New
leader says party must shun the old dogmas of left and right


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


Mr Tony Blair won a clear mandate yesterday to push Labour further into the
political centre ground by securing a decisive victory in the party's
leadership election.
The 41-year-old successor to the late John Smith committed himself to a 'war
against complacency' in the party. He won an immediate pledge of loyalty
from his newly elected deputy, the more traditionalist Mr John Prescott.
Promising to drive forward the process of 'modernisation' and echoing the
themes of President Bill Clinton's 1992 US presidential campaign, Mr Blair
said Labour must eschew the old dogmas of both right and left.
Instead it would present the electorate at the next general election with a
new left-of-centre agenda based on economic regeneration and the restoration
of Britain's social fabric.
The youngest-ever Labour leader told supporters at a London rally that the
Conservatives had 'lost the nation's trust'. But Labour had still to work
for and earn that trust by launching a 'crusade for change'. Mr Blair's
victory with an outright majority of 57 per cent across the three sections
of Labour's electoral college was accompanied by Mr Prescott's comfortable
win in the race for the deputy leadership.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, who took over as interim leader from Mr Smith, was
defeated in both contests. She immediately pledged her loyalty to the new
leaders, indicating she would be seeking a senior post alongside Mr Blair
and Mr Prescott after this autumn's elections for the shadow cabinet team.
Mr Blair, whose victory coincided with the first meeting of Mr John Major's
reshuffled cabinet, will delay until after the shadow cabinet elections his
planned shake-up of Labour's team.
But he is already studying changes to the party's cumbersome policymaking
machinery and will next week provide a glimpse of his new leadership style
at the launch of a policy document linking industrial policy and education.
As Mr Jeremy Hanley, the new Conservative party chairman, attacked Mr Blair
as 'all style and no substance', senior ministers said the government's
strategy would be to highlight the 'clear water' which remained between the
two parties on the economy, taxation and Europe.
But in his acceptance speech the new Labour leader left no doubt of the
direction he intends to travel in an effort to end the run of four general
election defeats which have led to more than 15 years in the political
wilderness.
Labour would embrace the market economy but buttress it with a partnership
between government and industry; it would end the dependency of the poor by
promoting employment rather than welfare; and it would extend high standards
in education to all schools.
Mr Blair offered a clear hint also that he intends to continue the internal
reform process which saw the influence of trade union leaders in the
leadership election eclipsed by the votes of MPs, constituency members and
rank-and-file union members.
Mr Prescott, whose comfortable victory in the deputy leadership contest
underlined his popularity with the party faithful, said he intended to take
a high-profile campaigning role in the run up to the general election.
But he made it clear he would also expect a pivotal role in policymaking and
that he would continue to promote the goal of full employment which was at
the centre of his campaign for the leadership.
Labour's tragedy turns to triumph, Page 10
Hanley condemns, Page 10
Joe Rogaly, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940722

