FT941-3326

FT  16 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Share prices respond to strong gains
in bonds - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


Strong gains in British government bonds and further indications that
economic recovery is showing through in corporate results laid the
foundation for a 34-point advance in the FT-SE 100 Index yesterday. Trading
volume gathered pace as the stock market moved ahead to a confident close.
Investors were encouraged by good news on US inflation, by confidence ahead
of the Bund-esbank's money market repos tender today and by another round of
dividend increases from UK companies. The final reading put the FT-SE 100 at
3,267.4, with some analysts predicting that the 3,300 mark could be
challenged again before the end of the week.
A week heavy with important economic statistics saw the opening of
yesterday's session dominated by prospects for the US producer price index,
announced at midsession in London.
News that the core index had risen by only 0.1 per cent in February,
reducing the likelihood of a tightening in Federal Reserve credit policy,
was well taken in Europe.
UK equities, which had made modest progress during the morning, began to
move up strongly behind gains of more than a full point in long-dated
government securities.
On the domestic front, the switch in market sentiment in favour of signs of
economic recovery was encouraged first by news that UK construction industry
orders had jumped by 16 per cent in the three months to January, and then by
strong profits and dividend announcements from the construction and building
sectors.
An increase of around one-third in the dividend payment from Wolseley,
Britain's leading builders merchant, reinforced market confidence that
higher payouts will provide the drive for the stock market.
Little heed was paid to the latest distributive trades survey from the
Confederation of British Industry, which suggested a slowdown in the rate of
retail sales increase.
Store and consumer issues mostly followed the market trend, as investors
took the view that economic recovery will provide the basis for higher
levels of consumer spending. Heavy trading in Barclays reflected continuing
dividend optimism. The strength of sterling failed to deter shares in the
big exporting firms.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained 16.8 at 3,902.5 as buying spread through the
list of building and construction shares, many of which are outside the
FT-SE 100 stocks. By the end of the session, Seaq volume, at 616.1m shares,
showed a 10 per cent increase from Monday's total. Retail, or customer,
business on Monday was worth Pounds 1.25bn. While a little below last week's
average, retail business in equities remained healthily profitable for
London-based securities firms.
While sounding fully confident last night, market strategists pointed out
that today will bring significant tests for shares and bonds in the form of
the latest data on domestic retail sales, unemployment, average earnings and
unit wage costs. All will be scanned for evidence of progress in the
domestic economy, as well as for inflationary pressures.
With Wall Street a shade lower at the London close, it was clear that
attention had switched to Germany and that the UK market will focus closely
today on the progress and outcome of the Bundesbank repos tender, where some
analysts hope to see rates trimmed more sharply than they were last week.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

940316

