FT942-15892

FT  13 APR 94 / Arts: 'Rope' regains its reputation - Theatre


   By ANDREW ST GEORGE


Patrick Hamilton (1904-62) wrote Rope in 1929, a psychological thriller
braided into social comedy, taut and tense at the close. Hitchcock's bad
1948 film damaged the play, but not so Keith Baxter's excellent revival, now
at Wyndhams Theatre after opening at the Chichester Festival last year.
From the crashing discords and complete darkness, the play makes compulsive
viewing. Stage time and theatre time are identical. Hamilton gives us two
and half hours in the life of two Oxford undergraduates, Brandon and
Granillo, who have just murdered their friend Ronald. The opening - three
naked men, one dead - gives way to a wonderful scene in total darkness, the
actors detected only by their glowing cigarettes. It has the nerviness of
Macbeth, post-Duncan, and the scariness of Psycho, pre-shower.
The murder is a crime of vanity. Brandon and Granillo hide the body in a
chest, throw a tablecloth over it, and invite the victim's father, aunt and
assorted friends to dinner: 'You sit at the head.' But Rupert, a louche
free-thinking poet, begins to suspect. Before Brandon and Granillo can make
off to Oxford with the body, Rupert confronts them, and wrings a confession.
Will the free thinker enjoy the thrill of a healthy crime, too? Will he blow
the whistle?
Hamilton's writing is everywhere poised, the stage directions punctilious:
'He responds vaguely, as one who has only half understood'. But he also
makes psychological sense of the 'foul, lewd and infamous jest', like a good
Jacobean horror. The play moves the thriller genre into drama, but does so
by avoiding the whodunit mystery formula, because the murderers are
flaunting their crime. Here, every word comes out of the dramatic situation
on stage.
The direction (Keith Baxter) serves the purpose exactly. Each time new
information arrives, the situation and therefore the characters change.
Simon Higlett's set, skewed and twisted, keeps the intimacy of the original
three-sided production at Chichester; at the Wyndhams, real life comes and
goes through the door at the back of the stage, making the rest of the
theatre into a big conspiracy. The subtle lighting (Bill Bray) changes only
when the actors change it. The acting of the three principals keeps to the
changing subtleties of Hamilton's plot. They maintain a delicate triangle of
power, passion and guilt. Tristan Gemmill as Brandon finds bluster and
assertiveness in the character, while the surlier Granillo (James Buller)
drinks his way into a crisis of nerve.
Anthony Head as Rupert is all fancy and frolic, a cynical creature already
world-weary and bored, but witty enough to know it. On the ten commandments:
'Of course I honour my parents. I send them a telegram of congratulations
each year on my birthday.' The murderers will hang on his word. His is
decadence forced into moral standards by a specific case. Head has this
character pinned down: fiddling, twitching, clumsy at dinner but deft in
conversation.
Around him the rest of the cast twitter through the dinner party and leave
when they should. Richard Warwick as the victim's father adds gravitas while
Dawn Keeler as his aunt removes it. In all, a fine ensemble performance, and
a reminder that Hamilton's reputation - he wrote Gaslight and Hangover
Square - should hang on more than Rope.
At the Wyndhams Theatre

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940413

