FT941-16904

FT  07 JAN 94 / Management: Production line treatment for patients - A
Swedish hospital is using manufacturing management techniques


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


Think of a car going down a production line. Then picture a patient going
through a hospital. Can the two be compared? And can management techniques
to improve efficiency in the manufacturing sector be used with success in
services such as healthcare?
If Sweden's Karolinska hospital is anything to go by, the answer is yes. An
18-month time-based management project at the Stockholm hospital has cut
costs and waiting lists without affecting staff morale. The hospital is one
of the first healthcare organisations in the world where manufacturing
techniques have been applied so systematically.
The project has attracted international attention, particularly in Europe
where many hospitals are facing the same costs crunch as the Karolinska.
Among those to have shown an interest are representatives from 14 hospitals
in Denmark, two German hospitals, and UK hospitals in Wolverhampton and
Leeds.
'What we have done is to organise ourselves according to how the patient
moves through the system,' says Jan Lindsten, the hospital's chief
executive. 'The process is not quite the same as in the car industry but
there are great similarities.'
The Karolinska is facing a severe budgetary squeeze as part of a sweeping
reform of the country's healthcare system. It has been asked to cut costs by
SKr400m (Pounds 32.7m) between 1993 and 1995, equal to nearly 20 per cent of
its SKr2.2bn annual budget.
Lindsten says the hospital feared that a 'cheese-slicing' approach to its 45
departments would endanger their capacity to function effectively: 'The
challenge was to find a way to rationalise without cutting down by slicing.'
The resulting decision to call in the Boston Consulting Group led to the
adoption of a time-based management programme which takes the patient's
perspective. BCG manager Mikael Lovgren says the group has carried out more
than 60 other hospital projects worldwide, but that 'no other hospital has
made this kind of complete reorganisation around the patient flow'.
One of the first revelations was just how much patient and hospital time was
wasted by inefficient investigation procedures, which sometimes required the
patient to make up to five visits for different tests. Now nurse
co-ordinators arrange for all tests to be made during a single visit.
The second big area of inefficiency discovered was the operating theatre,
where an average of 59 minutes was being lost between the end of one
operation and the start of the next. The changes have cut the figure by more
than half.
The overhaul has placed far more stress on efficient preparation for
operations and bottlenecks have been reduced. Patients are pre-anaesthetised
outside the operating theatre so that less time is lost before the operation
begins. There is also less emphasis on having certain operating theatres
dedicated to particular types of operation while those of similar length and
complexity are carried out in the same theatre.
The changes have enabled the hospital to close four of its 16 theatres,
while increasing the number of operations. This year the hospital expects to
carry out 28,000 operations - 2,000 more than last year - in spite of the
reduced number of facilities.
The project has also led to more efficient use of operating nurses and
surgeons. But it also revealed that the hospital did not have enough
anaesthetists and that their time was used inefficiently. More anaesthetists
have been employed and an out-patient clinic for anaesthesiology has been
set up.
There has also been a significant re-organisation of the hospital's
functions. Separate medical and surgical departments and different tests
have been brought together to facilitate patient flow.
The project has not been applied to every department, partly because of
budgetary restraints. But in certain areas, it has achieved spectacular
results. Waiting times for hernia operations, for example, are down to three
weeks from as long as eight months. Overall cost savings have totalled more
than SKr100m, about 25 per cent of total costs in the areas affected.
The plan has met some resistance from staff who feared that increased
emphasis on time was simply a code for speeding things up and could lead to
mistakes. Lindsten emphatically denies there are any risks to the quality of
service, saying it is the time between operations rather than during them
that has been cut.
Some doctors and nurses have lost their jobs, he acknowledges, although more
anaesthetists have been recruited. 'Morale is better than it used to be,' he
stresses.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940107

