FT943-13219

FT  21 JUL 94 / Book Review: Traders and greens caught in a net


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


GREENING THE GATT: Trade, Environment and The Future
By Daniel C. Esty
Institute for International Economics, Washington DC
344 pages, Dollars 19.95
When a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade panel ruled against the US in
1991 for banning Mexican tuna exports, because they were fished with nets
which also caught dolphins, American greens saw red. On posters and in
newspaper advertisements, they attacked 'Gattzilla' as a rampaging dinosaur,
brutally trampling on ecological safeguards and national sovereignty.
The tuna-dolphin case has since become a potent symbol of friction between
environmental and trade policies - and of the heat it can generate.
Environmentalists sneer at the trade community as bloodless zealots, who
worship only economic efficiency.
Free-traders, meanwhile, deride environmentalists as wild-eyed idealists
with poorly thought-out goals which, implicitly or explicitly, favour
protectionism.
These mutual hostilities have not favoured rational debate on a subject
which is commanding growing international attention, but about which much
remains uncertain. The relationship between trade and environment policies
is so poorly charted that it is hard to be sure how far they genuinely
conflict - or whether the controversy is mostly politically contrived
alarmism.
Esty, a former US environmental policy official, declares his interest at
the outset. He insists serious issues are at stake because environmental
problems increasingly cross frontiers. Many trade experts would dissent. But
judging by the plaudits for his book from both sides of the divide, he has
set out the opposing arguments with exemplary fairness.
His starting point is that the focus of environmental policy has shifted
from crude curbs on smokestack pollution towards reliance on market forces
to change individuals' behaviour. The result is growing interest in the
principle of 'the polluter pays', in pricing mechanisms and in ensuring that
environmental costs are properly internalised.
Yet economic disciplines can work only if agreement is first reached on the
value of the assets concerned - a question on which opinions can differ
widely. What, for instance, is the value of a pretty view? On such
questions, Esty argues, political judgments are unavoidable.
However, he says, environmentalists lack a suitable institutional framework,
of the kind Gatt has provided in trade, in which to forge international
consensus on rules and their enforcement. As a consequence, the
environmentalist cause remains splintered, poorly focused and prey to
special interest lobbies.
Esty's preferred solution is a Global Environmental Organisation, which
would set worldwide standards and settle disputes. However, he is honest
enough to admit that - barring some global ecological catastrophe - the idea
is politically a non-starter.
But when Esty seeks alternatives, his balance starts to wobble. In striving
to be even-handed, he becomes enmeshed in convoluted arguments, the
implications of which he does not always fully explore.
On the one hand, he accepts that unilateral trade sanctions are a poor way
to enforce environmental standards: often, they lead to evasion or inflict
economic damage without solving environmental problems. Far better, he says,
to use financial incentives to encourage adoption of higher standards.
Equally reasonably, he suggests that Gatt disputes settlement procedures be
made more transparent and involve more environmental expertise.
Yet he says Gatt rules should nonetheless be changed to permit greater
recourse to trade measures for environmental reasons, because the US and
some other members will probably impose them anyway.
The notion is flawed. Not only does Esty admit that Gatt is a far from ideal
body in which to settle environmental issues. But he implies that
internationally agreed rules must be bent to suit the vocal political
lobbies in powerful economies which he earlier disparages. The same case
could be made to condone sanctions against low-wage exporters - or to
justify the enormities of the European Union's Common Agricultural Policy.
Esty raises more problems when he tries to construct general principles
under which Gatt might reasonably authorise use of trade measures. His idea
that they should be allowed in support of environmental policies which enjoy
wide 'moral' legitimacy internationally or address 'global' problems looks
suspiciously like a formula for endless hair-splitting debate about matters
on which even scientists find it hard to agree.
The water is muddied still further by his proposal that the Gatt clause
which authorises bans on products for environmental reasons should be
extended to production methods. Not only would that heighten risks of trade
conflict by elevating local environmental problems to international status;
but by switching the onus from protecting consumers to disciplining
producers, it would create immense administrative difficulties.
How would environmental standards at millions of factories worldwide be
monitored? How would customs officers identify offending products, such as
microchips which had been processed using ozone-unfriendly CFCs? And why
should producers necessarily respond to trade sanctions by raising
environmental standards, rather than by lowering them still further to cut
costs?
That Esty provides no satisfactory answers is less a criticism of his book,
which is an honest attempt to make sense out of confusion, than an
illustration of the difficulties of policymaking while so much in the trade
and environment debate remains unclear. The immediate need is not for more
solutions, but for rigorous and objective analysis to clarify the true
nature of the supposed problems, and how much they matter.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940721

