FT942-16202

FT  12 APR 94 / Receiver trapped in legal maze: Lancer Boss's future has
been complicated by two conflicting sets of insolvency laws


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Receivers love to be in control. But Mr Allan Griffiths and Mr Scott Barnes
have yet to gain full control of Lancer Boss, the UK lift-truck company for
which they were named administrative receivers on Friday.
A few hours before the partners at Grant Thornton were named receivers for
the Bedfordshire-based group and certain UK subsidiaries, a German lawyer
was appointed administrator to Steinbock Boss, the German subsidiary.
'It's an extremely unusual situation,' Mr Griffiths said yesterday.
As more details emerged of the circumstances behind the Lancer Boss
receivership, an extraordinary tale unfolded of conflicting insolvency laws
between UK and Germany, and of two separate banking groups with very
different priorities.
Two groups of banks - one in the UK and one in Germany - were funding the UK
and German parts of Lancer Boss, which each had borrowings of 'tens of
millions of pounds', Mr Griffiths said. To add to the confusion, the UK
banking group includes not only National Westminster and Standard Chartered
but also Dresdner Bank, which is based in Germany.
At a press conference in Tring, Hertfordshire, yesterday, Mr Griffiths
revealed little of Lancer Boss's financial position, but some of the puzzles
behind the receivership of one of the UK's largest private manufacturing
groups are becoming clearer.
Jungheinrich, the large German lift-truck producer, revealed yesterday that
it had been holding negotiations with Lancer Boss on the future of
Steinbock, Lancer Boss's German unit, which has been badly hit by the
recession.
It is believed that, originally, negotiations were based on a full-scale
link-up between Jungheinrich and Lancer Boss. But the receivers believe that
it emerged recently that Jungheinrich wanted only to buy Steinbock. The
German banks were keen to pursue a domestic solution for Steinbock's
troubles, and strongly backed the deal.
But Steinbock's directors and Sir Neville Bowman-Shaw, Lancer Boss's
chairman, rejected the deal because it would have involved the break-up of
the group. In response the German banking group withdrew its support from
Steinbock, which had been trading within its banking limits, and the
administrator was called in.
This left directors of Lancer Boss in a difficult position, because of what
Mr Griffiths called the 'interconnectedness' of the UK and German
operations. Large sums of money were flowing between Germany and the UK, he
said, and there was considerable interchange of products and reciprocal
supplies of components.
For that reason, he said, Sir Neville and directors of Lancer Boss decided
to ask banks to appoint administrative receivers for the UK operations - to
maintain stability while the German administration was sorted out.
Mr Griffiths is keen to maintain the links between the UK and German
operations because he believes the group would be worth more if both parts
were sold in one piece.
He has already had two approaches from potential purchasers in the UK. 'To a
purchaser, the attraction is to buy both the UK and German operations. In
isolation, they are not worth so much.'
The problem for Mr Griffiths is that he does not have control of the German
operation, and is urgently trying to establish what powers the German
administrator has to sell Steinbock. 'I am concerned that we will not get
control of the German company,' he said. 'If I do, I could sell the group in
a short period of time.' He hopes that Grant Thornton can persuade its
German counterpart to co-operate.
Mr Griffiths said a variety of companies would be interested in buying
Lancer Boss as a group. A 'structured financial deal' backed by engineering
interests was possible, or the business could appeal to big UK industrial
companies. No inquiries have yet been received from foreign companies, but
they are expected.
Meanwhile, Mr Griffiths and his team have moved quickly to secure the
support of the 770 workers in the UK businesses. Flanked by union
representatives at yesterday's press conference, he revealed that he had
already announced 19 redundancies and could not give any guarantees to the
remainder. But he stressed that his first concern was to sell Lancer Boss as
a going concern with as many jobs preserved as possible. Only if that fails
would he consider 'stage 2' - selling the product range without the
manufacturing operations in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940412

