FT942-15895

FT  13 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: A freight train out of control
 -Without radical reform of Superfund legislation in the US, the prospects
for insurers are bleak


   By RICHARD LAPPER


Pollution and asbestos claims could become a 'black hole' for the US
insurance industry unless big changes are made to the 'Superfund' laws, AM
Best, the US insurance and analysis and rating agency, warns.
But a new report* estimates that insurance companies will need to reserve
Dollars 260bn (Pounds 180bn) in additional funds to meet their exposure to
environmental and asbestos claims over the next 15 to 20 years.
To finance that bill, the insurance industry would need to set aside Dollars
132bn now (the present-day value of future payments before allowing for
interest earnings), an amount equal to nearly three-quarters of its
shareholders' funds - compared with some Dollars 12.5bn in reserves and an
estimated Dollars 20bn paid out in claims so far.
'It is hard to overstate the potential extent of the environmental and
asbestos liability problem for the insurance industry,' says the report's
author, John Snyder, a senior vice president at Best.
If most US court decisions go in favour of insurers, the amount needed to be
set aside for the future could fall to Dollars 55bn, Best says. Equally,
however, if court cases go against the industry, total reserves would need
to rise to Dollars 623bn.
'Environmental liability, both Superfund liability and all other hazardous
waste liability, represents the single largest threat to the property and
casualty insurance industry's financial health for the next several
decades,' Snyder adds.
The amounts involved represent an increase on frequently cited figures
prepared by Tillinghast, the actuarial and consultancy group, in 1990.
Tillinghast estimated net liabilities for the insurance industry of between
Dollars 37bn and Dollars 426bn over a similar time period.
Best says that while 'enough consensus has developed in Washington on how to
reform Superfund', under which the US federal government can order industry
to clean up some 36,000 identified polluted sites, the report assumes that
reforms are likely to be insufficient to help insurers.
Proposals unveiled by the Clinton administration in February envisage
extensive amendment of the Superfund regime. They centre on a reduction of
legal expenses - which account for about one-third of all Superfund-related
costs - but do not propose any change to the 'polluter pays' principle nor
any modification of the principle of retroactive liability. The US Congress
is hearing submissions on the issue, including alternative proposals put
forward by an alliance linking sectors of the insurance and chemical
industries.
Snyder does not rule out the prospect of reform but says that it 'is not out
of the question that nothing will happen' and that the Superfund legislation
will be reauthorised later this year.
Without fundamental reform, however, the report makes clear that the
prospects for insurers are bleak. 'This is a freight train bearing down the
tracks out of control. As time goes on it will become a bigger and bigger
problem, threatening industry solvency,' it says.
By the middle of last year, only about 1,270 of the most polluted sites had
been placed on a 'national priority list'. Of these only 149 - or 11.7 per
cent - had been cleaned up by September 1992. The cost of cleaning up each
site is - on average - Dollars 31m.
According to Best, the EPA indicates that the number of priority sites will
grow to 2,100 by 2000, although several independent observers believe the
list could balloon to 10,000 or more over the next several decades.
'Just the clean-up cost of these sites could skyrocket to Dollars 50bn or
Dollars 750bn, depending on the ultimate number of the sites to be cleaned
and the stringency of the clean-up,' says the report.
These estimates do not include the costs of litigation and other
transactions, 'the potentially enormous costs of bodily injury and property
damage lawsuits and natural-resource damage claims'.
The companies most vulnerable are those that underwrote comprehensive
general liability (CGL) policies - which insure against legal awards to
third parties - from the 1950s to the 1980s.
US courts have frequently ruled that companies ordered to clean up can claim
on their CGL policies. US insurers introduced exclusion clauses on these
policies in 1973, restricting coverage to 'sudden and accidental' pollution.
This was intended to remove coverage for gradual pollution caused, for
example, by leakages. In 1985, the companies withdrew coverage for all
pollution from CGL policies.
The report also paints a gloomy picture of the insurance industry's exposure
to asbestos-related claims. It says that only 50 per cent of the total
claims linked to asbestos - claims paid to victims of asbestosis,
mesothelioma and other asbestos-related diseases - have so far emerged.
With new claims from workers suffering from asbestos-related diseases being
filed at the rate of 50 to 60 a day, the agency estimates that insurers may
ultimately need to add an extra Dollars 20bn to reserves, bringing the cost
of asbestos liability, past and future, to Dollars 40bn.
In response to both sets of exposures, insurers have steadily increased the
amounts paid into their reserves since 1990. The sum of Dollars 2.2bn was
added during 1990, Dollars 2.6bn in 1991 and Dollars 3.6bn in 1992. The
amount increased to Dollars 4.3bn in 1993, partially because of the
introduction of new accounting rules which made it more difficult for most
companies that actively underwrote CGL policies during the 1960s, 1970s, and
1980s to report zero liability for environmental claims in their annual
accounts.
Best refuses to specify which insurers are most exposed, arguing that
'determination requires greater analysis and discussions with company
managements'.
The agency insists on the need for extensive reform. 'This problem has
escalated beyond anyone's wildest expectations. It just can't be tinkered
with and fine-tuned,' says Snyder.
*BestWeek Property/Casualty Supplement. A Special Report
Environmental/Asbestos Liability Exposures: A P/C Industry Black Hole. AM
Best Company, Ambest Road, Oldwick, New Jersey 08858.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940413

