FT942-16400

FT  11 APR 94 / Works council 'hit list' drawn up


   By ROBERT TAYLOR, Labour Correspondent


A 'hit list' of transnational companies operating in the UK has been drawn
up by unions. The TUC claims these companies will have to introduce
company-wide works councils for employees by 1996 under a European Union
draft directive.
The measure is expected to be approved by all EU states, except the UK, by
the end of this year. However, many companies in the UK will be directly
affected. Under the directive every company or industrial group employing at
least 1,000 workers in the EU with 100 workers in at least two member states
will have to introduce a works council. This will cover mainland-owned
companies with plants in Britain but also British-owned transnationals with
operations on the mainland.
UK unions have already established steering committees in preparation for
the works councils with their mainland colleagues in 12 British-owned
enterprises. These are Unilever, Coats Viyella, Reed International Elsevier,
Cadbury Schweppes, Watmoughs Holdings, Ferguson International Holdings, BPB,
Lucas Industries, GKN, United Biscuits, Guinness and GEC-Alsthom.
In a further nine companies UK unions have already met their mainland
equivalents. These are BET, Rolls-Royce, Pilkington, BAT Industries,
Redland, Hillsdown Holdings, Securicor group, ICI and Meyer International.
Five more British companies are also being targetted by the European unions.
These are SmithKline Beecham, Bowater, Glaxo Holdings, Blue Circle
Industries and Clark C and J.
Mr Nick Clark, co-ordinator of the British union works council campaign with
a Pounds 190,000 grant from the EU, estimates that 12 mainland-owned
transnationals already have UK union representatives involved in their works
councils. They are Elf Aquitaine, Generale des Eaux, BSN, Renault, Kone,
Pechiney, Thomson CSF and Thomson Elec, Bull, Asaea Brown-Boveri, Nestle and
Rhone Poulenc.
As many as a further 34 mainland transnationals have UK unions on joint
union steering committees preparing for the works councils.
In a further 16 companies UK union officials have attended meetings with
their mainland colleagues.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940411

