FT941-3563

FT  16 MAR 94 / Balladur settles feud on defence


   By DAVID BUCHAN and REUTER


   PARIS, BONN


Prime Minister Edouard Balladur has settled a feud between his defence and
budget ministers over future military expenditure by deciding that armaments
spending should rise annually by 0.5 per cent in real terms until the end of
the century.
Mr Balladur engineered the compromise as the government prepares to present
to parliament next month the 1995-2000 military framework law. This does not
absolutely tie a government's hands over annual defence budgets, but since
France is likely next year to elect a president from the ranks of the
governing coalition - even perhaps Mr Balladur - it will be a good guide to
future defence spending.
Mr Francois Leotard, the defence minister, had pushed for a rise in military
equipment spending of 2.5-3 per cent a year, taking as his text the recent
government-approved defence white paper. It said real 'annual growth of at
least 3 per cent' was needed to fund all programmes underway, though it
acknowledged greater efforts could be made to keep arms suppliers' charges
down and foresaw some savings through 'a certain pause' in modernising
France's nuclear deterrent.
Mr Nicholas Sarkozy, the budget minister, argued that the armed forces
should be subject to the same financial discipline as the civil sector. The
government's five-year fiscal programme, designed to fit France to enter
monetary union with Germany and other European partners by the late 1990s,
calls for an average 0.4 per cent cut in public spending in each of the next
three years.
Mr Balladur's decision to allow arms spending to continue to rise modestly
will appease the strong defence lobby inside the government coalition, but
will mean more severe cuts in civil programmes. France's 1994 defence
equipment budget of FFr100.4bn (Pounds 11.5bn) is already higher than that
of other European allies, with Britain planning to spend about 60 per cent -
and Germany only 27 per cent - of the French level this year, according to
French defence officials.
President Mitterrand's two-year old moratorium on French nuclear tests in
the south Pacific has provoked strong complaints from within the government
majority, but without saving much money because the government has started
research into laboratory simulation of such tests. The Elysee yesterday
welcomed President Clinton's decision to prolong until autumn 1995 a similar
moratorium.
Another general drain on the defence budget has come from France's heavy
involvement in United Nations peace-keeping operations in ex-Yugoslavia and
elsewhere. Last year this cost France FFr7bn, of which only FFr1.5bn will be
reimbursed by the UN.
The German government yesterday approved new guidelines for the armed forces
which call for the build-up of rapid-reaction forces under Nato's post-cold
war strategy of crisis management, Reuter reports from Bonn.
The guidelines, laid down in a policy document to be published next month,
spell out Germany's new international role after unification and detail
changes in the military force structure. 'This is the first building block
of the future Bundeswehr (Federal Armed Forces),' Mr Volker Ruhe, defence
minister, said. There were instances in international crisis management
where 'military means are necessary to prevent, limit or end violence,' he
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940316

