FT942-12637

FT  28 APR 94 / International Company News: June date for launch of Euro
Disney rights issue


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


The Euro Disney banks yesterday finalised plans to underwrite a FFr6bn
(Dollars 1bn) rights issue as part of the troubled leisure group's FFr13bn
rescue package, and hope shortly to officially launch the issue.
All the 61 international banks belonging to the Euro Disney loan syndicates
were asked to participate in the underwriting of the rights issue, which
forms a critical part of the rescue deal.
Walt Disney, the US entertainment company that owns 49 per cent of Euro
Disney, is committed to taking up its full entitlement, leaving the banks to
organise underwriting for the remaining FFr3.06bn in shares.
The banks, which last week endorsed proposals to waive their entitlement to
interest payments from Euro Disney for 18 months, have for weeks been in
intense discussions over the underwriting arrangements. However, a senior
banker involved with the negotiations said that by yesterday the
underwriting had been over-subscribed.
Caisse des Depots, the state-controlled French financial institution, will
be the leading underwriter after Walt Disney, having volunteered to
subscribe for FFr790m of the issue. Banque Nationale de Paris and Banque
Indosuez, joint heads of the banks' steering committee, have offered to take
up FFr300m and FFr200m respectively.
The banks now plan to press ahead with the final preparations for the rights
issue. The terms of the issue and price of the shares will be announced
within the first two weeks of June. The issue is scheduled for completion by
July 14 at the latest.
BNP and Indosuez are now attempting to secure unanimous agreement from the
banks to authorise the entire FFr13bn rescue package, which includes Euro
Disney repaying half its FFr20.3bn net debt and Walt Disney waiving its
entitlement to fees from the European company.
A majority of the 61 banks have already formally accepted the package. BNP
and Indosuez originally set a deadline of yesterday for the remaining banks
to agree. However, some 10 banks last night had not yet given their
agreement. BNP and Indosuez hope to have secured their approval by early
next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940428

