FT941-4164

FT  12 MAR 94 / Leading Article: George fires a warning shot


The Bank of England is flexing its muscles. The annual rate of UK economic
growth could rise to as much as 3 per cent over the next 18 months to two
years and needs no 'artificial' stimulus, predicted the governor, Mr Eddie
George, in the US on Thursday. Earlier in the week, his deputy, Mr Rupert
Pennant-Rea said that it was 'a delusion' to think that the UK had defeated
inflation.
Arriving in Detroit for the jobs summit of the Group of Seven leading
industrial countries next Monday, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will be
cheered by the Bank's views on the strength of the recovery back home. But
he will also find it more difficult to make a case for cutting interest
rates, should he wish to do so.
Evidence from the first of this month's batch of economic statistics would
seem to bear out the Bank's optimism. Figures published last week showed
that manufacturing output increased by 1.1 per cent in January, a much
larger rise than was expected, while December's drop was revised to just 0.2
per cent. Housing starts rose by an annual rate of 16 per cent in the three
months to January, although from a low base. Government estimates of net
lending to consumers in January showed a sharp drop from December 1993. But
figures from the Finance and Leasing Association, which are taken from a
wider base, disclosed a 37 per cent year-on-year rise in gross lending
between January 1993 and January 1994.
The sharp rise in bond yields witnessed in recent weeks suggests that
investors in bonds share the optimism over growth. Yields on 10-year gilts
now stand a little under a percentage point higher than at the beginning of
the year. The rise in the yield on index-linked gilts implies that about
half of this increase is due to higher real interest rates. The remainder is
due to a rise in inflationary expectations. Both presumably reflect greater
confidence about the prospects for economic growth, partly worldwide, but
partly also in the UK.
Strong demand
Yesterday's trade figures confirm the picture of strong demand. The surge in
imports in December, and upward revisions to the trade deficit for the whole
of last year, also rekindle fears that the UK economy will suck in imports
and run into balance of payments problems, as it starts growing reasonably
rapidly. The rise in manufacturing output gives some reason to be optimistic
on this score, however, since manufactures constitute such a large
proportion of the country's traded goods.
The output figures also show that production of investment goods rose by
nearly 4 per cent in January, while that of consumer goods fell slightly.
There may be evidence here of a shift towards investment-led growth,
essential if a rapid recovery is to prove sustainable.
Nevertheless, what is happening to consumption will be of more immediate
interest to Mr Clarke as he contemplates the effect the imminent tax rises
may have on the economy. Consumer expenditure grew at an annual rate of 3.2
per cent in the final quarter of last year, which confirms that personal
consumption, much the biggest component of demand, is the driving force
behind the recovery. But the measures announced by Mr Clarke and his
predecessor Mr Lamont in last year's two budgets represent a net fiscal
adjustment of Pounds 12.8bn. The tax bill of a married man on average
earnings will be Pounds 12.50 a month heavier after April.
Reduced savings
Taxpayers' disposable incomes are going to be hit hard, as the Labour party
has delighted in pointing out. If the consumer-led recovery is not going to
grind to a halt, consumers will have to reduce their rate of savings. In
fact, they have already begun to do so. The savings rate fell from a peak of
13 per cent in the middle of 1992, to 10.6 per cent in the third quarter of
1993. But if real consumer expenditure is to continue growing at 2.5 per
cent a year at a time of stagnant real disposable incomes, the savings rate
will need to fall to 6 per cent by the end of 1995.
The consensus is growing among commentators, including the chancellor's own
panel of independent forecasters, that the recovery should survive the
increased tax burden. Needless to say, there are also dissenting voices who
refuse to accept that the savings rate is set to decline so sharply.
Unemployment needs to continue its decline if the precautionary element in
savings is to fall. House prices, which rose 3.8 per cent in February, will
also have to recover still further if consumers are to feel confident about
their wealth.
Despite these doubts, it would be a brave chancellor who ignored the
outspoken comments of the governor of the Bank of England. It seems
increasingly likely that policymakers will wait until the effects of next
month's tax rises become evident before deciding whether to make further
changes in interest rates. Moreover, the next move in interest rates may not
be downwards.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940312

