FT943-13082

FT  21 JUL 94 / World Trade News: Row mars birth of Caribbean trade bloc


   By CANUTE JAMES


   KINGSTON


Ministers and officials from Caribbean Community (Caricom) countries have
spent this week solving a dispute which threatened to overshadow next week's
formal establishment of the new Association of Caribbean States trade bloc.
A diplomatic shuttle was needed to persuade President Rafael Caldera of
Venezuela to attend Sunday's signing ceremony. Venezuela had considered
recalling its diplomats from Caricom before a hurried visit to Caracas by
Caricom officials resolved the problem.
Venezuela's displeasure arises from a letter sent by Caricom leaders to
former Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Perez, who is in prison awaiting
trial on corruption charges. In his two terms in office, Mr Perez promoted
closer ties with Caricom and the letter expressed 'profound appreciation'
for his contribution to 'the development of democracy and economic
advancement in the hemisphere'.
Mr Caldera's administration interpreted the letter as interference in his
country's domestic affairs.
Caricom quickly sent the fence-mending mission to secure the participation
of one of the more important members in the new trade group.
With Venezuela mollified, attention is now on the start of the new economic
group of 25 countries, with about 15 dependent territories to be offered
associate membership.
The 13 Caricom members (English-speaking countries including Belize in
Central America and Guyana in South America) will be joined in the ACS by
the Group of Three (Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela), the countries of
Central America, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Surinam. Haiti's
seat will be offered to the government in exile.
'The signing of the convention creating the ACS will launch new
opportunities for the pursuit of collective initiatives by 40 states,
countries and territories, comprising some 200m people, united by the waters
of the Caribbean,' the Caricom secretariat said.
The aims of the new group include the expansion of trade among its members
and an increase in the level of functional co-operation in several sectors,
including energy, seabed mining, agricultural and industrial development,
transport and communication.
The ACS will take a common approach in international trade negotiations,
such as with the European Union and with the members of Nafta. It will be
involved in the negotiations of 'preferential arrangements for trade in
goods and, pending the outcome of the Uruguay Round negotiations, in
services as well', according to Caricom.
The row between Caricom and Venezuela was an early hurdle for the ACS to
clear. The involvement of Cuba may prove less easy to resolve.
Cuba sees the new trade group as a possible opportunity of escaping from its
economic morass. Mr Roberto Robaina, Cuba's foreign minister, says his
country is seeking regional co-operation in tourism, and to expand its
market for a range of goods and services.
US concern at Cuba's inclusion has already meant the loss of some associate
members. Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands, both US territories, will
not join the ACS.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940721

