FT944-14373

FT  24 OCT 94 / EU's new leader faces baptism of fire: Jacques Santer is
caught in a battle between two foreign policy barons


   By LIONEL BARBER


Mr Jacques Santer, president-designate of the European Commission, will this
week seek to resolve an acrimonious dispute over the share-out of new
portfolios, the first test of his grip on colleagues and clout with member
states.
But a power struggle between the Commission's two foreign policy barons  -
Sir Leon Brittan, chief EU trade negotiator, and Mr Hans Van den Broek, the
Dutch commissioner in charge of political affairs - threatens to sink Mr
Santer's hopes of reaching an early agreement.
Other last minute hitches include the Italian government's delay in
nominating its two commissioners, uncertainty over control of the
agriculture portfolio, and the absence of a political heavyweight willing to
take charge of the single market.
Mr Santer remains determined to reach agreement at a meeting with his new
commissioners in Luxembourg on Saturday, despite hints from Sir Leon's camp
that the senior British commissioner may block a deal if he is asked to cede
responsibility for relations with central and eastern Europe to Mr Van den
Broek.
Mr Van den Broek has also failed to endear himself to Mr Santer by objecting
to the Commission president's plan to assume personal control over foreign
policy in the new Commission. Mr Santer intends to introduce new committees
of commissioners in order to co-ordinate policy-making better.
Officials close to Mr Santer portray the plan as a bid to break up personal
fiefdoms which have flourished at the end of the 10-year reign of Mr Jacques
Delors, the outgoing president.
Mr Santer also wants to inject greater realism about the role of the
Commission in foreign affairs, especially since sovereignty-conscious member
states led by France, the UK and Spain have made clear they do not want
Brussels usurping their own powers under the guise of the Maastricht treaty.
As part of this effort, he wants to break down the barriers between
political and economic affairs in the present Commission whose curtailed
two-year tenure ends on January 6. This division, introduced by Mr Delors in
1992 to exploit the sharper profile given the Commission by the Maastricht
treaty, is widely viewed as a mistake and has led to constant turf battles
between officials loyal to Sir Leon and Mr Van den Broek.
Instead, Mr Santer would like to engineer a split on geographic lines. He
has suggested tentatively that Mr Manuel Marin, senior Spanish commissioner,
would retain control over Latin America and the Mediterranean; Mr Joao de
Deus Pinheiro, former Portuguese foreign minister, would look after the
developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific; Sir Leon
would handle trade relations with the developed countries.
Mr Van den Broek would continue to be responsible for orthodox diplomacy
such as attending international conferences, but he would also take over
relations with central and eastern Europe - a plum job since one of the
chief tasks of the new five-year Santer Commission will be to lay the
groundwork for EU membership of Poland, the Czech republic, and Hungary.
Mr Van den Broek may emerge with enhanced powers thanks to Mr Santer's
desire to bolster the Christian Democrat influence in a Commission likely to
be dominated by socialists.
Other posts tentatively agreed in the new Commission include transport for
Mr Neil Kinnock, the former UK Labour party leader; environment for Ms Ritt
Bjerregard, the new Danish commissioner; and research and competitiveness
for Madame Edith Cresson, the former French prime minister. Mr Martin
Bangemann, the senior German industry commissioner, will retain control over
information technology, while Mr Karel van Miert, will continue running
competition policy but drop control of personnel. Mr Santer also plans to
pencil in jobs for commissioners from Austria, Finland, Sweden and Norway,
which are due to join the EU next year, pending referendums in the latter
two countries in the next few weeks. Austria and Finland have already voted
to join. Each country would be able to nominate one commissioner.
An unresolved question concerns the future of Prof Mario Monti, the
distinguished Italian economics professor who is the first choice of the
Berlusconi government, but who wants responsibility for the economics
directorate, including preparation for monetary union.
The trouble is that the French government has waged an apparently successful
campaign for the Emu job on behalf of Mr Yves-Thibault de Silguy, former
adviser to Mr Edouard Balladur, French prime minister.
Last week, efforts were being made to persuade Prof Monti to come to
Brussels to run the economics directorate without Emu but with new
responsibilities, possibly including supervision of the multi-billion Ecus
'cohesion' funds which funnel money to the 'poor four' - Greece, Ireland,
Portugal and Spain - in order to help them prepare for Emu.
See editorial comment.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941024

