FT942-16260

FT  12 APR 94 / Row about Tory broadcast damages Major's campaign


   By KEVIN BROWN, Political Correspondent


Mr John Major was embroiled in a damaging row over Conservative election
advertising yesterday, amid signs of continuing unease among backbench MPs
over his leadership and growing electoral nervousness among the party's high
command.
On a visit to Birmingham, the prime minister's attempt to boost the local
Conservative campaign was undermined by criticism of the aggressive tone of
a Tory broadcast attacking the city's Labour council.
In an attempt to limit the electoral damage in Birmingham - the only large
city where the Conservatives have a realistic hope of overturning Labour
control - Mr Major told local voters: 'I am not bashing Brum.'
In an interview with the Birmingham Evening Mail, Mr Major said: 'Our
political view is that (the city) is being short-changed by the
inefficiencies of the present Birmingham council.' The visit was intended to
help the local party win the seven seats needed to take control, but he did
not forecast a Conservative victory in the city.
Meanwhile, party officials were backing away from a weekend admission by Sir
Norman Fowler, party chairman, that the prime minister's future could depend
on the results of the May 5 local elections. Mr Gerry Malone, deputy
chairman, said: 'This is not a referendum on John Major in any possible
sense.'
But Tory MPs returning for the parliamentary session starting today told a
different story. 'There is a lot of unhappiness in the constituencies with
the prime minister's leadership,' a supporter of Mr Major said.
There were also indications that the government may seek to avoid holding
the by-election in the vacant Conservative-held seat of Eastleigh,
Hampshire, before the June 9 elections to the European parliament. Mr Major
and senior cabinet ministers will decide today whether to stick to plans to
hold the by-election on the same day as the local polls.
The Liberal Democrat party, expected to win the seat, said it would move the
writ for the election on Thursday if the government did not do so tomorrow -
the deadline for a May 5 poll. Both main parties fear a Liberal Democrat
victory before June 9 would give the party a strong platform for the
European vote.
A Mori poll of voting intentions in The Times today suggests that, on a
uniform national swing, Labour could win 66 of the 84 European seats in
Great Britain, the Conservatives 15, and Liberal Democrats three.
A regional breakdown suggested the Tories could fall to eight seats from 32.
The Liberal Democrats, who hold no seats, would win 10 and Labour, which
holds 45, would win 66. But Labour played down the poll, saying: 'We do not
think it is possible for us to win 66 Euro-seats.'
Clash on Eastleigh date, Page 7
Election reports, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940412

