FT941-16887

FT  07 JAN 94 / Technology: Brainchild hidden in a basement - Jacques
Stern's dream of a European supercomputer is poised to become reality


   By ALAN CANE


Behind a door marked simply 'Maintenance' in the drab basement of a tower
block in the city of Lyons, south-east France, a full-scale prototype of a
supercomputer sits incongruously.
It is evidence that the organisation several floors above, the four-year-old
Advanced Computer Research Institute (Acri), is chasing a dream, not a
fantasy. It is also proof that the European Union and a group of private
investors have something to show for some FFr315m (Pounds 36m) put into the
project since 1990.
By mid-1994, the EU's contribution will be Ecu30m (Pounds 23.6m). The dream,
that a European company could catch and compete with the rest of the world
in supercomputers, has been nurtured since the 1980s by Jacques Stern,
Acri's founder and chief executive.
A former chairman of Groupe Bull, the French state-owned computer
manufacturer, Stern has assembled in Acri a 200-strong multinational team
with the goal of developing a globally competitive product. 'We do not
suffer from the 'not invented here' syndrome,' he says. 'Our technology and
engineering can come from anywhere. If you do not think globally at the very
beginning, you will never succeed.'
Late last year, in Portland, Oregon, the company made its international
debut at a leading US supercomputing exhibition under its trading name
'Stern Computing Systems'. SCS also plans to market systems developed by its
strategic partners, including Digital Equipment of the US. Digital's 'Alpha'
microprocessor chip, said to be the world's fastest, is at the heart of the
Acri-1, the company's first machine scheduled for commercial launch this
year.
Some years ago, the idea of a European challenger in supercomputers would
have invited derision. The market was small and pioneering costs high.
Supercomputers were custom-built to squeeze power out of the available
technology, with no expense spared. The world leader was Cray Research of
the US, followed by the Japanese companies, NEC, Hitachi and Fujitsu.
Much has changed. Developments in microprocessor technology have created
minisupercomputers - computers nearly matching a Cray for power at a
fraction of the price - and massively parallel systems such as Thinking
Machines' Corporation's Connection Machine, in which hundreds, perhaps
thousands, of microprocessors are strung together to tackle a computing
problem co-operatively. Convex Computer Corporation of Dallas in the US was
a pioneer in minisupercomputers; significantly, Adrian Wise, a senior
vice-president at Convex, has now been appointed vice-president for sales
and marketing at Acri.
These smaller, less expensive, machines have dramatically altered the
supercomputer market. Companies like the UK's Meiko, which builds parallel
processors, have won sales in the US. Cray's share of the world market has
started to slip and it has been forced to develop cheaper computers.
So Acri is adopting the strategy of niche player, aiming at the
high-performance technical computing (HPTC) market. Here, supercomputers
model and simulate mechanical structures, environmental conditions, chemical
processes and natural phenomena.
Companies need this information to design new products and to prove they are
complying with regulations. Tor Bloch, Acri's chief operating officer, gives
as examples combustion engine and oil burner developments, ship hull
collision resistance and the resistance of electronic aviation systems to
lightning strikes.
Supercomputers capable of handling these problems typically cost between
Dollars 5m (Pounds 3.3m) and Dollars 6m. These are not machines designed for
so-called 'Grand Challenge' problems - modelling the behaviour of the oceans
or the atmosphere, for example - for which large Cray or Fujitsu machines
costing up to Dollars 30m are needed.
Bloch estimates the value of the HPTC market as Dollars 5.1bn in 1992,
growing to more than Dollars 6.7bn in 1997. He says Acri's attack on the
market will follow three guiding principles.
It will use the most advanced available technology. The octagonal frame,
some 2m high, houses six Alpha chips each capable of processing 64 bits of
data simultaneously, giving up to 8bn operations a second. Gallium arsenide,
three times faster than silicon but difficult to work with, is used for some
of the chips. The machine is not fast by supercomputer standards, but
combines the best elements of Cray-type systems and massively parallel
systems to give excellent price performance. Typically, the price of an Acri
machine will be Dollars 2m.
It will use reduced instruction set computing (risc) techniques which offer
the best performance for the price in the HPTC market. It will use open
systems or client-server designs and will make use of a standard operating
system, Digital's OSF-1 version of Unix. It has an agreement with Cray to
share a common scientific programming language (Fortran) which should reduce
time to market and open the door to existing technical applications
software.
It will be easy to use. Bloch points out that as demands for increased
performance rise, supercomputer designs will converge and ease of
programming will determine which ones will be successful.
Acri was created out of discussions between Stern, Bloch, then in charge of
the advanced computing group at the European Organisation for High Energy
Physics (Cern), and Alain Lichnewsky, in charge of science and technology
and formerly director of research at Inria, the French National Institute of
Research in Computer Science.
Acri's network of strategic alliances involves equity interests. It has a
shareholding in Acset, a small Belgian company which writes the software
which makes Acri's computers easy to program. Cray Research is also a
shareholder in Acset and has a strategic alliance with Acri. Digital
Equipment has shares in Acri as has CEA, the French atomic energy agency.
Acri plans to sell its machines directly in Europe and through partners in
the US and elsewhere. Now it faces a tough test. The technology, Tor Bloch
says, is proven but more money must be found to bring the first Acri
machines to market. The company must raise a further FFr200m. If it fails,
Europe's supercomputing dream could founder, not from lack of innovation or
entrepreneurial zeal, but for want of cash.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940107

