FT943-13319

FT  20 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Mr Blair's new party


Barring accidents, Mr Tony Blair will become leader of the Labour party
tomorrow. The event should refresh Britain's tired politics. Mr Blair's
election could mark the ascendancy of a new generation of 'modernisers,'
whose leader-in-waiting has not been afraid to proclaim that he values the
dynamics of the free market. The old Labour party, dominated by trade
unions, representative of producer interests, steeped in socialist history,
is being subsumed by what might be called, after the New Democrats in the
United States, Britain's new left. Thus revitalised, Labour might yet
present the voters with an acceptable alternative party.
The balance of forces, old and new, will be evident from the voting patterns
in the leadership contest. The size of the modernisers' victory will be
important. Mr Blair has attracted promises from some 60 per cent of Labour
members of the Westminster and European parliaments; the remainder support
either Mr John Prescott or Mrs Margaret Beckett.
The electoral college is, however, divided into three parts, of which the
MPs constitute one. It is not clear whether the new leader will win overall
majorities in the sections reserved for rank-and-file party members and
trade unionists. If he fails to do he may be seen to have depended on the
second preferences of those opting for the least popular candidate.
This may matter more than the party's choice of deputy leader. Whether it be
Mrs Beckett, with her roots in the old left, or Mr Prescott, who does not
personify renewal, is of no significance. To borrow the advice given to
Lyndon Johnson before he became vice president of the US, the deputy
leadership of the British Labour party is not worth a pitcher of warm spit.
Political strategist
Mr Blair will have learned that and more from the US. Like President
Clinton, echoes of whose primary campaign can be found in his own, the new
Labour hopeful aims to reposition his party in the centre. His campaign has
revealed him to be a careful and self-disciplined political strategist. He
is not telegenic by accident; he works at it. His use of language is
designed to win wide popular support. He has grasped that most ordinary
voters, whether they be working or middle class, are apprehensive of rising
crime, reluctant to pay more taxes, and doubtful of the wisdom of
maintaining increasing numbers of people on the welfare rolls.
In a series of stump speeches he has intimated as much. He has been
particularly forthright, for a Labour politician, on welfare dependency. A
great deal of what he has said, notably on the economy, is a moderniser's
restatement of existing Labour themes. Some of it is his own: early on, for
example, he scratched the renationalisation of water from the party's
manifesto. Some of it is detailed, as with his proposed bill to incorporate
the European Convention on Human Rights into British law, or his promise to
disbar hereditary peers from the House of Lords. Some of it is a marker, as
with his careful redefinition of Labour's approach to the European Union, or
his cautious rephrasing of party policy on education.
Questions remain
In short, his campaign has changed the mood, but left obvious questions
unanswered. The music has been rephrased but the lyrics remain unwritten.
The Labour party faces a blank page. This is both a weakness and a strength.
Mr John Smith and Mr Neil Kinnock, Mr Blair's immediate predecessors, were
modernisers, but were never quite free of old Labour thinking. Tomorrow's
man does not carry the intellectual baggage of the party's past. If his
campaign had been bolder and more radical, it could have been used to commit
the whole party to a more creative direction. As it is, that task remains.
From now he will be urged to outline specific policies. Too much detail can
be the death of a political campaign: the voters do not absorb it, but rival
parties build their counter-attacks upon it. Too little could result in the
election of a government with no credible programme. Mr Blair's solution is
a series of 'flagship' proposals, which would serve as examples to buttress
his theme of renewal of every part of the the British polity. The electoral
process is testing: he will be obliged to turn out a flotilla of flagships
before polling day comes.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940720

