FT942-16232

FT  12 APR 94 / Canada vows to crush deficit: Finance minister flies to
London to state his case


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


Mr Paul Martin, Canada's finance minister, feels badly misunderstood.
In recent weeks, interest rates have soared and the Canadian dollar has been
under pressure on the foreign exchange markets. Last Friday Moody's
Investors Services announced that it might downgrade Canada's foreign
currency debt from its Aaa rating.
Yet Mr Martin, appointed finance minister in November after the Liberal
party's landslide election victory, insisted yesterday that Canada's new
government had mounted the most determined assault on the country's budget
deficit in two decades. He was in London to impress this message on
financial markets.
Mr Martin underlined that the Canadian government's policy was 'to keep its
eye on two balls - deficit reduction and job creation'. He told the
Financial Times: 'Everything should be geared to that.'
But he made clear that fiscal rectitude came first in his list of
priorities. Canada last week announced its best employment figures for two
years with a sharp fall in unemployment to 10.6 per cent in March from 11.1
per cent in February and 11.4 per cent in January. Mr Martin was in no mood
to make optimistic predictions or hail the drop in the jobless rate as a
sign that Canada's export and investment-led economic recovery was becoming
more broadly based.
'We were elected to create jobs, and we recognise that we can't create jobs
unless we mount a fundamental assault on the deficit problem,' he said.
Mr Martin stressed that the government would not retreat from the goal
enshrined in its February budget of bringing the deficit down to 3 per cent
of gross domestic product or about CDollars 25bn (Pounds 12.3bn) by 1996-97.
The budget, which envisages a reduction in the deficit to CDollars 39.7bn in
1994-95 from CDollars 45.7bn last year, 'is the most significant budget in
the last 20 years in terms of cuts'.
The financial markets had failed to recognise that it involved 'a deep
restructuring of the way government operates', including radical reductions
in unemployment insurance and defence expenditure. The markets were wrong to
fear that deficit reduction might be put off course by higher interest rates
following the rise in US rates since February.
The government had planned for the unexpected, Mr Martin said. 'We will take
whatever action is required to hit our targets.'
It was not properly understood abroad that the 3 per cent deficit to GDP
target was anchored in legislation that would be passed in this year's
budget bill and that budgets in later years would seek to cut the deficit
even more.
Meanwhile, Canada has an inflation rate that is well below the average of
the main industrial countries, productivity increases 'are going
gangbusters' and growth, at an annual rate of 3.8 per cent in the final
quarter of last year, is high by international standards and above the
government's expectations of a 3 per cent annual rise. Higher than expected
growth added further credibility to the government's budget targets, he
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940412

