FT942-14799

FT  19 APR 94 / Tightening of export rules may pre-empt Scott


   By JIMMY BURNS


THE government has been tightening export regulations in a move that may
pre-empt some of the recommendations of the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
The DTI has briefed companies in recent weeks on the new regulations, which
mainly involve applications for licences on potentially defence-related dual
use goods. The regulations particularly affect machine tool companies.
The Department of Trade and Industry has revised and updated licensing forms
to include detailed questions about the final user and use of goods.
Companies are being asked whether machine tools for export can be used in
nuclear or chemical warfare manufacturing. They are also being asked for
detailed statements from customers on the final destination of exports.
Lord Justice Scott is thought to be considering recommendations on reforming
export and licensing procedures. His inquiry has heard evidence that
ministers, officials and executives connived in exploiting loopholes in
licensing procedures.
Britain sold nearly Dollars 93m in machine tools to Iraq between 1987 and
1989 - more than manufacturers in the US, Italy, and France put together,
according to official UK figures.
Last night the DTI denied that it was reacting to or pre-empting the Scott
inquiry. It said tighter licensing procedures had been introduced in the
aftermath of seizure of long-range parts for the Iraqi supergun in April
1990. Three weeks ago the DTI launched a new code of practice and an export
control training initiative which it claims is aimed at making it easier for
companies to understand the licensing system.
Within the machine tool industry reactions to the new government initiatives
have been mixed.
Mr Malcolm Taylor, managing director of Bridgeport Machines, said a
licensing system that aimed to control the movement of machine tools was
'totally impracticable'. At the industry's annual trade fair in Birmingham
last week, Mr Taylor said the end-use and end-user of a sophisticated
dual-use machine tool was a 'moving target' which the exporter could not
control.
'Machine tools can be used to make whatever the end user chooses. A transit
van can be used to carry milk or munitions,' he said.
He was also critical of the impact on the machine tool industry of the Scott
inquiry. 'I would have preferred it if the Scott inquiry had never happened.
We are washing our dirty linen in public and hanging it out for all the
world to see. There is not a country in the world that punishes its
exporters in the way we do.'
However, Mr Keith Bailey, chairman of BSA Tools, one of the companies most
directly affected financially by the Iraq affair, said the Scott inquiry had
forced the DTI to be clearer in describing its policy to business leaders.
It had also made companies more diligent in pursuing potentially sensitive
dual-use contracts.
Mr Bailey said: 'In the pre-Scott days it was very much a nod and a wink
with the DTI saying, 'We don't want to know about your goods, so don't tell
us, carry on'. Now the DTI is in effect saying, 'You tell us everything and
we'll tell you what you can do and how far you can go'. Policy is
understood.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940419

