FT942-14438

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: Minister warns on Schneider
crisis


   By QUENTIN PEEL and DAVID WALLER


   BONN, FRANKFURT


Germany's banking system is facing a self-inflicted 'crisis of confidence'
in the wake of the bankruptcy of the Jurgen Schneider property empire, Mr
Gunter Rexrodt, the economics minister, warned yesterday.
His remarks, following yesterday's cabinet meeting, came as a leading German
newspaper claimed to have discovered the whereabouts of Mr Jurgen Schneider,
the 59-year old entrepreneur whose disappearance earlier this month
triggered the property crisis with debts at an estimated DM5bn (Dollars
2.9bn).
According to today's edition of the Berlin-based Die Welt newspaper, Mr
Schneider is living in a rented villa on the small island of Siesta Key,
south of St. Petersburg on the west coast of Florida in the US.
Mr Schneider is quoted in the article as saying he was 'going through a bad
patch' and had been ordered by his doctors to take a month-long break from
business affairs.
German banks were yesterday in discussions with the receiver appointed on
Monday to wind up the affairs of Mr Schneider, his wife and officials of the
Schneider group.
The banks are keen to avoid a hasty sell-off of the group's 85 property
developments in Germany.
Mr Georg Krupp, director of the Deutsche Bank, the failed group's biggest
creditor, told a German newspaper yesterday that the banks planned to
complete Schneider's unfinished projects.
Mr Rexrodt took the highly unusual step of calling on the big banks to take
swift and 'unconventional' measures to protect the small creditors
threatened by the collapse of the property group, in order to protect their
own reputation.
He was speaking after the German government discussed the bankruptcy at its
weekly cabinet meeting, and called for a comprehensive report on the
consequences by next week.
Mr Rexrodt said it was up to the banks, in the first place, to take measures
to support their clients, particularly the small suppliers worst hit by the
Schneider bankruptcy.
It might also be possible to use funds set aside in the government's job
creation programme to provide relief, he added.
Mr Dieter Vogel, the government spokesman, said members of the cabinet had
expressed their concern about the Schneider affair, and particularly about
the plight of the small suppliers.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940420

