FT942-12377

FT  29 APR 94 / International Company News: Buying into an industry's
heritage - Agco has grown by acquiring famous names


   By LAURIE MORSE


Agco, the farm equipment manufacturer and distributor based near Atlanta, is
an upstart in an industry decimated by rationalisation and plummeting demand
for tractors in the past two decades.
The company is barely three years old, but its products bear familiar names
going back to the early days of manufacturing history. This week it added to
its range by acquiring the remaining assets of Massey Ferguson's European
operations in a Dollars 328m deal.
Agco's network of 2,600 North American dealers sells tractors with
trademarks such as Allis of Allis-Chalmers, White and Massey Ferguson, and
combines and reapers under the Gleaner and Hesston names.
Mr Robert Ratliff, chairman, has been building the company from the ground
up, buying the remains of ailing equipment manufacturers at fire-sale
prices, boosting their dealer networks and squeezing profits from
rationalisations and strategic product combinations. Agco's stock has jumped
from Dollars 14, when the company went public in April 1992, to around
Dollars 34.
Although 98 per cent of Agco's business has been centred on North America,
the Massey Ferguson acquisition, with its European operations and worldwide
dealer network, will make Agco's strategy global.
Mr Ratliff founded Agco when he led a management buy-out of what was left of
Allis-Chalmers' farm equipment division from Germany's
Klockner-Humboldt-Deutz.
Deutz wanted to divest the farm business because it was a poor fit with its
automotive businesses. Mr Ratliff, a former International Harvestor
executive, financed the Dollars 89.4m purchase by selling the company's
dealer receivables to Whirlpool Financial.
Since then he has completed a string of acquisitions, expanding his sales
force but where possible avoiding capital-intensive manufacturing
operations. Agco, for example, contracts with manufacturers such as Italy's
SLH to produce equipment that Agco sells under its own brand names.
While expanding the dealer network, the acquisitions have also provided a
wider selection of equipment to sell in a broad range of prices, a strategy
which has proved popular with farmers. It has also given Agco a profitable
business in replacement parts, which is less sensitive to industry cycles
than new equipment sales.
'Farmers keep their machines a long time, and need replacement parts. It's
the most profitable part of this business now,' says Mr Frank Manfredi, a
Chicago-based farm equipment analyst.
Agco's main US competitors are Deere and Co and J. I. Case, owned by
Tenneco. Agco's stock price has moved up in tandem with Deere and Tenneco,
benefiting from recovery in the US farm sector.
The company's 1993 sales rose to Dollars 600m, mostly on the strength of
acquisitions, generating profits of Dollars 34m. Following the Massey
Ferguson deal, Mr Ratliff expects Agco's sales to hit Dollars 1.5bn, though
the debt-to-capital ratio will increase to 57 per cent from 49 per cent.
At first glance the Massey Ferguson purchase is at odds with the Agco
strategy - Massey Ferguson has large manufacturing operations in the UK and
France, and was bought at a premium to book value.
However, Mr Ratliff says that the deal is a logical step in his plan to
expand Agco worldwide. It adds 4,000 dealers to its distribution network,
all of them outside the US, and Agco will use these outlets to market lines
now offered only in North America.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940429

