FT941-3449

FT  16 MAR 94 / Personal View: Time for the new Italy to take power


   By CARLO DE BENEDETTI


Economic growth and competitiveness are the world's dominant political
themes today. In North America and Asia, the main concern of government and
business is how to achieve a strong position in the global economy. Ideology
has been abandoned in favour of a pragmatic search for the quickest, surest
way to boost competitiveness and growth, and to turn the prospect of a new
cycle of international economic growth into reality.
In Europe, on the other hand, the break with the past is not so clear-cut.
Political attention seems to focus on the past rather than the future; on
defence rather than attack; on rejuvenating the old rather than creating the
new. The result is yet another year of missed business opportunities for
Europe, and rising unemployment to socially unacceptable levels.
This contradiction is even more evident in Italy. Here, political debate has
either failed to take account of the future now emerging; or it is confined
to impromptu, demagogic assertions that ignore the global competition Italy
should be preparing to meet, if it wishes to avoid being excluded from the
ranks of industrialised nations.
Now, in the run-up to an election that will be decisive for the country's
future, the electoral scene is far from inspiring.
On March 27 and 28, Italians go to the polls under a new electoral system -
the outcome of a referendum which vetoed the intolerable regime of
corruption and inefficiency generated by the lack of alternatives to the
dominant political system. For months, debate centred on how to create an
electoral system that would permit alternation between a progressive pole
and a conservative pole, enabling Italy to stand alongside the great western
democracies.
But partly because the new electoral law was the reluctant product of a
parliament forced to act by the result of the referendum, the elections will
take place in a climate dominated by three main factors.
First, the reality of transformation: to a great extent these elections are
in the hands of the offspring of the old political system, of whom the most
brazen representative is the standard-bearer of Forza Italia, together with
the embalmed remains of certain areas of the left.
Second, the risk to economic self-sufficiency: a real risk which lies
beneath the wonder cures promised by the right, or the sermons of the
outdated apologists of the left.
Third, confusion: the contest is riddled with left-over ideologies which
have been disinterred for the occasion.
Such suicidal behaviour may not be surprising coming from the new right; but
it is alarming when it appears among the more serious elements of the centre
and the left.
What politicians should be doing is explaining to the electorate that Italy
is not the centre of the world, or even of Europe; and that if we want to
remain at the forefront of world markets, we have to identify our
competitive advantages and abandon rearguard actions and verbal wars.
Behind all the manoeuvrings of the politicians, old and new, in this vital
election, there is a country which has decided to move on: this is the real
Italy. The country has grown. You need look no further than today's great
moral clean-up which, in its pursuit of a whole generation of corrupt
politicians, has reached a scale unparalleled in any other country.
Or the spirit of sacrifice displayed by countless citizens in the face of an
often chaotic, punitive fiscal system and an inefficient, oppressive public
sector.
Or the vigour and innovative capacity of an entrepreneurial class that has
reasserted its competitiveness despite the constraints under which it
operates. The remarkable improvement in the trade balance in 1993 from
L4,000bn to L50,000bn was not due entirely to devaluation.
This Italy must be represented politically by dignified action and thought.
The growing interest in its financial markets demonstrates that Italy's
international image is changing. And foreign observers' view of the new
Italy is far more accurate than the picture created by the election
campaign.
Italy cannot afford to forego the chance to take part in a new cycle of
growth in an ever more interconnected world. This will require rational
decisions, calculated sacrifices and an acceptable balance between recovery
and growth. It means social consensus and a government capable of plotting
an intelligent, pragmatic and credible course.
There is no room here for slogans and miracle makers. In today's world,
non-alignment with other nations means economic and social decline, with the
risk of losing the basic values of democracy and freedom.
This is the 'Italian risk' two weeks before the elections.
The author is chairman of Olivetti

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940316

