FT942-16294

FT  11 APR 94 / FT Guide To The Week


11 MONDAY
Yeltsin visits Spain
Russian President Boris Yeltsin arrives in Spain for an official three-day
visit during which he will try to drum up investment and reassure the west
of Russia's continuing friendship despite its more assertive foreign policy.
The visit comes at a time of continuing political instability in Russia and
speculation about the president's health.
Air France ballot result
The outcome of a staff ballot on the rescue plan for Air France should be
known by this evening. Trade union officials expect a majority of the 40,000
workforce to support the package of job cuts and a wage freeze to secure
FFr20bn (Dollars 3.5bn) of state aid for the loss-making state-owned
airline.
Chairman Christian Blanc has said he will quit if staff do not give him a
clear majority. Prime minister Edouard Balladur has made staff approval of
the plan a condition for receiving government subsidy.
Council of Europe assembly
The Council of Europe parliamentary assembly meets until April 15 in
Strasbourg, France. During the session there will be a contest for the post
of secretary-general.
The Council of Europe has become the main forum for welcoming fledgling
democracies into Europe's institutional structures. Russia has applied to
join the Council and will send a parliamentary guest delegation. Russian
nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky, whose extremist views worry the west, will
be part of the delegation.
IADB meeting
The InterAmerican Development Bank holds its annual meeting in Guadalajara,
Mexico, from April 11 to 13. The talks will centre on a proposed Dollars
40bn capital increase for the bank.
Iliescu trip to France
Romanian President Ion Iliescu begins a three-day visit to France (until
April 14), in his first official visit to the country since taking office in
1990. He will meet President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister Edouard
Balladur. France has been more sympathetic to Romania than most EU states,
who are worried by the continuing dominance of former communists, including
Iliescu himself.
Senate returns
After a two-week recess, the US Senate returns today, the House tomorrow.
Funding Agency for Schools
The UK launches a government agency which will further erode the system of
local authority-run mixed ability education. The FAS will help administrate,
set up and fund grant-maintained but independently run schools which may be
wholly or partially selective in which pupils they take.
Holidays
Hong Kong celebrates the Queen's birthday; India is on holiday for Gudi
Padwa.
FT Survey
Latin American Finance.
12 TUESDAY
Uruguay Round talks
World trade ministers will meet in Marrakesh, Morocco, until April 15. On
Friday they are due to sign the long-delayed final act of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) Uruguay Round, which was agreed last
December. The signing will come a few days before the expiry of US President
Clinton's 'fast-track' negotiating authority extended by the US Congress in
April 1993.
The US had demanded that the World Trade Organisation, the new permanent
body to replace Gatt, should be formally committed to discuss links between
trade and labour standards. This was attacked as a protectionist ploy by
developing countries. A compromise now appears to have been reached.
UK parliament returns
Interest will focus on the local elections next month and the European
parliament elections in June amid continuing speculation over the position
of the prime minister. Key pieces of legislation before parliament include
the criminal justice bill and the deregulation bill.
Texas Democratic primary
A run-off primary election for the Senate will be held in Texas to determine
who will face Republican Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson in November.
Competing for the Democratic nomination are former congressman Jim Mattoz
and businessman Richard Fisher.
Japanese economic figures
This week a slew of economic figures will be closely watched for any signs
that the tentative economic upturn is here to stay.
Many analysts predict that Japan's recession, one of the worst since the
war, is coming to an end. Consumer activity has shown signs of responding to
the government's four economic stimulus packages while figures for
industrial output (released on Friday) are forecast by the Bank of Japan to
have risen in the first quarter.
Bolstering confidence in the possibility of recovery is a strong increase in
housing starts which has been evident since the autumn. From that,
manufacturers of consumer goods are expecting a pick-up in demand this
spring as consumer goods generally lag housing starts by six months.
FT Survey
Slovenia.
13 WEDNESDAY
Macedonia deadline
This is the EU deadline for Greece to lift its two-month embargo of
Macedonia or face legal action in the European Court of Justice. Today
Macedonian officials hold talks in New York with Cyrus Vance, UN mediator in
the dispute over the former Yugoslav republic's name, flag and constitution.
Greece will meet Vance tomorrow but is unlikely to lift the embargo before
today's deadline.
Chinese trade mission
Trade minister Wu Yi leads a 200-strong delegation, the largest sent to the
US, to negotiate 800 contracts.  President Clinton has made a renewal of
China's 'most favoured nation' trade status dependent on human rights
improvements this year.
Party funding report
The House of Commons home affairs committee publishes its report into
funding of political parties. The inquiry began last year after the row over
disgraced entrepreneur Asil Nadir's donations to the Conservative party.
Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs will want either state funding or strict
controls on donations and election spending because of the scale of business
donations to the Conservatives, many from abroad.
Israeli withdrawal date
Israel is due to complete its military withdrawal from the occupied Gaza
Strip and West Bank town of Jericho in preparation for Palestinian self-rule
under last September's peace deal.
However, the final troop pull-out is dependent on Israel and the Palestinian
Liberation Organisation completing a comprehensive agreement in Cairo on
security and economic issues.
Israel has virtually completed its withdrawal but the talks have been bogged
down in wrangling over the role and size of the Palestinian police force and
the extent of Israeli legal jurisdiction.
In Strasbourg, PLO chairman Yasser Arafat will address the Council of
Europe's assembly and will undoubtedly comment on any delays.
US retail sales
A rebound in today's US retail sales figures for March may heighten fears
that the Federal Reserve will tighten monetary policy. Also out today is the
consumer prices index for March, which is expected to have moved a notch
higher.
14 THURSDAY
Bundesbank meeting
Having been caught repeatedly on the hop by most of the Bundesbank's
interest rate shifts of the past 12 months, few economists are prepared to
call the odds on a discount rate cut at today's meeting of the German
central bank's council. Some tea leaf watchers suggest a move this week to
head off friction at the G7 meeting booked for Washington on April 23 and
24, but they are in a minority.
Although most indicators point firmly towards further reductions, the
Bundesbankers can easily blame any delay on the uncertainty caused by the
recent explosion in M3 money supply growth. Even though the bank claims it
has identified the 'special factors' responsible, and suggests there is
little need for concern, experience shows that it likes to be sure that it
is receiving all signals clearly before going into action.
UDF conference
Bulgaria's opposition Union of Democratic Forces holds a national conference
(to April 15). The UDF won the October 1991 elections but collapsed after
little more than a year in a welter of internal wrangles and scandals,
leading to the return of a government backed by the Bulgarian Socialist
party, the former communists, and breakaway elements from the UDF.
The UDF hopes that Bulgaria's economic problems will deliver them the next
election, which is due in 1995 but likely before then.
Pasok congress
Greece's ruling Panhellenic Socialist Movement holds a party congress for
the first time in more than three years (until April 17). Although the
leadership issue is not on the agenda, potential successors to ailing Prime
Minister Andreas Papandreou will be jostling for position in the corridors.
The leading contender, interior minister Akis Tsochatzopoulos, expects to
boost his chances by winning re-election as Pasok general secretary.
Pawlak visits Germany
Waldemar Pawlak, Poland's prime minister, begins a two-day official visit to
Germany. Although relations between Bonn and Warsaw are very good, the
Polish government remains disappointed at the low levels of investment by
German companies in Poland.
Pawlak, who heads a coalition of the Democratic Left Alliance and the
Peasants party, will seek to assure his hosts that there is no turning back
from the economic reforms.
UK visible trade figures
Analysts will watch today's whole world trade figures for January for signs
that recovery in the UK is putting pressure on the visible trade deficit.
The last set of complete trade figures were disappointingly poor, with
higher imports in particular suggesting that the UK trade balance is
deteriorating.
FT Surveys
Turkey; Austria.
15 FRIDAY
Italy's parliament meets
Italy's new members of parliament from last month's elections take their
seats today. The business of government cannot begin until Italian President
Oscar Luigi Scalfaro has chosen a prime minister, which he cannot do until
parliament has reconvened. Media magnate Silvio Berlusconi appears
increasingly likely to be able to form a right-wing administration.
CIS summit
The former Soviet republics meet in Moscow to try to make progress on
economic union and military co-operation.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development begins a four-day
annual meeting in St Petersburg.
Brazil debt deadline
Brazil and its private bank creditors are expected to complete a Dollars
52bn debt rescheduling in New York, reducing the overall burden on Brazil,
the developing world's biggest debtor.
UK retail prices index
The March figure may have been boosted by the delayed end to January
discount sales, but the dropping out of increases in petrol and food prices
last year may cut the underlying rate.
16-17 WEEKEND
EU and GCC in Riyadh
Ministers and officials from the European Union and the Gulf Co-operation
Council (GCC) grouping of Gulf Arab states meet in Riyadh on Sunday. They
will almost certainly discuss the long-standing Gulf concern of
petrochemical access to the European market.
Pacific Grand Prix
The Formula One World Championship motor racing Grand Prix will be held in
Aida, Japan, on Sunday.
London Marathon
On Sunday the Nutrasweet London Marathon will begin at Greenwich and finish
in front of Buckingham Palace. It has a world-record entry of 36,500
runners.
Fifth Test match
England play West Indies in the fifth and final cricket Test match at St
John's, Antigua, from Saturday to April 21.
Embassy World Championships
The World Snooker Championships will be held at the Crucible Theatre,
Sheffield, from Saturday to May 2.
Edited by Robert Anderson.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940411

