FT943-13032

FT  21 JUL 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Hospitality joins
the fast track - A look at the business of sport and its value to companies


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


The popularity of corporate hospitality or employee motivation evenings in
the form of 'arrive and drive' go-kart racing has inspired dozens of
circuits catering for the activity throughout Europe.
The concept is poised to be lifted on to an altogether higher plateau - with
200 horsepower Alfa Romeo 155 saloons of similar appearance, if not quite
the performance, of the bright red Alfa Romeos currently leading the British
Touring Car Championship.
Companies, or even wealthy individual drivers, will rent every car competing
in the 'Pro-Series' Alfa 155 championship planned for the 1995 motor racing
season.
The championship departs from conventional motor sport concepts in that
sponsoring companies and their drivers can expect to complete a full
championship season at a fixed cost, with the onus on providing raceworthy
cars for each round switched to the actual operator of the championship.
The venture operators, Graham Hathaway Racing and entrepreneur and
rallycross driver Peter Earnshaw, will retain full ownership of the cars;
repair, maintain and take them to and from the circuit, and provide the
hospitality facilities for participating companies to entertain their
guests.
Pioneered in North America in the Zerex Saab championship, the concept is
intended to eliminate one of the biggest disincentives to all commercial
motor sport sponsorship, spending spiralling out of control as competitors
seek technical advantage over rivals.
Motor sport is an expensive activity, with even a single-car budget for a
modest 'one-make' championship likely to approach Pounds 50,000 for a
season. It is also notorious for its disillusioned sponsors. Many companies
vow never to involve themselves again when confronted with a choice between
injecting extra funds part way through a season or their team's withdrawal
and the collapse of the sponsorship venture.
Earnshaw, who is currently negotiating approval and administration of the
series with the British Automobile Racing Club and motor sport authorities,
says that companies not wanting to back a single car will instead be able to
join a small pool of sponsors whose branding will be carried on every
competing car throughout the dozen or so races which will make up the
championship.
The concept is about offering a financially predictable, rather than
necessarily cheaper, entree into motor sport. Costs have not been finalised
but several thousand pounds per race is certain.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940721

