FT942-15863

FT  13 APR 94 / The Wall Street bears prepare to have a picnic


   By BARRY RILEY


First blow up your bubble and enjoy it, then work out how to deflate it
without creating an explosion. Prepare to worry. The Japanese have been
grappling with this for several years now, the US Federal Reserve only for a
few months. Mr Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, has some awkward choices:
either he can raise short-term interest rates sharply, on the grounds that
the bad news had best be got out of the way, and anyway it is now
anticipated; or he can leave rates alone for a few months, hoping that the
markets will settle down.
The middle way is to keep edging up by a quarter-point every now and then,
hoping to keep the politicians quiet and with luck allowing an orderly
adjustment in securities prices.
Bonds have already tumbled, but US equities have remained quite resilient.
After all, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is only off about 2 per cent in
1994 so far (though down 7 per cent from its peak four days before Mr
Greenspan first tightened on February 4) and it is less than a month since
prices on Nasdaq were hitting all-time highs. But now some of the North
American stock market sheets are getting very edgy: there is a growth scare.
The stock market is in dangerous territory according to The Bank Credit
Analyst, and a sharp correction lies ahead; Grant's is eagerly if
equivocally anticipating 'what may or may not prove to be an unforgettable
bear market'.
Meanwhile the casual radio and TV listener is baffled by news reports that
the stock market is weak because the US economy is proving to be
unexpectedly buoyant. But what about the benefits for equities of rising
profits and surging output? The market has obviously gone crazy again.
Well, not quite. Mr Gordon Pepper, one-time star guru of the London
gilt-edged market and now a professor at the City University, next week
publishes his long-awaited monetarist theory of asset prices*. In it he
shows that overall equity market price movements are largely explained in
the short to medium term by changes in bond interest rates. Only over
periods upwards of four years do the corporate sector fundamentals, such as
dividend growth, exert a dominant influence.
Meanwhile, he emphasises, many securities transactions are motivated not by
any change in the economic or corporate fundamentals but by the need to
raise or invest cash. He could have devised no better example than the
margin squeeze which has forced a collapse in global bonds.
Many nervous eyes are now on the US mutual funds sector. Over the past two
or three years US private investors have accepted a large new exposure to
risk as they have shifted out of savings deposits into stock and bond funds
at the combined rate of often more than Dollars 20bn (Pounds 13.6bn) a
month. The particular feature of 1993 was a sharp rise in the purchases of
mutual funds investing in overseas equities.
As recently as February this year a near-record Dollars 14bn was still
pouring into stock funds, but bond fund inflows had collapsed. It will be
bad enough for equity markets around the world if the money now simply stops
coming in, after the first negative quarter for the average mutual fund
price for two years. We are a long way from any serious net selling, but it
is worrying that there is Dollars 700bn in equities in potentially loosely
held mutual funds. It was bad enough in 1987 when stock funds were worth
only Dollars 200bn.
This brings us back to Mr Greenspan's dilemma. He would surely like to take
short-term dollar rates back to 5 per cent, because low rates have now
achieved their tasks of recapitalising the banking system and reviving the
economy. But a move intended to be economically stabilising could
destabilise the financial asset markets because there have been such huge
shifts by investors seeking higher returns.
The anti-meltdown techniques used in Japan - such as leaning on public
sector funds to buy equities, and slashing interest rates - are not open to
the Americans. In fact, if the US economy continues to surge, short-term
interest rates as high as 6 or 7 per cent might be justifiable next year.
However, higher taxes may slow the economy, and masterly timing might
cushion the blow of interest rate rises. Let's hope so, and worry a little
less.
*Money, Credit and Asset Prices, Macmillan/St Martin's Press, Pounds 40.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940413

