FT942-12831

FT  28 APR 94 / Rival soaps in lather over 'rotted' clothes claim


   By MAGGIE URRY and RONALD VAN DE KROL


   LONDON, AMSTERDAM


Procter & Gamble and Unilever, bitter rivals in the Pounds 6bn a year
European detergent market, yesterday resorted - almost literally - to
washing their dirty linen in public.
Unilever executives brandished ladies' underwear in evidence as they
fervently denied claims by P&G that a new concentrated washing powder rotted
clothes.
The row reached boil-wash temperature when an unnamed P&G executive was
quoted in a front page article in the Rotterdam newspaper Algemeen Dagblad
as saying that fabric showed damage after 24 washes in Unilever's new
powder.
Stung by the allegation - all the more painful because Rotterdam is its
headquarters in continental Europe - Unilever rapidly called a press
conference. One of its scientists held up a cloth which had been washed 380
times in the product and asked: 'Can you see any holes?'
Unilever, whose position in the market has fallen behind P&G's in the last
five years, is attempting to catch up with the pan-European launch of a new
concentrated powder.
Billed as the most significant new product launch in the market for 20
years, Unilever claims the powder is genuinely innovative, better at
removing stains and more environmentally friendly.
The company plans to spend nearly Pounds 200m to promote the product across
Europe and has already invested Pounds 100m in three new factories to
produce it. Unilever's sales of concentrated powders total Pounds 500m
across Europe.
Advertising will stress environmental benefits as the product is launched
under local brands such as Persil Power in the UK and Omo Power in the
Netherlands and Switzerland.
Dutch consumers have been able to buy the powder for the last two weeks,
although it has been test marketed in the Netherlands since last autumn. It
will begin to appear on the shelves of UK supermarkets next week.
While Unilever expected P&G to retaliate to protect its Ariel brand,
executives at the Anglo-Dutch conglomerate appeared shocked by its US-owned
rival's attack.
Unilever said the allegations were 'absolutely unfounded' and it was
consulting lawyers over what action it might take.
The vital ingredient in the Unilever powder is a new molecule which it
claims accelerates the bleaching process, shortening washing times and
allowing lower temperatures. As well as using 80 per cent less energy to
make the powder, the ingredient also reduces the consumer's energy bills.
But a P&G executive, quoted in Algemeen Dagblad, said his company had known
for 20 years about the technology Unilever is using. Unilever has patented
the molecule, and searches of patents show none of its competitors had
claimed ownership of anything like it.
P&G slips 4 per cent, Page 32

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940428

