FT943-993

FT  27 SEP 94 / Protests greet Israel's new interest rates


   By DAVID HOROVITZ


   JERUSALEM


The Bank of Israel's decision to raise interest rates by a sharp 1.5
percentage points, in what looks like an increasingly desperate effort to
rein in surging inflation, has brought a chorus of disapproval.
The stock market has dipped, the Histadrut labour federation has lamented
the rise workers face in mortgage repayments, the Manufacturers' Association
has warned of looming recession, and Mr Micha Harish, minister for trade and
industry, has spoken of a dangerous lack of co-ordination between the
central bank, the Finance Ministry and the various other economy ministries.
Professor Jacob Frenkel, governor of the Bank of Israel, is unmoved by the
protests. He has raised interest rates no fewer than seven times since last
November, including another 1.5 percentage point increase only a month ago.
He has given no firm assurance that this week's rise, to 15.5 per cent, will
be the last.
The government had set a target of 8 per cent for inflation in 1994, and one
of 8-11 per cent for 1995, he notes. In reality, the 1994 rate is running at
about 14.5 per cent. If the 1995 goal proves unrealistic, he says, 'it will
really undermine the credibility of the government's economic policy'.
At the back of Prof Frenkel's mind lies the memory of the early 1980s, when
Israel's annual inflation rate soared to 450 per cent and the then finance
minister suggested tying the Israeli shekel directly to the dollar.
A drastic austerity package finally pegged the triple-figure rate to below
20 per cent within two years, a package that included interest rates as high
as 40 per cent.
Some experts believe that treatment is needed now. 'If the bank really wants
to fight inflation with monetary policy,' says Mr Ya'acov Sheinin of the
Economic Models company, 'interest rates would have to double.'
But Mr Harish and Mr Dan Popper, president of the Manufacturers'
Association, warn that the current 6 per cent-plus annual growth is already
threatened by the interest rate rises, noting the government has plenty of
other weapons in its armoury. The problem is that the government has seemed
reluctant to use them.
A key component in the inflationary spiral is the rise in house prices,
propelled not only by local buyers, but by foreign investors keen to buy
property in an Israel on the threshold of peace.
Cabinet meetings have been devoted to tackling the issue, committees have
met, prime minister Yitzhak Rabin has pledged his trouble-shooting
expertise. Yet, for all the proposals, no significant increase has occurred
in housing starts. Mr Avraham Shochat, finance minister, admitted last
weekend he could not see anything stemming the house price rises in the near
future.
It is a similar story with fruit and vegetable prices, at present the
leading factor in pushing up the monthly consumer price index. The
Agriculture Ministry has been resisting calls for import of cheaper produce,
and only recently licences have been granted for limited imports of apples,
pears and potatoes.
Mr Danny Gillerman, president of Israel's Chambers of Commerce, says the
government is shooting itself in the foot, by approving high public-sector
wage settlements and, recently, price increases for phones and public
transport.
Overall, Prof Frenkel takes pains to emphasise the economy is in robust
shape, with growth high and unemployment falling. 'But there are signs it
may be overheating,' a bank spokesman said yesterday. 'Savings are down,
credit is too readily available, private consumption is rising rapidly. The
time has come for more restrictive monetary policies.'
Prof Frenkel's problem is that interest rate rises are his only means of
fighting inflation. To tackle it more effectively, he needs more
co-operation from Mr Shochat and his cabinet colleagues.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940927

