FT941-3332

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (5):
Computers which appeal to the senses - The multimedia market is still in its
infancy


   By JOIA SHILLINGFORD


Multimedia brings sound and video to the personal computer. Like sex, it
promises to appeal to the senses. Unlike sex, multimedia has yet to appeal
to a wide audience.
However, one application which seems likely to increase the take-up rate of
multimedia is desktop video-conferencing. The technology is also suitable
for point-of-sale promotions, interactive educational/training software and
 -in very skilled hands - designing multimedia presentations.
Here and on the following page we look at two areas with most potential:
desktop video-conferencing and multimedia at the point of sale.
Desktop video-conferencing: Some computers now come fully equipped for
videoconferencing, allowing users to transmit live video images of
themselves to other, similarly-equipped users, and to see on their PC the
person they are talking to.
For example, Sun Microsystems, the US workstation company, says its new
SPARCclassic Unix workstation, which costs Pounds 4,340 (Dollars 6,510), is
the industry's lowest cost, fully-configured multimedia workstation. This
includes camera, real-time video-capture and compression and a storage disk.
But most users will have to buy a multimedia kit if they want to carry out a
video-conference in a window on their personal computer.
In April BT and Olivetti will begin selling multimedia kits which allow pc
users to do this. The BT-Olivetti kits will cost Pounds 3,595; they include
a small video camera which sits on top of the PC, a card which slots into
the PC, and software.
In addition, the kit makes it possible for users to transmit still video
images, photographs or sound. BT says the kit will send video at 15-frames a
second when it goes on sale.
At this speed, video images will be rather jerky (it may look as if the
person you are talking to has just come back from a boozy lunch). So
'meeting' someone for the first time via a desktop video-conference is not
ideal if you want to make a good impression. It is more suitable for
follow-up 'meetings,' where being able to see the person you are talking to
may give a better idea of their reactions.
Will this form of communication catch on?
Yes - according to Judith Jeffcoate, of the research consultancy Ovum. She
believes that between 1996 and the end of 1998, revenues from pcs equipped
for video will exceed those from conventional videoconferencing equipment.
Suppliers are also upbeat about the potential market. An increasing number
have developed desktop video-conferencing products. They include
Canada-based Northern Telecom (with the Visit system distributed by UK
computer dealers P&P); Intel, the US semiconductor company; AT&T; BT and IBM
(with Coco); Apple (in the US); and Olivetti.
Many of these products allow people engaged in a video-conference to point
to or edit information they can both see on their screens. Intel says that
with its system, users at far-flung sites can edit a report together, both
looking at the same version on their screens.
The system is modular and it is possible for US users to buy the ProShare
shared editing software for Dollars 99 without the full videoconferencing
kit (which costs Dollars 1,200 to Dollars 2,500). Intel is spending Dollars
100m (Pounds 67m) a year on what it calls personal conferencing technology.
Its multimedia kits will go on sale in Europe this year.
To use one of its kits, the user must have a pc based on a powerful
microprocessor (486DX or Pentium) and must install an ISDN (Integrated
Services Digital Network) telephone line. Most other desktop
videoconferencing systems are also designed to work with ISDN, a high-speed
digital dial-up service.
Simon Goodwin, of AT&T Global Information Solutions, expects the multimedia
market to be worth Dollars 900m by the end of 1995. He believes that growth
will be fuelled by three factors: falling prices for multimedia components;
the acceptance and roll-out of Euro-ISDN, replacing proprietary national
ISDN communication; and the combined efforts of important European
industrial participators in exploring new opportunities and requirements for
videoconferencing products.
Point-of-sale promotions: Another potential growth area for multimedia is in
point-of-sale (POS) devices. These can be used not only to promote products
but also to collect information about customer preferences.
Many POS devices developed so far are linked into ISDN, so that they can
relay customer orders back to head office or be updated with the latest
product and price information.
Examples include:
An interactive point-of-sales terminal which Ford plans to use in its car
showrooms to enable customers to see the car of their choice in the colour
and configuration they want - for example, four doors, spoilers.
A system which helps a customer to choose a hairstyle from a database of
4,000 styles. Hairstyles can be superimposed on to a video image of the
customer's face to see how he/she would look. (Although the system is used
by only 18 Belgian hairdressers, Comsys of Belgium, its developers, is
undeterred, and has crossed the channel in search of UK business.)
A point-of sale terminal for a big music retailer. This system, developed by
Applied Interactive Marketing (AIM) of Piccadilly Circus, London, allows
customers to sample albums which are to be released in the next few months
(by selecting a track and a seeing a video clip of the singer). Customers
can operate the terminal using touch-screen commands, and indicate which
releases they are interested in buying.
AIM says that developing a multimedia POS system can take as little as three
to four months or up to a year and a half. Costs of developing a system
range from Pounds 15,000 to Pounds 200,000.
Multimedia at the point of sale has a lot to offer. However, 24 multimedia
POS kiosks based in London's Heathrow airport illustrate the main problem
with the technology: most people are unfamiliar with multimedia
terminals/kiosks and are hesitant to try them out.
The colourful Galleria 21 Heathrow kiosks, designed by the John Herbert
Partnership (which was involved in the interior design of Terminal 4), use
AT&T's multimedia technology. At first, people spotted the kiosks and
wondered what they were for. Most people did not know - so they did not use
them. Now the kiosks have been clearly labelled 'Tax free shopping' and AT&T
says usage has increased. They allow travellers to use a touch-sensitive
screen to order goods via credit card.
The terminal works out how much the goods will cost, based on factors such
as which currency is being used in payment, delivery charge, and whether any
duty is payable. The goods thus ordered can be delivered to any destination
in the world within seven working days.
The tale of the 24 kiosks shows that a multimedia screen has only limited
powers of attraction. In order to reach a wider audience, multimedia
products must demonstrate clear benefits.
Joia Shillingford is associate editor of the Financial Times newsletter,
Business Computing Brief

The Financial Times


London Page III

940316

