FT944-6074

FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94: Review levels the rules on measuring profits -
Life insurers


Anomalies and difficulties in the taxation of life assurance business were
amended after a review of existing rules.
The measures changing the tax rules for life insurance companies will allow
annuities and some interest to be deducted when it is necessary to measure
the trading profits of a life insurance business and prevent a loss being
used more than once. The rules also amend the way income and gains are
attributed to different classes of business to minimise the distortions
which can occur when a company changes its valuation basis; and to ensure a
closer fit with commercial reality and make it clear when capital allowances
are available.
The measures also introduce other measures relating to dividends and
distributions adapting existing legislation to the circumstances of life
assurance companies and prevent UK residents taking advantage of the tax
treatment given to business written at overseas branches with non-
residents.
Companies generally cannot deduct annuity payments or some types of annual
interest in arriving at their Schedule D Case I trading profit for tax
purposes. Instead these are deducted as 'charges on income' in computing the
total income and gains chargeable to corporation tax. For some of them it
can result in a much larger than intended proportion of profits being
charged at the normal corporation tax rate of 33 per cent rather than the
special 25 per cent rate that applies to the profits accruing for
policyholders.
Other companies have found that the rule gives them an advantage. The
Chancellor proposes to allow these charges to be deducted in arriving at a
life insurance company's trading profits so that the calculation represents
the profit from operating the business.
Where an insurance company writes more than one kind of business within the
same fund, it will be required to apportion the total investment return
arising in the fund between the different kinds.
The apportionment rules may also require a life assurance company with
overseas branches to compute the amount of capital gains arising on those
assets even though they are tax-exempt.

The Financial Times


London Page 43

941130

