FT941-3432

FT  16 MAR 94 / Regulators move on OTC derivatives risk


   By NORMA COHEN


   CHICAGO


British and American securities regulators yesterday announced a joint
effort aimed at limiting risks to the international financial system posed
by the explosive growth of over-the-counter derivative instruments.
These instruments are not traded on exchanges, have no official market
price, and are tailor-made to suit the needs of individual counterparties.
Regulators are concerned that securities firms have controls to help them
account for and understand risks they take and to ensure adequate capital is
set aside.
The agreement is between the UK Securities and Investments Board, and two US
bodies, the Securities Exchange Commission and the Commodities and Futures
Trading Commission.
'Everyone feels there is no sense in trying to regulate this product,' said
Mr Andrew Large, chairman of the SIB.
'What we want is to ensure that securities firms have the capital base, the
controls and the understanding of the risk.'
The move stemmed from talks last year between the SEC and the SIB and
follows a similar agreement between US and UK banking firms.
Mr Carter Beese, a commissioner at the SEC said: 'Over the past year there
has been a very high level of co-operation between banking and securities
authorities in the US.'
In addition to promoting internal management controls, the SEC and the SIB
want to ensure that firms understand how 'severe market conditions' affect
the value of their securities, that there be a common approach to the
accounting recognition, measurement and disclosure of positions and that
there be enhanced information sharing.
Mrs Barbara Holum, acting chairman of the CFTC, said the near-collapse of MG
Corp, the US arm of the German group Metallgesellschaft, due to oil and gas
derivatives dealings, underscored the urgency of such an agreement.
Over-the-counter derivative traders gave cautious endorsement to the pact,
saying it parallelled the agenda of international banking regulators.
'We had been concerned that the securities regulators might be moving in a
different direction,' on issues like transaction netting, said Mr Joseph
Baumann, President of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association,
and director of global derivatives trading for Citibank.
Background, Page 33

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940316

