FT943-13002

FT  21 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Unemployment factors also a myth


   From Mr ANDREW SENTANCE


Sir, Peter Robinson (Personal View, July 18) usefully dismisses some of the
myths surrounding the current debate on employment and unemployment. But he
concludes by perpetuating a myth of his own. He alleges that it is the
decentralisation of pay bargaining and the abolition of incomes policy in
the private sector which have been responsible for a worsening
inflation/unemployment trade-off in the UK and, hence, the country's
currently high jobless total.
That is the wrong conclusion to draw from the experience of the 1980s. The
secular rise in UK unemployment was mirrored in other European countries
which did not experience the same changes in pay bargaining structure. Many
of them have very centralised systems of pay determination. Moreover, this
European experience stands in stark contrast to the US - which has a very
decentralised system of pay bargaining, and where unemployment has not
followed the rising trend apparent in most of Europe.
There is no simple link between pay bargaining systems and unemployment
experience across different countries. The key to maintaining a high level
of employment is real wage flexibility, so that unpleasant shocks are
reflected in lower labour costs rather than rising unemployment. Real wage
flexibility can be achieved under centralised pay bargaining systems in
corporatist economies (eg, Germany and Scandinavia). But it is also a
feature of the decentralised system in the US.
If there is any conclusion to be drawn about pay bargaining structures and
real wage flexibility, it is that overlapping centralised and decentralised
structures combine the worst of both worlds. So, having embarked on the
decentralised route, Britain's best chance of improving its
unemployment/inflation trade-off would be to continue in that direction.
Andrew Sentance,
Centre for Economic
Forecasting,
London Business School,
Sussex Place,
Regent's Park,
London NW1 4SA

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940721

