FT941-5708

FT  04 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: East Europeans warned against
farm protectionism


   By ALISON MAITLAND


   BUDAPEST


The European Commission yesterday warned east European countries not to
repeat the mistakes of the common agricultural policy.
Moves towards protectionism in these countries risked creating international
trade tensions 'instead of paving the way for a smooth entry of eastern
products into international trade,' according to Mr Rene Steichen, the
European Union's agriculture commissioner. He said there was a growing gap
between the long-term policy objectives of central and eastern European
countries and their short-term action on agriculture, which had become
'increasingly interventionist in orientation'.
Mr Steichen cited Poland, where import levies were expected to be
implemented shortly to protect certain domestic agricultural sectors from
competition.
Speaking in Budapest at an Agra Europe conference entitled Towards 2000:
Agriculture, Agribusiness and the Food Industry in Central and Eastern
Europe, Mr Steichen admitted the reformed CAP still relied partly on
intervention mechanisms to stabilise markets. But he said unchecked growth
in eastern European support for farmers could lead to old CAP-style prices
'far higher than market realities'.
But a senior Hungarian official told the conference it was a 'day-dream' to
think subsidies in eastern Europe could increase to the level of the EU. Dr
Laszlo Medgyasszay, secretary of state in the agriculture ministry, said the
high level of EU export subsidies compared with those in eastern Europe was
a particularly sore point.
'Without being able to cross draconian financial bridges, our commodities
cannot reach the favoured markets,' he said. 'Often we lose. . . due to the
lack of financial support.'
Mr Steichen claimed it was wrong for some east European countries to blame
EU protectionism for a decline in their exports to the EU in 1992, saying
this reflected internal difficulties in restructuring their farm sectors.
These arose, he said, from the slow pace of land privatisation, the
break-down in distribution systems, the collapse of traditional markets in
the former Soviet Union and the shortage of finance for farm modernisation.
However, the commissioner proposed improvements in co-operation between east
and west to avoid the kind of trade friction that arose last year over EU
minimum import prices for soft fruit imports and measures against livestock
imports from countries hit by outbreaks of disease.
He said the EU should set up an 'early warning mechanism' to lessen the risk
of east European exports suddenly being interrupted. It should encourage the
creation of exporter groups in eastern Europe that could co-ordinate a rapid
response to changes in trade. Eastern and western veterinary standards
should also be harmonised, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940304

