FT941-3316

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (15): A
make-or-break factor - Facilities management / In the term 'computer
services,' emphasis is shifting away from computers and towards services.
That is one reason why companies once dedicated to hardware or software are
moving into facilities management


   By CLAIRE GOODING


The ability of a company to operate - or not - may depend on the management
of its computer system. This can be the 'make-or-break' factor, especially
as computers move close to the centre of business in areas such as
manufacturing, customer service and sales, as well as the traditional
accounting functions.
On this premise both factions on facilities management (FM) base their
arguments. The faction 'against' believes the computer system is so vital to
the competitive strength of core activities that it would be madness to
contract it out. Inside knowledge - expertise about computing, and the
business - should stay that way.
The argument about being in the centre of things hands equal ammunition to
those who promote FM. In a culture where compulsory competitive tendering
(CCT) is the norm, there are economies of scale in an outside (or
'outsourced') supplier providing the hardware, the software, and the
expertise to support it.
CCT demands that every contract decision must involve those classic
elements, 'measure and deliver' - dear to the heart of IT professionals. You
can't deliver what you can't measure. Furthermore, FM proponents argue that
they are much better at knowing how much things should cost, where economies
can be made, and delivering them, undistracted by the fluctuating concerns
of core operations.
Coding, programming and the support of end users are the central activities
of an IT department. The argument runs thus: how much better for individuals
to be at the profit making centre of a company whose business is supplying
IT services, than to be at the periphery of a company whose real raison
d'etre is baking biscuits, making cars, or exploring for oil.
It has to be said, on both sides, that the margins in supplying computer
hardware and even packaged software have dwindled. However, the
long-accepted figure of '80 per cent of IT spending is on support and
maintenance' stays constant. The tedium of arguing about who owns a problem
(software, hardware, network?) has driven many a user-company into
single-source-supplier agreements, and the idea of contracting out an entire
IT department is simply a logical step further in cost control.
The result is a burgeoning market in 'systems integration' and 'facilities
management' - new names for bundling activities, familiar since the earliest
days of computer services.
Systems integration is a broad church. It covers anything to do with
development - including every sort of alliance of software and hardware
involved in setting up new systems. FM is the contracting out of an entire
task and its maintenance - the contractors take over the assets and the
manpower necessary to the service.
The research company Dataquest estimates the value of the FM marketplace at
more than Dollars 2,500m in Europe, growing by 20 per cent a year. This
explains why some of the best-known names in the computer industry are now
turning to FM as a core activity.
They include the big, traditional firms of accountants such as Andersen
Consulting and Ernst and Young, and names once identified with
manufacturing, rather than merely supporting computers. Unisys and Olivetti,
for example, are among the companies which, once known for their proprietary
hardware, have turned to supplying services and support for almost any sort
of hardware and software, particularly the workstations and PCs termed
'desktop services'.
Nearly 1,000 of Olivetti UK's 1,400 employees are in the Customer Support
Group, working for a customer base largely in the financial and retail
sector. Unisys has recently signed up Bass Taverns, the UK's largest public
house retailer, for an FM contract worth over Pounds 3.9m over three years.
Its job is to support 2,500 pubs, developing and supporting Bass's Central
Retail System.
In the UK, other users of Unisys' outsourcing services include McDonald's
Restaurants. US users include the federal government, the Ford Motor
Company, and Nasa.
Hoskyns is an active FM company, one of the UK's largest computer services
companies, worth Pounds 200m, part of the French-owned Cap Gemeni Sogeti
Group. UK customers include Woolworths, Bristol Water, and Hoover -
'outsourcing is still the fastest-growing sector of the IT services market.
Analysts estimate that the European market will double by 1998 to a value of
Pounds 4bn,' says Peter Falconer, Hoskyns' associate director.
Falconer is looking to the European market to expand. Five recent contracts
for Hoskyns' Scandinavian sister company, adding up to Pounds 17m worth in
all, underline the ambition. 'The pace at which FM is adopted will differ
country by country,' he says. 'CGS is well placed to benefit from this
expansion, because it is committed to regional as well as global service
delivery.'
He argues that in-house IT departments find it difficult to keep pace with
the growing demands of the organisations they serve, and the increasing
complexity of PCs and LANs is putting more strain on them.
According to a 1993 survey by Romtec, desktop services (PCs, their
procurement, installation, configuration and support) is the fastest-growing
part of FM - worth over Pounds 1bn by 1995. Asset management, network
design, installation and administration, and the end-user helpdesk, all come
under the 'desktop' label. The desktop is one of the prime areas targeted by
Bull Information Systems, the newest arrival in the FM market, which
launched its Athesa FM division this February (see below).
Sharing the benefits of cost-saving is a convincing argument for FM, but
there is always concern about staff who have to change allegiance to the
'outsourced' supplier. (See panel on Andersen's BP contract for an example).
There are regulations to protect them: the Transfer of Undertakings
Protection of Employment Regulations 1981 retains current terms and
conditions for staff being transferred.
The government is anxious to remove obstacles to free market testing.
According to the William Waldegrave, the minister for public service and
science, speaking at a recent Financial Times conference on resource
management, 'The relevant provisions of the Deregulation and Contracting-Out
Bill, now before Parliament, are designed to extend the scope for market
testing activities in central and local government by removing obstacles to
the contracting-out of statutory functions.' This is good news for Athesa
and others - but staff affected might not be so pleased.
Unison, the UK's biggest trade union, and CMS, a division of British Steel,
claimed to have broken new ground when they recently signed a trade union
agreement which outlined practices and procedures to be followed when staff
transferred from Cambridge City Council to CMS, a division of British Steel,
which won the multi-million pound contract in late 1993. According to Mark
Pope, CMS sales and marketing manager, this was an important 'industry
first'.
'We believe it is important that our new staff have confidence in us, and we
in them.' The Unison office at Cambridge City Council stressed the
importance of contractors recognising unions. 'If we are to be subject to
the contracting out of services from local authorities, then it is important
that any successful contractor recognises unions: CMS was the only candidate
that had any track record of successful relationships with Unions.'
This is a hint that the change of culture associated with working for one
organisation rather than another might bring new patterns to the computer
industry. 'Partnership' - the key word emphasised by all FM suppliers -
means both partners making allowances if the marriage is to last.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

940316

