FT942-16348

FT  11 APR 94 / BT and AT&T alliance win telecoms contract: Pioneering deal
for pan-European network


   By ANDREW ADONIS


A ground-breaking contract to provide a Europe-wide telecommunications
network for 30 of the continent's leading multinationals has been won by
British Telecommunications and an alliance of AT&T and the Swiss, Swedish
and Dutch state telecoms companies.
The contract, which might be worth Ecu500m (Pounds 394m) a year, is the
first step in a plan to build a pan-European telecoms network linking the
facilities of the 30 companies.
It is a milestone in the struggle by BT and AT&T, the largest US operator,
to establish themselves in continental Europe.
The 30 companies - believed to include Rank Xerox, ICI, Philips, ABN Amro
and ABB - have formed a European telecoms association, aiming to gain tariff
reductions and upgraded services by acting jointly to provide for their
telecoms requirements.
Although a significant breach of Europe's monopoly telecoms regimes, the
corporate network plan has the approval of the European Commission, which
wants to accelerate the development of pan-European communications.
Companies will not be allowed to communicate with each other across the
network. It therefore qualifies as 'private', and is allowed under EU rules.
However, each company will be allowed to include its suppliers, customers
and part-owned subsidiaries.
Services planned for the network include short-code dialling and common
numbering.
Mr John Sale, Rank Xerox's network services manager, said the network, based
on leased lines and dedicated software, could provide savings of up to 40
per cent on the companies' existing bills for cross-border European traffic.
AT&T's joint bid with Unisource - a consortium of the Swedish, Swiss and
Dutch state operators - follows the stalling of its attempts to link up with
France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom, the French and German state operators.
The main losers are France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom, which bid jointly.
Cable & Wireless, the UK group, Sprint, the third largest US operator, and
Telstra, the Australian national operator, were also unsuccessful.
The contract is initially for 12 months from September, with a view to
choosing one operator or more to provide a 'one-stop shop' for the
association from September 1995.
The association draws on experience in the US, where a group of large
companies - some of them members of the European group - operates a pan-US
private network to provide enhanced telecoms facilities at special rates.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940411

