FT942-16181

FT  12 APR 94 / Tighter video hire conditions planned


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Children will be required to produce evidence of age before hiring
particular videos, under a government plan expected to be announced today.
The idea, proposed by the British Board of Film Classification, is put
forward as Mr David Alton, the Liberal Democrat MP, tries to change the law
to ban home videos that are inappropriate for children or that may harm them
psychologically.
Critics of the Alton amendment, including Mr James Ferman, director of the
BBFC, believe it is too widely drawn to be workable.
Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, is expected instead to tighten the
conditions under which young children might gain access to videos aimed at
those aged over 15 or 18.
Conditions for video rental would resemble those for buying fireworks or
alcohol, where evidence of age can be sought. At the moment the issue of age
tends to be left to the judgment of video shop staff.
Mr Ferman also said yesterday that the BBFC planned to extend its film
classification for 12-year-olds to video for the first time.
The BBFC director was talking as the board launched the first study into the
viewing habits for young offenders for more than 20 years.
The study, carried out by the Policy Studies Institute, found little
difference in the viewing habits of a group of 78 young offenders aged from
12 to 18 and a representative sample of more than 500 schoolchildren of a
similar age. Soap operas and similar dramas dominated the viewing of both
groups, although the young offenders showed a marked preference for The
Bill, the ITV police series. The favourite film among both the male
offenders and the schoolboys was Terminator 2: Judgement Day.
The study also found that the offenders had less access to television, video
and other equipment than other children, probably because they came from
poor and disrupted families.
The report, by Ms Ann Hagell and Mr Tim Newburn, suggested that, in both
groups, those aged under 18 had access to films classified for those aged
over 18.
Editorial comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940412

