FT942-12229

FT  30 APR 94 / UK Company News: Nixon death almost scuppers bid timetable


   By DAVID WIGHTON


The Enterprise team at SG Warburg had reason to mourn the passing of Richard
Nixon.
The bid team was in complex negotiations with the US Securities & Exchange
Commission and New York Stock Exchange when America took Wednesday off to
commemorate the former president.
Enterprise's advisers were already under pressure because they were
attempting something which had never been done before - making a hostile
share offer available to the target's American investors.
Hostile bids involving the issue of shares are almost unheard of in the US
because the new shares have first to be registered with the SEC, a long and
public process.
An offer by a UK company to US shareholders in another UK company run into
the same problem. It also faces the task of meeting the requirements of two
different sets of takeover regulations.
As a result no hostile UK offers have ever been made available to US
shareholders.
The SEC has publicly stated that it is keen for US investors in foreign
companies to be treated equally and Enterprise's advisers SG Warburg has
shown that it can be done.
It compressed into two weeks a process that usually takes at least two
months, persuading the SEC to review its registration statement in private.
It also had to convince the US authorities to allow Enterprise to buy Lasmo
shares for cash in the market, which is banned under US rules for all-share
offers.
Lasmo shareholders will see the results on Tuesday when they will receive
what is thought to be the fattest ever UK takeover document.
At 261 pages it contains the UK offer, the US tender offer, listing
particulars for the new shares for the UK and the effective registration
statement for the US. UK shareholders will also receive a slimline version
which looks more like a normal takeover document.
Enterprise and its advisers went to such lengths because about 23 per cent
of Lasmo's shareholders are American and so could be vital to the outcome.
However, now that they have blazed the trail it is thought likely that
future hostile bidders may follow its example. Indeed at some stage the SEC
may insist that they do so.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940430

