FT944-10981

FT  08 NOV 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries lower ahead of quarterly
refunding


   By PATRICK HARVERSON and CONNER MIDDELMANN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US Treasury prices drifted lower in light trading yesterday as Friday's
bearish jobs report and impending supply pressures unsettled market
sentiment.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  1/16 at 92
19/32 , yielding 8.159 per cent. The short end of the market was also
weaker, with the two-year note off  1/32 at 99 21/32 , yielding 7.046 per
cent.
Trading opened in lacklustre fashion, with many participants on the
sidelines ahead of today's first leg of the Treasury's quarterly refunding
round and Thursday's producer prices data. The mood of the market remained
sombre, as dealers and investors continued to mull over Friday's October
employment report.
The report, although seemingly positive at first when the growth in non-farm
payrolls came in lower than expected, subsequently proved bearish for bonds
because the data included some warning signs on inflation which analysts
said only increased the likelihood that the Federal Reserve would raise
interest rates at the meeting of its open market committee on November 15.
The expectations of another policy tightening, which pushed long yields to
new 3 1/2 -year highs last week, depressed prices further yesterday, when
bonds were also undermined by concern about the impending arrival of new
supply.
Today, the Treasury will sell Dollars 17bn in three-year notes, followed by
Dollars 12bn of two-year notes tomorrow, and analysts questioned whether
there would be sufficient demand from investors in the week before the Fed
is likely to put up interest rates.
European government bond markets were once again depressed by weaker US
Treasuries, leaving prices to drift lower in sluggish dealings.
The spectre of fresh supply further weighed on markets as traders wondered
where new bonds would be placed in the absence of investor demand.
The biggest supply burden comes in the US, where the Treasury is due to
auction Dollars 29bn in the next two days.
Germany is set to sell an estimated DM10bn of 10-year bonds today and
tomorrow; Japan is expected to auction around Y300bn of 20-year bonds today;
France is due to issue five and 10-year Ecu bonds tomorrow; the Dutch
finance ministry plans to tap the 30-year sector on Thursday; and the Bank
of England last Friday announced the sale of two Pounds 250m tranches of
conventional gilts and two Pounds 100m tranches of index-linked stock.
'Placing supply in these markets is not easy, and it's one factor keeping
them subdued,' said Mr Graham McDevitt, bond strategist at Paribas Capital
Markets.
UK gilts slipped by about  1/2 point, depressed by weakness in other markets
and continued uncertainty on the UK interest rate horizon.
Interest-rate jitters were revived by the latest UK industrial production
numbers, showing a bigger than forecast 1.1 per cent rise in September.
While the market did not react sharply to the data, they did fuel talk that
the Bank of England may tighten monetary policy sooner than expected.
The December long gilt future fell by  15/32 to 100 3/4.
German bunds lost their intra-day gains to end the session about  1/4 point
lower, pressured by weaker US Treasuries and some futures sales ahead of
today's 10-year bund auction.
The December bund future on Liffe fell by 0.32 to 89.07.
In Sweden, yields jumped again on renewed worries that Sunday's referendum
on European Union membership may result in a 'no' vote after a poll showed
42 per cent of voters opposing membership, 40 per cent favouring it and 17
per cent undecided.
The 11-year benchmark bond yield rose 22 basis points to 11.67 per cent  -
off its intra-day peak of 11.80 per cent - and the 10-year spread over bunds
widened to around 401 basis points from 363 basis points on Friday.
In this environment, the auction of five and 11-year bonds was sluggish,
enabling the government to sell only SKr5.2bn of the SKr7.5bn offered.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941108

