FT943-13235

FT  20 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Betelmania takes Taiwan by
storm - A look a craze that is turning Taipei's streets blood red


   By LAURA TYSON


A taxi driver sticks his head out the window and spits a stream of dark red
juice on to the pavement. Splat] Red spittle dribbles from the corners of
his mouth; some down the side of the car.
Not to worry - he's not ill, and those blood stain-like blotches speckling
Taipei's streets and sidewalks are not the scenes of a myriad of violent
crimes.
Betelmania has reached endemic proportions in Taiwan. Chewing the
bitter-tasting green nut of the betel palm, areca catechu, is supposed to
ward off fatigue and chill. In Taiwan, betel quid is usually prepared with
slaked lime, to cut the acidity, betel flower and cardamon for flavour and a
bit of Chinese medicine for good measure; all tucked into the tough, fibrous
husk of the betel nut. Every vendor has his or her own special formula. When
chewed, the concoction induces copious amounts of saliva and stains the
teeth and mouth red, giving the masticator a rather ghoulish aspect.
Called binglang in Chinese, betel nut is a mild stimulant long popular in
many southeast Asian countries. But for no apparent reason, except perhaps
that disposable income has risen, its consumption in Taiwan has grown
dramatically over the last decade.
The 'red-lipped population group' is estimated at 2.5m strong, or 12 per
cent of the population, several times that in the early 1980s. The typical
'binglang mi' - betel fanatic - is a manual worker, but according to a study
conducted by National Taiwan University, students, intellectuals and
professionals - mostly men - also chew. Some 40 per cent of chewers are 65
and older, but chewing is quickly gaining popularity among the young.
Production has risen commensurately as farmers have transformed rice paddies
into palm groves to cash in on the betel bonanza. According to figures
compiled by Taiwan's provincial Department of Agriculture and Forestry,
there were 44,671 hectares of land under betel cultivation at the end of
1993. The harvest weighed in at 137,467 tonnes, compared with 30,102 tonnes
a decade earlier.
Meanwhile, the value of 1993's betel crop topped USDollars 380m, making the
betel nut the country's second most important crop after rice in value
terms, according to government figures. However, researchers say that
official statistics are conservative.
Several independent studies have estimated the market at upwards of
USDollars 1bn a year. A local newspaper, citing unnamed officials from the
ministerial-level Council of Agriculture, recently reported that betel was
now Taiwan's number one cash crop, with a street value approaching USDollars
2bn. Betel nuts retail at 50 US cents to USDollars 1 a chew, and hard-core
chewers munch through 20-30 quids a day. Demand is so high that when betel
is out of season in Taiwan, supplies must be smuggled in from Thailand.
The government is alarmed at the rise in use of the nut. 'We're concerned
about the health implications as well as the fact that spitting in the
streets is unsightly and unsanitary,' said Ms Fu Chi-yu, a special assistant
in the horticulture division of the Council of Agriculture.
Dr Tsai Chi-cheng, dean of the school of dentistry at Kaohsiung Medical
College, said betel-chewers tended to suffered from periodontal disease,
dental attrition, submucosal fibrosis and oral cancer. 'Not everyone who
chews betel gets cancer, but nearly all the people who come into our clinic
with mouth cancer chew betel,' he said.
The National Science Council several years ago commissioned a study to
develop betel substitutes, to be undertaken by the graduate institute of
food science and technology at National Taiwan University. Researchers
extracted alkaloids and other key ingredients and removed potentially
carcinogenic compounds to produce a betel nut chewing gum, designed to look,
taste and chew like the real thing.
A lecturer in nutrition at the Chung Shan Medical College, Mr Wang Chin-Kun,
is trying to persuade private manufacturers to bring betel nut gum out of
the laboratory and into the mouths of Taiwanese. 'We hope our healthy and
non-polluting betel substitute can be accepted by the consumer market,' he
said, while conceding that the plan had so far met with limited success. But
who knows, maybe betel nut gum will one day find favour with clean-living
chewers across Taiwan and even the rest of South-east Asia.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940720

