FT941-12782

FT  28 JAN 94 / Arts: Bold stab at Die Soldaten - Max Loppert reviews the
Paris premiere of Zimmermann's opera


   By MAX LOPPERT


The long-awaited Paris premiere of Bernd Alois Zimmermann's Die Soldaten has
taken place at the Opera Bastille, and the after-shock of its artistic
impact can still be registered all over the city.
This remarkable piece - the composer's own treatment of the revolutionary
1775 play by Jakob Lenz - was completed in the late 1950s, pronounced
unperformable, reworked, and eventually given its premiere at Cologne in
1965; since then it has been tackled by an increasing number of brave
companies across Europe and the US.
The New Grove reckons that Zimmermann's single essay in the form is 'widely
acknowledged as the most important in German since those of Berg'.
Certainly, in the cultural history of the second half of our century it has
secured a position achieved by few other postwar operas.
From the first, the modernists celebrated the many-layered complexities of
its four-act structure and rigorous 12-note idiom, intricately laid out for
a vast ensemble of singers, instrumentalists (including onstage jazz band),
dancers and figurants, with taped and filmed accompaniment in the final act.
The opera's precisely plotted simultaneities - different actions unfolding
on different stage levels at the same moment - parallel contemporary
developments in Stockhausen; the triple-stage devices of We Come to the
River, Henze's 1976 opera for Covent Garden, pale into insignificance in
comparison.
But also from the first, many other audience-members, even those utterly
unsympathetic to the postwar avant-garde, were yet able to submit themselves
to the immediacy and theatrical force of Zimmermann's creation.
In Paris, Die Soldaten packs a mighty punch. The Bastille stage,
inhospitably large for Mozart and even Puccini, comfortably contains its
furthest-flung activities. The Bastille acoustics, whose distancing tends to
dampen the delights of the general repertory, provide here no dilution of
the chamber-music filigree that marks much of the instrumental part-writing,
nor barrier to the contorted eloquence of the voice parts - which, with
their upward leaps, wide intervals and intricate rhythmic notation, must be
hell to get right, but which come together to make in situ an always justly
judged dramatic progression.
Altogether, the best aspects of the Bastille adventure are here favoured for
display - and, since this is an opera that requires maximum amounts of time
and money to mount, that obviously includes providing the wherewithal to
make it happen in the first place. (In Britain Die Soldaten might be deemed
the missing link in the modern-operatic chain: brought to the 1972 Edinburgh
Festival by the Dusseldorf company, it has over the last decade been
scheduled and then, for want of money, cancelled by at least three of our
national companies.)
The Paris performance, a re-creation of the 1987 staging for Stuttgart by
Harry Kupfer and the designer Wolf Munzner, combines stringent
musico-dramatic organisation and abrasively brilliant showmanship. Several
of the original Stuttgart cast have made the journey to Paris, notably the
excellent Franz Mazura (Wesener), Michael Ebbecke (Stolzius) and Ursula
Koszut (the Countess), and the superb conductor Bernhard Kontarsky. As one
may easily judge by reference to the Stuttgart recording (on Teldec), the
new leading lady, the American Lisa Saffer, outclasses her predecessor with
the crystalline beauty of her high soprano.
Lenz's play, a compact vision unfolded in trenchantly ironic stages, tells
of Marie, daughter of Wesener the Lille fancy-goods merchant, a middle-class
girl first seduced and later reduced to whoredom by a succession of army
officers. Zimmermann was (he later wrote) attracted to its operatic
potential not so much because of the socially-critical content, much more
because of the avant la lettre modernity in Lenz's elliptical, jump-cutting
treatment of characters, situations and time-shifts.
Kupfer's production does justice to both the laconically fierce world-view
of Lenz and the 'total-theatre' adventure of Zimmermann. Upon the permanent
set, a two-tier wooden edifice baldly outlined, there play modern lighting
devices - strobe seizures, palais-de-danse swirls, magically winking
hand-held lamps - in sharp contrast to the in-period costumes and props.
During the instrumental interludes making up the pattern of Zimmermann's
Wozzeck-inherited formal structures, the whole company is set a-twitching
like marionettes: a nice theatrical symbol of the dehumanising nature of
military life.
This production flourishes the Kupfer signature at its boldest. As is his
wont, the producer proves unable to resist going the whole final hog: at the
end the whole stage edifice collapses in a Gotterdammerung heap. On this
occasion, however, the device could be defended as an analogy for the
nuclear mushroom-cloud image on which Zimmermann wanted the opera to close,
and a response to the strangely cut-off humanity that lies at the heart of
the work.
Heard on record, the opera seems for this latter reason an artistic
'machine' to be admired, not a fully-fledged experience to be drawn into. In
the theatre, the extraordinary acuteness with which Zimmermann judged
material and dramatic moment amplifies the impression. But in the end, the
inevitable comparisons that one makes with Wozzeck and Lulu suggest exactly
what is missing from Die Soldaten: an emotional openness in the vision which
allows the audience to distil from it more than just an all-encompassingly
harrowing finality.
Opera de Paris Bastille: final performance February 2

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940128

