FT944-14620

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (7): Savers'
sentinel will need time to prove it's up to the task - Investor Protection /
The new watchdog authority, which has been the subject of controversy, has
begun operations. What difference will it make?


   By ALISON SMITH


The creation of a single financial services regulator to protect the private
investor has taken a long time. And it will be some years before it becomes
apparent whether the Personal Investment Authority, which opened for
business in July, is effectively protecting financial services customers
from fraud and incompetent advice.
The PIA's purpose, as set out by the chief City regulator, is to bring about
a 'step change' in investor protection. It was intended that it should do
this in two broad ways:
First, in place of the split system, where Lautro and Fimbra were separate
regulators responsible for life companies and independent financial advisers
respectively, it would bring consistent standards of regulation, whatever
the consumers' source of advice.
Second, by scrutinising life companies and independent advisers who apply to
be authorised, and by introducing new standards of regulation, it would
allow the retail financial services industry to make a fresh start, and
would give added impetus to regulatory improvements.
In terms of the first point, there has already been a change in the climate
of opinion in and around the industry. Once, the idea of a single regulator
for retail financial services was a matter of controversy; now, it is
received wisdom. The concept of a single watchdog was virtually the only
issue on which the cross-party treasury committee of MPs was fully agreed,
in the report they produced in May on financial regulation.
The second point is more complex. One argument is that the number of
applicants that the PIA turns down, and the reasons why it does so, will be
a sign of how rigorously it is using the opportunity to weed out of the
industry those who ought not to be in it.
There is also the view that the gap between the number of applications and
the potential membership of about 5,500 is a sign that some of those
operating in retail financial services realised in advance that they would
not meet the PIA's standards, and decided to jump before they were pushed.
Beyond the application process itself is the new regime that PIA will run.
Some of the signs are promising, though they are not without cost.
Among the welcome prospects are:
The involvement of a consumers' panel, which will produce a report each year
on the effectiveness of the PIA.
An approach to monitoring companies and advisers which is explicitly based
on the 'risks' run by each member - for example, in its type of business.
An ombudsman scheme which has the capacity to deal with all complaints
relating to financial services business.
Less welcome, for example, was the PIA's reluctance - until under pressure
from the treasury committee - to be prepared to adopt a system of individual
registration for all those it authorises. This was a requirement for Fimbra,
but not for Lautro.
Then there has been the cost of the disruption to continuing regulatory
efforts, while attention was diverted to the setting up of the new watchdog
itself. There has been some disturbance to the existing programme of routine
visits; and work in policy areas, such as monitoring the rates at which
long-term policies were surrendered early, has also been affected.
But the fierce controversy over the form of the new regulator has also had a
wider impact.
On one level, it is a good sign that the new watchdog has not received
unanimous approval from the sector it is supposed to scrutinise. The
closeness of the relationship between Fimbra and its constituency led some
observers to conclude that the watchdog was too inclined to wag its tail
when it should have been baring its teeth.
However, the continuing dispute has undermined the PIA in two ways.
It has, for example, caused attention to focus on issues which are not
directly germane to investor protection. The insistence by Ms Colette Bowe,
PIA chief executive, that the question should be 'not whether it is
statutory or self - but whether it is effective regulation', suffered early
this year from the high-profile resignation from the PIA board of Jim
Stretton, deputy managing director of Standard Life, the UK's largest mutual
life insurer, over the board's composition.
He said that the new system could not amount to self-regulation, as it is
supposed to under the Financial Services Act 1986, when more than half the
PIA board would not come from the financial services industry.
Second - although Prudential Corporation remains a lone rebel - it is not
good for the regulator that the UK's largest life insurer has insisted on
its right to be regulated directly by the Securities and Investments Board,
the City's chief watchdog.
Some of these difficulties have arisen because the government has wanted to
shift the regulatory arrangements deriving from the 1986 Act without passing
new legislation.
Though the Treasury is not currently prepared to legislate to create a
full-blown statutory system of regulation, this does not mean the PIA is
necessarily the end of the regulatory road. The arrival of either a Labour
administration, or a fresh cause for concern, or both, could bring pressure
for change within the next few years.
So the PIA will need to build on the progress it is already making, and show
a rapid improvement in standards, in order to be sure of survival. In the
meantime, within existing constraints, it is the most effective retail
regulator we have.

The Financial Times


London Page X

941021

