FT942-15284

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Austria (1): New challenge in Europe - The
recession came and went so fast that many Austrians now wonder whether it
happened at all. Even the most bullish of officials find it hard to explain
why their country escaped so lightly from the European downturn


   By PATRICK BLUM


Austrians tend to be cautious, but there is no hiding the general feeling of
relief and optimism, not to mention surprise, at having left behind so
quickly the country's worst recession for more than a decade.
The recession came and went so fast that many Austrians now wonder whether
it happened at all, although rising unemployment is a reminder of the
country's vulnerability to external economic developments. But even the most
bullish of officials find it hard to explain why their country escaped so
lightly from the European downturn.
One explanation is that Austria continued to benefit much more than
initially thought from the opening up of the former communist states in
central and eastern Europe. While growing exports to eastern Europe could
not fully compensate for declining trade in traditional western markets,
they reduced the impact of the downturn. Domestic demand also held up
relatively well, with public and private consumption boosted by tax reform
and an acceleration in planned government expenditure on infrastructure and
housing. There were other factors. Wage rises were moderated by fear of
unemployment, although at 4.2 per cent of the work force, the proportion of
people without jobs is well below that in other European countries.
Many sectors of the economy are still sheltered from international
competition, and the predominance of small and medium sized companies -
which proved to be much more flexible than the large mainly state-owned
groups - also helped. Many companies were able to switch markets and adapt
production relatively easily.
Whatever the reasons, Austria's recession - with gross domestic product
declining by about 0.25 per cent in 1993 - will have been one of the
shortest and mildest in Europe. A modest recovery is forecast for this year,
although as growth picks up again in Europe, especially in the important
German market which takes about 40 per cent of Austrian exports, Austria
should be well placed to reap the benefits. Growth may turn out stronger
than the 1.5 per cent forecast.
Austria will also be well placed to benefit from European Union membership -
expected on January 1, 1995 - which will give it full and free access to the
Union's expanded internal market and strengthen the country's attraction as
a base for foreign investment. Good infrastructure and telecommunications, a
skilled and disciplined labour force - strikes are practically unknown - a
pleasant environment, and a government eager to encourage foreign
investment, have already enticed many companies to establish themselves in
the country.
Since the fall of communism in central and eastern Europe, Vienna's role as
a regional base for western multinationals has been strengthened.
But membership will also bring costs. Austria's inefficient agriculture and
food processing industries are in for a shock as protective barriers come
down and prices are aligned with those in the rest of the EU.
For the country's farmers, the blow will be cushioned by state and EU
subsidies during the next few years, but the speed at which German milk
producers gained local market share as the European Economic Area came into
force on January 1 this year is an indication of the competitive pressures
Austrian producers will face from now on.
The same is true for other industries where one of the biggest challenges
comes from low-cost competition from central and eastern Europe.
Manufacturers of sensitive products from cement to fertilisers face a tough
future as eastern producers undercut prices even for the most economic and
modern of Austrian plants.
Traditional industries will find it increasingly difficult to compete
against producers benefiting from labour costs of almost one tenth those in
Austria. This has encouraged a growing number of Austrian companies to
internationalise their operations by moving labour-intensive production to
neighbouring countries.
'For the cost of running a small factory with 50 workers here, you can move
to Bratislava and employ more than 200 workers,' says a businessman. Austria
has emerged as the largest western investor in the region in terms of
numbers of joint ventures established.
EU membership will also accelerate the pace of restructuring. Productivity
gains in recent years have helped the most exposed sectors to adjust to
international competition, but further improvements will be needed if
Austria is to remain competitive as a business location.
Mr Franz Vranitzky, the social democrat chancellor, says that raising skills
and quality will be central concerns of the next government after general
elections in October. 'In Europe, it is increasingly difficult to maintain
employment. Every structural change has ended with a decline in industrial
jobs. We would not be well advised to copy eastern Europe (with cheap
labour). We need a high level of development, of education and skills,' he
says. Openness and competitiveness will be the most important factors in
securing future prosperity, he adds.
Good intentions, however, are not always easy to live up to. Last year, the
government overshot its spending targets by about 60 per cent with the
budget deficit rising to just under Sch100bn, representing about 4 per cent
of GDP. The worsening deficit was due to lower tax revenues, a virtual halt
in the privatisation programme, and rising social outlays for unemployment.
The deficit should come down this year as the recovery strengthens and
privatisations get under way again. Moreover, the deficit is not as serious
a problem as in other European countries, and it would represent only about
2.5 per cent of GDP if the healthier provincial government finances were
taken into account. Inflation, at 3.1 per cent, is falling slowly.
Economists would like to see the government make greater efforts to cut
spending, but with a referendum on EU membership and a general election due
later this year, improvements on this side are likely to be modest.
The EU referendum is scheduled for June, and the future of the coalition
between the Social Democratic Party (SPO) and the conservative People's
Party (OVP) will be tested in general elections in October.
Baring surprises, the referendum should come out in favour of membership,
with Austria joining on January 1. Opposition to joining has so far remained
fragmented and weak, and opinion polls suggest that a clear majority of
voters favour membership. The Greens and Mr Jorg Haider's Freedom Party
(FPO) on the extreme right are opposed to membership, though they are
divided on the issue.
The greatest threat to a positive outcome may be complacency, with people,
especially socialist voters, not bothering to vote - 'for the right or wrong
reasons, the EU has not been a very attractive product to sell,' says
Chancellor Vranitzky. It is widely perceived to have failed in its
peace-making efforts in Bosnia; it is identified with the international
recession; and it has much higher unemployment than Austria. The recent
quarrel over minority votes was unedifying.
'So it takes an extra effort to convince our people that as a model it's an
improvement,' he says.
Uncertainty over the referendum's outcome worries business - 'if we don't
join, foreign investment will dry up. If there is no foreign investment,
there'll be no technological transfer. And if there is no technological
transfer, we will not be able to modernise our economy and compete,' says a
local banker.
Officials, however, believe they have secured sufficiently attractive
membership terms and enough concessions from Brussels on agriculture and
transit lorry traffic to win majority support for membership.
The general election will present the ruling parties with a different
challenge. Their popularity has steadily declined since the 1980s as an
increasing number of voters has grown tired of the old system under which
the social democrats and conservatives have shared out power and patronage
among themselves.
Dissatisfaction has boosted the Freedom Party and the Greens, but the FPO's
xenophobic anti-immigration campaigns have effectively ruled it out as a
coalition partner, while the Greens and the Liberals remain too small to
exert much influence. The most likely outcome of the elections remains
another grand coalition.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940415

