FT942-12466

FT  29 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Cruel deception perpetrated by
opponents of PO privatisation


   From Mr MICHAEL E CORBY


Sir, Your article, 'Troubles pile up for the Post Office' (April 25) was
timely, but I fear the consequences of the delay in Post Office
privatisation could be even worse than you suggested. The PO is not only
ripe for privatisation, but such a step is essential if it is to be in a
position to continue to provide the range of facilities to the current high
standards, and keep its prices within current inflation levels. In the last
decade the management and staff have transformed the business in terms of
profit, service and prices. This is now being put at risk by the lack of a
decision on privatisation by the government.
Concerns about privatisation resulting in loss of service are ill-founded.
Similar dire prospects were conjured up at the time of telecoms
privatisation but services, particularly the social and public ones, greatly
improved.
The change from Crown offices to franchised offices has already produced
improvements in services. Entrusting former Crown offices to entrepreneurs
has led to longer opening hours and a more customer-friendly approach.
However, if PO Counters continues to be inhibited from developing
alternative trade then unit costs will rise, to the detriment of the
service. Those relying on Counters for pensions and social security payments
will be hurt the most. Those who oppose privatisation of PO Counters are
perpetrating a cruel deception on the very people they are purporting to
help.
With mails, the risk is that, as letter traffic is eroded, the existing PO
will be less well able to underpin current service levels across all its
business. The underlying trends of PO finances are now becoming adverse. If
the PO slips back from its current position it will be even harder to turn
round than it was during the 1970s.
The Treasury is in a lose-lose position. If it allows matters to drift then
either it will receive reduced contributions to the public sector borrowing
requirement from the PO, or, if it insists on them being maintained, the PO
will have to fund them by a combination of inflationary price increases and
service cuts.
This is avoidable: an imaginative privatisation, involving all the staff and
the public, will ensure that the PO has the financial strength and
managerial flexibility to maintain and develop its services and secure its
future. Regulation by 'Ofpost' will safeguard the social service elements.
The more the government delays, the bigger risks it is taking.
Michael E Corby,
(director, Mail Users Association 1976-1985),
21 The Hamlet,
London SE5 8AW

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940429

