FT942-12824

FT  28 APR 94 / Berlusconi to receive call to power today


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro last night ended a delay in forming Italy's
53rd post-war government by summoning Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media
magnate-turned politician, to visit him today.
The expected call to Mr Berlusconi to head the administration follows a
24-hour delay prompted by fears of a conflict of interest over Mr
Berlusconi's Fininvest empire and a row over allocating ministerial posts,
especially the key interior ministry.
President Scalfaro had originally been expected to ask Mr Berlusconi to form
the government yesterday, a month after he led the four-party Freedom
Alliance to victory in general elections.
But it became clear Mr Berlusconi was not yet ready with his cabinet.
Moreover, several politicians were unhappy about the suggested formulas for
distancing his political responsibilities from ownership of Fininvest, the
second largest media group in Europe.
The president proposed on Tuesday that he himself act, in his role as
guardian of the constitution, as guarantor against any conflict of interest.
But this vague proposal left many perplexed.
The Northern League, a main component of the future government along with Mr
Berlusconi's Forza Italia, has threatened to press for President Scalfaro's
resignation once the new government is formed, and several members regarded
the president's proposal as a disguised means of ensuring he remained in
office. The view was shared by the neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance,
another member of the would-be coalition.
Others pointed out that President Scalfaro lacked the authority to take an
active role in monitoring any conflict of interest - especially where it
concerned Fininvest's three television channels.
However, it appears President Scalfaro only stepped forward because it had
been impossible to agree an independent watchdog to monitor any conflict of
interest. The opposition parties on the left were reluctant to see such a
role conferred on parliament because the Freedom Alliance had an absolute
majority.
Mr Berlusconi has not detailed how he believes he can act as prime minister
and retain ownership of the second largest private group in Italy.
Mr Mario Segni, leader of the centrist Italian Pact, told President Scalfaro
during formal consultations on the formation of the next government this
week that Mr Berlusconi's business interests were an insuperable obstacle to
the media magnate assuming the premiership.
Mr Segni said: 'There is a clear incompatability between the functioning of
government and those of an entrepreneur involved in a series of activities
that impinge heavily on public life.'
This was the sole public veto for Mr Berlusconi. However, the conflict of
interest was raised in varying degrees by everyone consulted by President
Scalfaro - not least by the Northern League leader, Mr Umberto Bossi.
Hurdles yesterday also remained over ministerial appointments. The League
has been fighting a tough rear-guard action to secure the interior ministry.
This portfolio has always been in Christian Democrat hands and traditionally
has been a source of enormous power. This internecine battle underlined the
difficulties faced by Mr Berlusconi in putting together a cohesive team from
a largely inexperienced and unlikely group of partners.
The new government is expected to be slimmer than previous ones but will
balance the respective weights of Forza Italia against the League, the
MSI/National Alliance and the small rump of the old Christian Democrats, the
Christian Democratic Centre.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940428

