FT944-2614

FT  16 DEC 94 / Telecom Italia set to sign mobile phone pact


   By ANDREW HILL


   MILAN


Italian ministers should decide today whether to relax the terms of Telecom
Italia's monopoly over certain telephone services, in order to offset the
impact of increased competition in the lucrative mobile telephone sector.
In an indication that a compromise may be found to satisfy the
state-controlled company, the Telecoms Ministry said yesterday that, after
the ministerial discussion, Telecom Italia was likely to sign the joint
convention governing digital mobile phone services.
Telecom Italia has withheld its signature pending a satisfactory reply to
its demands for full liberalisation of mobile phone tariffs and a cut in the
fee it pays the government for its monopoly over other services.
The final ministerial decision could be complicated by the obvious
ill-feeling stirred up this week between Mr Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's prime
minister, and his old business rival Mr Carlo De Benedetti.
Olivetti, the computer group chaired by Mr De Benedetti, is one of the
leading partners in the consortium which will operate Italy's new digital
mobile phone network.
The consortium, Omnitel-Pronto Italia, won the licence to compete with
Telecom Italia on the eve of the March general election which brought Mr
Berlusconi to power.
The defeated consortium included Fiat, the automotive and industrial group,
and Fininvest, Mr Berlusconi's media group.
Mr De Benedetti angered Mr Berlusconi by indicating, in an interview
published last weekend, that his administration should be replaced by an
institutional government.
On Tuesday, Mr Cesare Previti, defence minister and former Fininvest lawyer,
told another newspaper that the mobile phone contract had been granted
'unjustly' to the Omnitel-Pronto Italia consortium. Mr Previti said he would
go into more detail 'when the moment comes to explain this abomination'.
Mr Berlusconi himself also launched a thinly veiled attack on Olivetti and
Mr De Benedetti in a letter to Il Sole 24 Ore, Italy's business newspaper,
published ahead of his questioning by Milan anti-corruption magistrates on
Tuesday.
Telecom Italia has demanded the right to set its own prices for mobile
telephone services on the existing analogue network.
The company has built a digital network, with which Omnitel-Pronto Italia
will compete. But the state company argues that if the price of its analogue
services continue to be regulated it will lose subscribers to the new
consortium.
Omnitel-Pronto Italia - which includes US, German and Scandinavian partners
 -claims any concession to Telecom Italia would put it at a further
disadvantage as the new entrant in the market.
Analogue customers can use their phones only in Italy, whereas the digital
subscribers can make calls from other European countries which have adopted
the common 'GSM' standard.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

