FT944-14481

FT  22 OCT 94 / World Stock Markets: Structure and finances depress Madrid
stocks - A look at the bolsa's lack of enthusiasm


   By TOM BURNS


The fact that the Spanish market has fallen this year is of comparatively
little concern to investors who have seen the same story elsewhere in
Europe. What worries them is its slow, and apparently unenthusiastic
response when other bourses are on the recovery tack.
One reason is that Madrid's bolsa has been pushed back to the periphery. It
is no longer exotic, a label which stirred interest in the late 1980s, when
Madrid was a sustained target for funds. The bolsa is now altogether too
well known as small, narrow and illiquid.
On a conventional valuation basis, employing price earnings ratios and
yields relative to the bond market, Spanish equities are cheap; but
valuation alone is not enough to propel a market which is seeing plenty of
special pleading for its rivals.
By the same token first half corporate results in Spain have been good, with
at least 50 per cent in line with most estimates, and some 20 per cent
coming out above expectations. In general, earnings have not been
disappointing and Spanish companies, thanks in part to more liberal labour
market laws, are looking trimmer than they have done for a long time.
'But,' says Mr Robert Maxwell of Madrid brokers Maxwell and Espinosa, 'you
are getting far more upside on earnings in France, Germany and the UK than
in Spain.'
The bolsa's notorious lack of industrial stocks makes it particularly
vulnerable in at times when investors sniff a rally. 'We are looking for
results surprises and for cyclical upturns and Spain does not fit into our
strategy for Europe right now,' says Ms Alexandra Perricone of London's
James Capel.
Although Capel has remained remained neutral over Spain since the spring,
with a weighting of 6 per cent in its European portfolio, its strategists
now think that underweighting in the second and third quarters of the year
might been more advisable.
A second reason for the bolsa's persistent gloom is that the government is
doing little, or at least not nearly enough, to whet investors' appetites.
The 1995 budget, which is currently before parliament, has Spain's GDP
growing at 2.8 per cent next year, against 1.7 per cent this year, but it
makes only a timid use of such expansion to tackle the public deficit. The
austerity sentiment is there for the Economy ministry forecasts a reduction
in the deficit from 6.7 per cent of GDP this year to 5.9 per cent in 1995;
but it is at best lukewarm.
More worrying still is the threat of inflation that darkens the Spanish
landscape and with it the fear of an interest rate rebound. If Spain failed
to tame inflation this year, ask analysts, how can it be expected to do so
next year?
In spite of very low growth for the first half of this year, depressed
domestic demand for all of the 12 months, historically low wage settlements
representing salary increases of below 3.5 per cent and persistently very
high unemployment, Spain's headline inflation is expect to end 1994 at
between 4.2 and 4.5 per cent against the initial target of 3.5 per cent for
this year.
A 3.5 per cent inflation rise has been chalked in again for next year and,
unsurprisingly, the sceptics are out in force, particularly because there
will be a major change in the composition of the GDP. According to next
year's budget, growth will be domestic demand led and exports will
contribute a mere 0.1 per cent to the forecast 2.8 per cent GDP rise against
the 1.6 per cent that exports contributed this year.
Analysts are concerned about a string of inflationary factors which have
been built into and around the 1995 budget: a 1 per cent, across the board
rise in Value Added Tax which, according to the Bank of Spain, will
technically increase the CPI by 0.85 per cent; additional tax rises on
tobacco, alcohol and fuel as well as raised telephone charges; a fall in
employers' social security contributions which unions will seek to
recuperate in wage demands; a deflation of personal income tax rates and
witholdings; an indexation of civil servant pay and of pensions.
'It would appear that if the government wanted to write inflation increase
worries into Spain's economy next year, it could not have gone about it
better,' said one foreign bank economist in Madrid.
Utilities, consequently, are being downgraded because the interest cycle is
perceived to have turned; the jury is out on the banks, the other large
component of a bolsa portfolio.
The fact that growth next year will be domestic-led is of little comfort to
Spanish investors, for there are precious few consumer spending stocks; the
retailer, Cortefiel has been a welcome addition this year. It is easier in
Spain to spot and to buy into the export sensitive companies.
Where, then, is the good news to be found?
A more cheerful theme, highlighted recently by Baring International
Investment Management, is that Spain has been wrongly put in the same bag as
Italy and Sweden. This is a mistake, according to Baring's Ms Kate Munday,
because 'when you look at the details Spain does not have a funding
problem'.
The lesson from such a perception is that in Spain's case, the bond market
has over-reacted. Baring, which is betting on the Spanish bond market's
recovery, has moved from being underweight to be being neutral in Spain.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

941022

