FT942-15643

FT  14 APR 94 / Technology: When chips get too close for comfort


   By ROB CAUSEY


In the 30 years since the invention of the silicon chip, researchers have
concentrated on squeezing more and more circuitry on to the chip's surface.
For the first time, they are now also beginning to worry about what happens
underneath these circuits, inside the silicon.
The goal of silicon research has been to make the transistors in the
circuits smaller. The more transistors on one chip and the faster each
works, the more each chip can do for the user.
But the transistor is basically a switch. Like a light switch, the moment it
is flicked a great deal of current starts flowing. Although the effect is
invisible inside a chip, the sparks can be big enough to affect other
transistors nearby, making them switch when they should not and possibly
causing the computer to malfunction.
This effect is called leakage and is similar to a crossed telephone line
when the electrical signals from one circuit pass on to another. As
transistors become rapidly smaller, so do the signals switched. But for
reasons to do with the physics of silicon, the sparks are not reduced at the
same rate, making leakage more and more of a problem.
In the past, leakage was cut out by building walls, called isolation, around
each transistor. But as the transistors get smaller, the part of the chip
taken up by isolation becomes excessive, so a new solution had to be found.
A number of companies now believe the answer is to put a layer of insulator
under the transistors. This is because computer models of silicon chips
suggest the leakage current goes down into the silicon before affecting
other transistors. The most common such technology is called Silicon on
Insulator or SOI.
Researchers at NTT, the Japanese telephone company, have built a number of
SOI chips. Mitsubishi engineers have used the same techniques to make
circuits for a 256Mbit memory chip. This is two generations of technology
beyond the most advanced memories used in PCs today, or about five years
ahead of the market.
European chipmakers such as SGS-Thomson and the French operation of IBM are
also developing chips based on the technique, as are Japan's Toshiba and
Motorola of the US. IBM in the US has helped set up a company called SiBond
to supply the right kind of silicon. Chenming Hu, a professor at the
University of California at Berkeley, says the technique would be vital for
chips used in battery powered systems such as personal digital assistants
like Apple's Newton.
The SOI technique does not require drastic manufacturing changes. The
difference is in the silicon wafer which the chips are made on. Instead of
pure silicon, a layer of insulator is injected below the surface of the
silicon using high energy beams. These make it relatively easy to control
the depth and thickness of the layer of insulator.
Not all chipmakers agree that SOI is the right answer, however. Researchers
at AT&T's Bell Labs in the US have developed their own technique and are
sceptical about SOI's long-term usefulness. They point to damage to the
wafer which can be caused by the process of injecting the insulator as a big
drawback of SOI.
The Bell Labs technique creates two tiny areas of insulator under each
transistor rather than a layer under the surface of the whole wafer. One of
these areas has to be implanted using the same technique as SOI, but the
team believes that because it is much smaller, it will cause less damage to
the wafer. The second layer can be created using ordinary chipmaking
techniques.
As computers become more portable, what goes on inside the silicon will
matter as much as the ever-shrinking transistor on its surface.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940414

