FT943-778

FT  28 SEP 94 / State may aid Credit Lyonnais if first-half Pounds 540m loss
deepens


   By ANDREW JACK and DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


Credit Lyonnais, the embattled French banking group, yesterday announced a
FFr4.5bn (Pounds 540m) loss for the first half of 1994, and said the state
had agreed to help if its losses worsened further this year.
The bank set aside further provisions against bad debts of FFr10.1bn, which
wiped out its operating profits of FFr5bn. A French state capital injection
of FFr4.9bn this summer brought the bank's ratio of own funds to assets to
8.1 per cent - only a shade above the internationally agreed minimum of 8
per cent.
Mr Jean Peyrelevade, Credit Lyonnais chairman, acknowledged he had
overestimated the degree to which the bank could recover from past bad loans
and investments on its own and out of current banking income.
Credit Lyonnais was announcing results unexpectedly delayed from last
Thursday, following emergency consultations between the bank, its auditors
and the government. Mr Peyrelevade denied some suggestions by the government
that the state-controlled bank misled it, saying that 'we told them
(ministers) everything we knew when we knew it'.
He said the bank would try to contain this year's loss to last year's level
of FFr6.9bn, but conceded that even before that level was reached 'we would
need a recapitalisation to avoid our solvency ratio falling below the
minimum'. In addition to the government and other public sector shareholders
in the bank providing the FFr4.9bn capital increase, the government has also
guaranteed FFr40bn worth of its doubtful property loans.
For the first time, Mr Peyrelevade raised the prospect that Credit Lyonnais
might sell some of its international banking network, in addition to the
already announced programme to sell some FFr20bn worth of the group's
industrial and financial holdings. He resisted suggestions that the
government had made bank asset sales a condition of further help, but said
Credit Lyonnais 'might rectify the frontiers' of its banking business by,
for instance, abandoning retail banking in 'some distant countries'.
This month Credit Lyonnais said it would reduce its retail banking operation
in the UK in favour of focusing on corporate banking and market trading.
Some FFr3.4bn of the FFr4.8bn 'exceptional' provisions in the first half
were related to Credit Lyonnais's banking subsidiaries of Altus, an
investment bank whose high-risk operations had turned wrong; SDBO, which is
the main banker to Mr Bernard Tapie; and of CLBN, the Dutch subsidiary whose
loans to the American film business required further provisions.
Mr Peyrelevade described a new and tougher regulatory climate in which the
bank's new auditors insisted that the bank must start taking precautions
against the 'latent risks' inherent in the bank's past activities.
Lex, Page 26
World stocks, Page 43

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940928

