FT943-956

FT  27 SEP 94 / Grand shipbuilding tradition goes under: The death of an
extraordinary industry in the north-east


   By CHRIS TIGHE


The loss of Swan Hunter's design team means the unthinkable is about to
happen. North-east England, the source for many years of more than a third
of the world's ships, is to see its last shipbuilder die.
The departure on Friday of most the remaining designers brings to an end the
struggle by Swan Hunter's workforce and local community, unions, politicians
and receivers Price Waterhouse to keep alive one of the world's great
shipbuilding companies.
Few industries have the grandeur and resonance of shipbuilding, in spite of
the arduous toil it imposes on those who work in it.
Still fewer companies enjoy the exceptional commitment and loyalty Swan
Hunter has sustained from its founding in the mid-Victorian era to today.
Swan Hunter's employees and its reputation for quality form the bridge with
that distant time before cars and aircraft.
Fourth-generation employees include Mr David Swan, 54, former quality
assurance inspection manager - the last of the Swans and Hunters on the
payroll. He is now unemployed, having been made redundant by the receivers
in May.
Joint receiver Mr Gordon Horsfield, an insolvency practitioner for 21 years,
said: 'There's a sense of kinship which is quite extraordinary, something
I've never really experienced before. It's a function of history, of shared
triumphs and disasters.'
Because Swan Hunter comprises several historic Tyneside shipyards the
company's founding can be set at 1860, 1873 or 1874, when shipbuilder
Charles Mitchell took over the Wallsend shipyard and made his brother-in-law
Charles Sheriton Swan, David Swan's great grandfather, its manager.
Mr Swan, trading under the name CS Swan & Company, travelled regularly to St
Petersburg to advise the Tsar on construction of ironclad battleships. His
enthusiasm for marine engineering cost him dear. In 1879 he leaned too far
over the rail of a steamer's paddlebox, fell and was killed.
In 1880 his widow brought George Burton Hunter, later Sir George Hunter,
into the business. His arrival started the company's rapid expansion as
north-east England entered its greatest shipbuilding period.
Among Swan Hunter's biggest triumphs was the Mauretania, which for 22 years
held the Blue Riband as the world's fastest liner across the Atlantic.
Launched in 1906, she combined sumptuous beauty with technical innovation,
thanks to Sir Charles Parsons, Tyneside-based inventor of the steam turbine.
US President Franklin Roosevelt wrote, in a comment that could have applied
equally to Swan Hunter itself, that neither size nor speed alone could have
given the Mauretania her fame. 'That rested on something more secure and
intangible - on her personality, for the Mauretania was a ship with a
fighting heart.'
Also exceptional was the supertanker Esso Northumbria, a 253,000 tonne ship,
1,143 ft from stem to stern, launched in 1969. She towered so high Swans had
to pay the lighting bills of the terraced homes overshadowed during
construction. Her launch was a logistical challenge. The Tyne was only 167
ft wider than the ship, even with a large notch cut out of the opposite bank
to stop her slamming into Swans' Hebburn yard when she was launched.
More recent triumphs include the aircraft carrier Ark Royal, currently
visiting the Tyne after active service off the former Yugoslavia, and
Illustrious, on which Swans worked day and night for the Falklands campaign.
Swan Hunter has had bad times before, in periods of international recession.
In the 1920s its workforce turned to making garden furniture to survive as a
team.
Recent decades have brought increasingly cut-throat competition from Far
East shipbuilders and rivals under more favourable subsidy regimes.
Even so, as recently as 1975 the Swan Hunter group could claim to be
Europe's biggest shipbuilding and ship-repairing consortium, with worldwide
activities and 33,000 employees in 10 UK shipbuilding yards and nine repair
yards at home and abroad.
The Type 23 frigate Richmond, to be handed over to the Navy on November 2,
is the last of 2,700 vessels, merchant and naval, built by the company. One
of the most dignified aspects of the receivership has been the workforce's
unwavering commitment to finishing their last three frigates on time, to top
standards.
After 16 months of receivership, of worldwide marketing and dogged
negotiating, Mr Horsfield has only now given up hope of a going concern
sale.
He said: 'All the opportunities there have been explored and no buyer has
been found.'
The Swan Hunter name is likely to be sold as part of the intellectual
property rights. This means it could go overseas.
For Mr Horsfield the workforce's humour and dedication to high quality have
made this a receivership of bitter-sweet memories.
For the workforce, Swan Hunter's demise is a tragic bereavement.
Mr Peter Hilton, 47, design team member and an employee for 30 years, said:
'It's a family. The last people, you'll have to show them out and close the
door behind them. If you left them, they'd just stay there.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940927

