FT944-5900

FT  01 DEC 94 / BTR brings in outsider as chief executive of Nylex


   By NIKKI TAIT and DAVID WIGHTON


   SYDNEY, LONDON


BTR, the UK-based industrial conglomerate, yesterday announced its second
top management change in two weeks with the appointment of Mr Philip Aiken
as chief executive of BTR Nylex, its Australian-based subsidiary. The move
sent the shares of both companies down.
Mr Aiken, 45 and an Australian, is managing director of BOC Group's European
gases operation. Mr Graeme Pearson, who was previously managing director of
BTR Nylex, becomes managing director of BTR Nylex's operations.
The apparent sideways move for Mr Pearson and the unexpected appointment of
Mr Aiken caused heavy trading in BTR Nylex shares, which are quoted on the
Australian Stock Exchange, as analysts tried to interpret the changes. They
closed two cents lower at ADollars 2.40. BTR shares fell 1p to 286p.
BTR said that Mr Aiken's appointment reflected 'the board's view that the
group holds strong positions in areas such as Australia and the US, as well
as the fast-growth area of Asia, offering a significant opportunity to
expand'. Mr Alan Jackson, BTR chief executive, added that Mr Aiken would
oversee an expansion plan centred on the Asia-Pacific rim.
Sources close to the company said it signalled a more aggressive approach to
acquisitions with Mr Aiken focusing on deals while Mr Pearson concentrates
on operational management.
At the annual meeting in June, Mr Jackson said that he believed acquisition
opportunities were emerging. Mr Jackson remains chairman of BTR Nylex, which
in the 1980s he transformed from an obscure BTR belting subsidiary into one
of Australia's largest industrial groups.
Nylex announced disappointing interim figures in September with after-tax
profit of ADollars 207m (Pounds 158m ) rising only 6 per cent on the
previous year.
BTR's shares have been further unsettled by worries about management
succession. Last week it announced the surprise retirement of Mr Bob
Faircloth as chief operating officer.
Separately, BTR announced that it is to raise its stake in BTR Nylex from
59.8 per cent to 61.9 per cent. The increase is the result of the exercise
of certain options held by BTR.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941201

