FT944-6033

FT  01 DEC 94 / Australian growth surges to 6.4%: Queensland drought fails
to halt biggest output increase since 1985


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


Australia's annual growth rate surged to 6.4 per cent during the September
quarter, the highest level since 1985. This is also the strongest
year-on-year increase in gross domestic product being reported by any
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development country.
The figure would have been even higher, at around 7.3 per cent, had it not
been for the impact of the severe drought on the farm sector in News South
Wales and Queensland, and was far above both market and official government
forecasts. The market had anticipated a rate of about 5.5 per cent, while
budget forecasts had assumed the Australian economy would grow at about 4.5
per cent during the 1994-95 financial year.
With the data revealing that growth in gross domestic product was fuelled in
large part by a surge in private consumption spending, local economists
quickly concluded that a rise in interest rates before Christmas was now a
strong possibility. Earlier in the week, statistical data showing a better
performance by Australian exporters in October and a decline in the monthly
trade deficit had appeared to make this less likely.
The Australian dollar rose sharply on the GDP figures, hitting a 31-month
high at one stage. By late afternoon, it had gained almost half a cent and
was trading at about USDollars 0.768.
In Canberra Mr Ralph Willis, federal treasurer, said the government expected
the growth rate to slow with and recent interest rate increases moderating
demand. He did not rule out a mini-budget in the new year.
Mr Willis said the current level of growth might prompt the government to
consider adjustments to fiscal policy.
Mr Willis' softening of the government's stance comes less than 24 hours
after Mr Bernie Fraser, governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, urged it
to consider using fiscal policy to rein in the budget deficit and prevent
any serious rise in inflation.
Opposition parties accused the government of losing control of the economy.
Mr Alexander Downer, leader of the coalition opposition said: 'We now know
that the Labor government's real agenda is to increase taxes and higher
taxes are going to damage Australian families and businesses.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941201

