FT944-6133

FT  30 NOV 94 / International Company News: Argentina seen as an appetiser
for Brazil - Foreign entrants in Latin America's food sector are far from
sated


   By DAVID PILLING


Foreign companies are gorging themselves on Argentine food producers. The
purchase last week of Bagley, an Argentine biscuit maker, by French group
Danone, is the latest in a series of foreign forays into the Argentine food
sector.
'When foreign investors think of Argentina, they often think of food,' says
Mr Marcos Devoto, a Buenos Aires-based analyst with Santander Investment.
'It is considered the sexy sector.'
The Danone deal, in which France's biggest food group paid Dollars 240m for
a controlling stake in Bagley, comes only months after the Dollars 250m
purchase by RJR Nabisco, the US group, of 70 per cent of Terrabusi. Between
them, Bagley and Terrabusi control about half the Argentine biscuit market,
the tenth largest in the world.
In September, Cadbury Schweppes gobbled up 80 per cent of Stani, a
privately-owned Argentine confectionery group. It plans to use the local
company to distribute its own brands and as a foundation from which to
attack other regional markets, notably Brazil.
Among other important foreign entrants have been Kraft, part of the Philip
Morris group of the US, which bought ice-cream manufacturer La Montevideana;
Italy's Parmalat, which purchased La Vascongada; and Chile's Ambrosoli,
which took over the Bonafide confectionery and coffee company.
Nestle, which had also been wooing Bagley, has joined the fray with the
purchase of La Serenisima, a powdered-milk company, and two local cheese
producers.
Part of the strategy of such foreign newcomers has been to bring new
products as well as modern management and marketing techniques to local
companies that, until the start of the 1990s, had been accustomed to
operating in a cosy world behind high tariff walls.
Since the opening up of the market, Argentines have developed a taste for
high-quality, well-packaged items - triggering fierce competition to upgrade
local brands.
Recent arrivals such as Danone and Cadbury will join the fight for market
share in a sector that has 'exploded', says Mr Devoto. The end of
hyperinflation and the return of economic stability has revived purchasing
power - especially for relatively cheap items like food - leading, for
example, to growth of 125 per cent in biscuit and cracker sales since 1991.
Analysts say such rapid progress is tapering off, and that the sector will
now grow more in line with general economic expansion.
'The market has reached a point of equilibrium. One can't hope to continue
at those sort of rates,' says Mr Jorge Lorenzo, general manager at Bagley.
Mr Christopher Ecclestone, an analyst at brokers Interacciones, sees the
Danone deal as 'a breakthrough in Argentine mergers and acquisitions'.
Unlike other takeovers realised at bargain prices, he says, Danone's was
fully priced, showing that Argentina is now viewed as moving towards greater
economic maturity. The Dollars 240m price-tag valued Bagley at Dollars 4.80
a share, more than Dollars 1 above the price being fetched before the sale
was announced.
'The Danone deal is part of a major restructuring of the food sector which
will, as a result, become much more efficient,' says Mr Ecclestone. 'Bagley
had run out of things to do and was shaking at the prospect of Terrabusi
under Nabisco control. This was a deal made in heaven for Bagley's owners.'
Although the Argentine food market is big in its own right, the real prize
for foreign entrants may well be Brazil. From next January, Brazil's 150m
consumers will, in market terms, be integrated with Argentina's 31m as the
Mercusor customs union between these two countries - and Paraguay and
Uruguay - comes into effect.
Easier access to Brazil will be bolstered by the recent success of the Real
Plan which has, temporarily at least, strangled Brazilian hyperinflation and
created a consumer boom.
The plan has also fuelled further appreciation of Brazil's currency against
Argentina's dollar-pegged peso, making Argentine goods more competitive.
'Our feeling is that what is happening in Brazil today is what happened in
Argentina in 1991,' says Mr Devoto.
Argentina's climate provides it with several comparative advantages -
especially in wheat and dairy production - which should enable it to take
advantage of this situation, he says.
Mr Neil Perry, head of Latin American research at Baring Securities, agrees
that many foreign companies have come to Argentina with the Brazilian market
in mind. 'Danone clearly has not invested in Argentina for the Argentine
market alone. This will definitely be part of a Mercusor strategy.'
Danone already participates in the Brazilian biscuits and yoghurt sector,
leading to speculation that it will try to create synergies between
operations in both countries.
Mr Devoto believes the best-run Argentine companies will have great success
in Brazil. 'They have had three years of stability that have enabled them to
reach more sophisticated levels of production.'
As a result, they will be well placed to compete at the top end of the
market, he says.
'In this new, competitive environment, the Argentine companies that can
adapt will have very strong sales,' says Mr Devoto. 'But the ones that can't
will fall by the wayside.'

The Financial Times


London Page 54

941130

