FT943-12627

FT  23 JUL 94 / Briefcase, Q&A: No interest in a Tessa


I took out a tax-exempt special savings account (Tessa) with the
Co-operative Bank when they were launched. The interest rate then was 14 per
cent with a 1 per cent bonus if kept for five years.
Recently, the bank sent me a newsletter which included details of all its
interest rates. The Tessa is now just over 5 per cent.
That was bad enough; worse was the statement that if you pull out capital
before five years, you lose all the interest. I rang the bank and asked if
this was true; when told it was, I immediately stopped my standing order.
I have never touched the interest. If I withdraw that and then close the
account, could the bank deduct the equivalent interest from my capital?
With regard to the withdrawal of capital from your Tessa: it is true that
any withdrawal within the first five years will lead to a loss of all tax
advantages.
There is no pro-rata relief if any sum of the capital is withdrawn.
Furthermore, any interest credited up to the date of the withdrawal will
become taxable income for the year in which the withdrawal takes place.
There is, however, a facility to withdraw interest from the account without
invalidating the tax-free status. These withdrawals must not exceed the full
amount of interest credited to date, less basic-rate income tax.
The reasoning behind this is to place depositors in a similar position to
what they would have been had they placed their funds outside a Tessa and
received interest net of tax. When the five-year period has ended, the
balance of interest can be taken out without penalty.
As long as the depositor adheres to the relevant limits, there will be no
income tax to pay, even on the interest withdrawn. (Answer by Murray
Johnstone Personal Asset Management).
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940723

