FT943-13102

FT  21 JUL 94 / Judge arrests drug company chiefs: Venezuelan probe into
medicine pricing


   By JOSEPH MANN


   CARACAS


A Venezuelan criminal court judge investigating alleged overpricing of
medicines has issued 16 arrest warrants against executives of pharmaceutical
companies operating in Venezuela, including the subsidiaries of several
multinationals.
The warrants, issued by Judge Cristobal Ramirez in Caracas, are against
executives from companies, including units of Ciba-Geigy, Eli Lilly, Merck,
Rhone-Poulenc, Roche, Sandoz and Servier. Most of the executives cited are
reported to have turned themselves in to the judge and have been released on
bail.
Judge Ramirez, who has said his investigation will affect more
pharmaceutical companies, claims that lists of products submitted to the
government at the beginning of this year by drug companies contained prices
that were inflated in comparison to prices listed a month earlier. At the
time, the outgoing government, replaced by the administration of President
Rafael Caldera on February 2, was getting ready to order wide-ranging price
controls on medicines.
Representatives of drug companies have said the prices submitted before the
imposition of price controls contained increases covering a new value added
tax (which was later eliminated) and other legitimate cost increases.
Mr Francisco Allende, executive director of Caveme, an industry association
that includes the 36 international drug companies operating in Venezuela,
said the steady devaluation of Venezuela's currency had hit retail drug
prices, since over 70 per cent of the value of products sold in Venezuela
are imported.
'We can't live with prices frozen at the level of December 1993, with the
dollar reaching as high as 200 bolivars,' he said. The dollar cost of
imports has risen sharply. Before exchange controls announced on June 27,
the bolivar had fallen to 200 to the dollar, representing a 47 per cent
devaluation from the end of 1993.
'Prices of medicines are frozen, but the industry still has to deal with
increasing costs for imported raw materials and other inputs, as well as
costlier labour,' Mr Allende added.
One pharmaceutical company executive said: 'These charges are seen by many
as a witch hunt against the pharmaceutical industry, since they've come at a
time when the government is blaming the business sector for high prices and
is trying to bully us into price stability.'
Many managers believe the government has helped to create a general
anti-business environment in recent weeks, accusing shopkeepers of
profiteering, speculation and hoarding, in an effort to divert blame for the
failure of earlier anti-inflation policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940721

