FT944-14649

FT  21 OCT 94 / Government Bonds: Signs of economic acceleration hit
Treasuries


   By FRANK MCGURTY and CONNER MIDDELMANN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US Treasury bonds took a sharp downturn yesterday on a weaker dollar and
fresh signs of economic acceleration and inflation.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was 1 3/32 lower
at 94 13/32 , with the yield rising to 7.987 per cent. Earlier, it touched
the important psychological level of 8.00 per cent before receding slightly.
At the short end, the two-year note was down  3/16 at 99 17/32 , to yield
6.741 per cent.
Two reports were released during the morning that undermined the view that
the economy is growing at a manageable pace and inflation is under control.
The Commerce Department said housing starts last month climbed 4.4 per cent
to an adjusted annual rate of 1.5m units, the highest level since last
December. Although economists thought the upturn was temporary, traders took
the data as a sign that the series of five interest rate increases so far
this year had failed to slow growth sufficiently.
The pessimism deepened at mid-morning, when the market was handed a more
compelling piece of evidence to suggest the Federal Reserve would probably
have to lift rates again soon.
The monthly business outlook report issued by the Federal Reserve of
Philadelphia showed a sharp jump in its overall index of economic activity.
Even more troubling to the inflation-insensitive bond market, indices
measuring prices paid and received by manufacturers surged.
Bond prices, especially at the long end of the maturity range, plunged on
the news, which seemed to undo much of the confidence gained over the past
month. In recent weeks, most of the economic news has been favourable for
bonds.
A bad morning turned worse when comments by Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US
Treasury secretary, precipitated a fresh drop in the dollar. Mr Bentsen was
reported to have discouraged speculation that the government would step into
the foreign exchange markets to support the currency. The declines have
upset bond traders, who fear the dollar's weakness would make US-denominated
securities less attractive.
European government bonds were relatively resilient in the face of US
Treasury weakness, closing only slightly weaker.
'The weakness in the US hasn't prevented further outperformance by European
bond markets - that was very encouraging psychologically,' said Mr Jouni
Kokko, international economist at SG Warburg Securities.
Germany's bond market held up relatively well, supported by hopes of lower
M3 money supply growth data, which are likely to be released today.
Comments from Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank President, and council
member Mr Otmar Issing indicating that M3 was set to continue falling
cheered the market. Most analysts are calling for a September rate of around
7.5 per cent. However, distortions caused by the recent introduction of
money market funds may push the number lower than that, some said.
A lower than expected number could revive hopes of further cuts in official
rates, especially after Mr Tietmeyer said the direction of German interest
rates depended on money supply trends and other factors which could affect
inflation. Regional consumer price data are expected early next week.
Dealers reported little investor activity, and said the bund market was
dominated by the futures pits. There, technical support of the December bund
future at 90.20 kept the market underpinned, though the contract breached
that level in after-hours trading on Liffe, falling to 90.16, down 0.21 on
the day.
UK gilts reacted more negatively to the US developments, easing by about
1/2 point.
According to one dealer, 'the US data were an excuse to sell a market that
has had a good run and was due for a period of consolidation'. Ahead of
Wednesday's auction, the gilt market is likely to react more negatively than
others to disappointing news, he added.
Traders reported little cash activity apart from switching into the new
five-year stock, which is currently trading on a when-issued basis.
Slightly stronger than expected UK money supply data added to the soggy
tone. 'The lending figures didn't help - they reinforced the view that the
economy is a bit more robust than some people have thought,' said Mr Nigel
Richardson, head of bond research at Yamaichi International. The numbers
come in the wake of a buoyant CBI survey and stronger retail sales data,
released earlier this week.
French bonds fell by nearly half a point after the US data, their yield
spread over Germany widening to 75 basis points from 69 on Wednesday.
Among other factors, the market has been suffering from weakness in the
French franc, which has been depressed by political jitters ahead of the
1995 presidential elections, and the dollar.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941021

