FT941-4224

FT  11 MAR 94 / UN chiefs desperate for extra troops


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


The extra troops promised yesterday by Britain and other countries must be
dispatched to Bosnia as soon as possible, UN officials in Zagreb warned last
night.
They said the troops, which fall short of the 4,600 needed for Sarajevo, the
Bosnian capital, and an extra 6,050 for central Bosnia, are desperately
needed to shore up the fragile ceasefire, reinstate vital services for
several cities, and speed up the deliveries of aid convoys throughout the
country. There are alrady 13,000 troops stationed in the republic.
'The sooner these troops come the better,' said Lieutenant Commander Jean
Marcotte, the UN's army spokesman in Zagreb, the Croatian capital.
In Sarajevo, the troops are needed to implement the ceasefire as well as
finally start de-militarising the capital. In addition, General Sir Michael
Rose, the UN commander in Bosnia, requires a support unit and an engineer
unit of 2,200 men to back up the troops, help rebuild local services, and
start clearing mines.
Elsewhere in Bosnia, General Rose wants additional forces to monitor the
ceasefire, but also help repair roads crucial for sending in aid convoys.
More important, any extra troops will be deployed to new 'safe areas', in
particular the besieged Moslem enclave of Maglaj, which Bosnian Serb forces
continue to bombard, as well as prevent UN aid convoys from delivering
supplies.
No supplies have reached this 20,000-strong enclave for several months.
'You can see the sense of urgency about sending the troops. The forces we
have are already stretched,' a UN official said. 'Also, you must remember
that the British forces in central Bosnia have to patrol a ceasefire line
which is over 300 kilometres long. That requires a lot of manpower.'
In Sarajevo alone, the ceasefire perimeter exceeded at least 200km.
'These lines have to be manned twenty-four hours a day on a three-shift
system. I just hope we can manage with the extra thousand or so which we
will be receiving soon,' a UN official added.
General John Shalikashvili, chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, said
earlier this week that about 50,000 troops were needed to oversee any
eventual political settlement for the republic.
Western diplomats in New York said several countries, including Pakistan and
Bangladesh, have already offered troops. But the problem is that they do not
have the equipment. 'Germany and Austria have agreed in principle to equip
them,' a diplomat at the UN headquarters said last night.
Germany, for constitutional reasons cannot send troops outside Nato
territory; neither can Austria for historical reasons and because it is a
neighbouring state.
'The problem with accepting the Pakistani or Bangladeshi offer, however
welcome, is that they will not be ready for deployment until June. Ideally,
we would prefer countries from Nato because they can react quickly and in
many circumstances, share the same command/training structures.'
Yet even once the troops are deployed, the UN is still faced with another
problem: will any troops redeployed from Croatia ever be replaced.
Over 10,000 troops have been stationed in Croatia in UN protected areas,
which Serb forces seized from Croatia during the war in 1991.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

940311

