FT943-901

FT  27 SEP 94 / The Lex Column: Reckitt freshens its act


Strategically, Reckitt & Colman's Dollars 1.55bn acquisition of Kodak's L &
F household and personal care products business cannot be faulted. The group
neatly side-stepped the trap of buying the subsidiary bundled with the
do-it-yourself operations, as Kodak originally wanted. The deal provides the
group with one of the last decent-sized US household products businesses -
and one of sufficient scale to allow Reckitt to compete with the big boys in
the North American market. Abandoning the emotionally-charged food business
also looks wise. Although Reckitt's business commanded some useful niches,
it was weak internationally and even in the UK remained too small.
Nor can the company be criticised for over-paying. A price of twice sales
and 13 times earnings is in line with similar deals. Whether L & F proves
good value is another question altogether. Much depends on Reckitt's ability
to achieve synergies. Its management has promised savings of Pounds 40m
during the next three years. However, the group's track record is not
auspicious. The Pounds 713m acquisition of Boyle-Midway in 1990 was not a
conspicuous success. In spite of three and a half years of economic growth,
US sales have proved mostly pedestrian, and occasionally immobile. Reckitt's
North American team may acknowledge its past mistakes, but that is no
guarantee it will not repeat them.
The debt issue is less troublesome. Reckitt's cash-flow is strong,
generating more than Pounds 100m a year. Even without the Pounds 400m
disposal programme, the company can reduce debt to present levels within
five years. Reckitt will not be a distressed seller, but that is just as
well. Large chunks of the UK food industry are on the block, but there has
not been a noticeable rush of buyers. The predicted exit multiple of one
times sales may eventually look justifiably conservative. Given the shares'
underperformance over the past three years, though, the rights issue is
thankfully small.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940927

