FT942-15632

FT  14 APR 94 / Economic Viewpoint: Markets fret over future inflation


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Securities markets have been pausing for breath since Easter after a bout of
nerves in the early months of this year. The main pressures have come from
US bond markets.
Part of the turbulence has been due to what the US bond analyst Henry
Kaufman calls structural changes, such as 'the leveraged activities of
high-octane portfolio managers' and the spread of mutual funds to high-risk
areas. But there are also economic reasons, or at least fears.
The smart thing to say during much of 1993 was that inflation was
yesterday's worry, and that the present concern was deflation in the sense
of falling prices of assets and tradeable commodities. This is still true in
Japan. In the US, however, the fashionable view has changed almost
overnight, to that of inflation being a danger after all.
US short-term interest rates have risen by somewhat more than suggested by
the headline rises in the Fed Funds rate. The Fed is, however, being
criticised for not moving earlier and more sharply to raise interest rates.
Wayne Angell, until recently a Fed governor, has criticised the US central
bank for seeming to give zero inflation a secondary priority compared to
'getting the economy going'. Angell was in the Fed minority voting for
higher interest rates last December. His present prescription is to raise
the rarely moved official discount rate by a shock full percentage point to
4 per cent, which he believes would take the Fed Funds rate to 4 1/2 per
cent and no doubt shift market rates higher still.
The Clinton administration is trying to shout down the worriers with the
assurance that there is no inflation on the horizon. But the neat division
of labour under which the White House exhorts and the Fed acts is, however,
threatened by the administration's continuing desire to edge the dollar
down, and the already ridiculously high yen still further upwards. This will
be - fortunately - more difficult if US interest rates are rising, thus
increasing the attractions of dollar over yen holdings.
The existence of indexed gilts in the UK allows one to make slightly more
informed guesses about market dynamics. The redemption yield on the UK
medium-term benchmark bond has risen since the end of the year by nearly 1
1/2 percentage points to about 7 1/2 per cent. During the same period the
yield on longer-term indexed gilts has increased by slightly less than  3/4
percentage points, which is a rough index of the increase in long-term real
interest rates. The remaining rise represents an adverse shift in
inflationary expectations. Indeed the bond market evidence suggests a
long-term expectation of UK inflation of a little more than 4 per cent a
year. This is much below the average of the past two decades, but worse than
appeared likely during last winter's euphoria, and a whisker above the upper
end of the UK government's target range.
The yield on US 10-year bonds has risen even more than the UK yield: by
about 1 3/4 percentage points from a lower trough in the autumn of 1993. But
international capital market integration may have reached the point where UK
indexed gilt yields are relevant in US markets. In that case we have to
conclude that inflationary expectations have deteriorated by more than a
whole percentage point in the US - quite a lot when one is talking about a
decade ahead.
What is the source of this inflationary pessimism? A survey by the UK
broking firm, James Capel, concludes that underlying US inflation is around
the headline rate of 2 1/2 per cent, and that there are no visible upward
pressures on costs. The main adverse signal comes from commodity market
indices, where price rises are relatively modest and may be in response to
exaggerated world growth expectations.
Nevertheless James Capel shares the worries of the Fed hawks about the
inflationary outlook. The lags in monetary policy are so long that policy
has to be tightened now if inflationary pressures in 1995 and 1996 are to be
countered. The danger is illustrated in the chart. US output is now believed
to be pressing against the limits of capacity - not physical capacity, but
the rate of operation beyond which inflation accelerates.
No country has solved the question of how to set policies whose full effects
on inflation will not be apparent for two or three years. Although I am a
fan of charts of 'output gaps', I use them to illustrate fundamental ideas,
and not because I take the posited numerical relationships seriously.
James Capel, for instance, expects that a modest acceleration in the actual
US growth rate to 3 1/2 per cent in 1994 would be sufficient to trigger a 4
1/2 per cent inflation rate in 1995. In fact, we do not know even
approximately, either the underlying growth trend, or the safe level of
capacity utilisation, or the degree of sensitivity of inflation to a given
pressure on capacity.
We do not even know the relative weight that US policymakers ought to put on
the divergent output gaps in the US and the rest of the world. For the very
same estimates, which show the US working slightly above the safe limit of
capacity, show all the other Group of Seven leading industrialised countries
working at an average of no less than 6 per cent below capacity
What then should Alan Greenspan do (apart from making sure of a majority on
the Open Market Committee)? An appropriate policy would be a mixture of
something he has already discussed and something he has not. He has said
that real short-term interest rates have been artificially low while the
economy needed support, but they now need to return to a normal level.
What might that be? US three-month real interest rates are about 1 1/2 per
cent a year on the basis of a conventional backward look at inflation, but
only about  1/2 per cent on the basis of medium-term inflationary
expectations. What is a normal short-term real rate? One might say 2-3 per
cent on the basis of historical averages. Reasoning along these lines would
suggest that US market rates be jacked up by a further 1, or probably 2,
percentage points at the earliest opportunity.
But the Fed needs a safety device as well, and should not put all its faith
in a fallible estimate of normal real interest rates. Faithful readers will
not be surprised to find my suggesting Nominal Gross Domestic Product as a
check. This can be looked at as a combination of inflation plus real growth.
It is better than an inflation target alone, because how fast the economy is
growing sheds some light on likely inflationary pressures - or the absence
of them - some time ahead. A Nominal GDP guideline also gives headroom for a
little more growth, if inflation continues to come in at rates lower than
expected, and would support a further tightening if inflationary pressures
build up unexpectedly.
To summarise: the US needs a further rise of 1-2 percentage points in
short-term interest rates. The process should be halted or reversed if the
growth of US GDP falls in nominal terms much below 5 per cent, but
intensified if it rises much above 6 per cent. Need I say that I am talking
about trends and not quarter-to-quarter vagaries of the national income
figures?
By the same criteria, German monetary policy needs to be loosened further,
especially if a forward rather than backward-looking view of inflation is
taken in estimating both real interest rates and Nominal GDP. In Japan
short-term real interest rates seem below 1 per cent if measured by consumer
prices; but they are a good deal higher if related to producer prices, which
have fallen by more than 2 per cent in the past year. All three countries
are moving in the right direction, but too slowly and too late - with
Germany lagging a good deal more than the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940414

