FT941-12783

FT  28 JAN 94 / Arts: Verdi's Messa da Requiem - Concert


   By DAVID MURRAY


We had a good, sound Verdi Requiem from the Royal Philharmonic in the
Festival Hall on Tuesday, much enhanced by the visiting Italians, the
conductor and three members of his solo quartet: all young, and all at the
outsets of their careers.
So was the Puerto Rican tenor Cesar Hernandez, though he sounded hampered by
something like a slight cold. His baritonal timbre was satisfyingly firm and
fibrous (there is no statutory requirement for a tenore di grazia in this
work), but he shaped his heroic rising phrases like someone confident of
attaining a bright, ringing top - which he never quite did. It remained
clouded, and often fractionally below pitch: never unpleasant, but not
thrilling either. I look forward to hearing him on a healthier night.
The solo bass was the 20-year-old Simone Alberghini, manifestly both
well-schooled and full-voiced. No doubt it will take him some years yet to
stamp the intended character upon the voice itself, beyond the vocal
surface-effects; nevertheless everything he did was both tasteful and
telling. The conductor Paolo Olmi, displaying the kind of deportment and
stylised gestures that one associates with an older generation, took us
through the score honestly, without tricks (instead of ear-shattering
thwacks from the bass drum in the 'Dies irae', we got most carefully
modulated punctuation) but with fine, unhesitating fluency.
The Brighton Festival Chorus and London Choral Society were unanimous and
sonorous, though their well-crunched consonants were better than their dull
British vowels. In this work there is really no substitute for open,
Italianate vowels, though the texts are in medieval Latin. It was left to
the women soloists to supply the essential dramatic feeling: breathless,
nervily elevated intensity from the soprano Norma Fantini, against the dark,
well-sculpted line of Luciana D'Intino's mezzo.
We should have heard Miss D'Intino in the recent Berlioz Troyens at the
Barbican (happy though we were with her last-minute replacement, Markella
Hatziano); here in Verdi, her lively maturity and judicious poise suggested
the noble Dido she might have given us.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940128

