FT942-14744

FT  19 APR 94 / Leading Article: Dependence


The governor of the Bank of France enjoys monetary policy autonomy, but his
freedom of manoeuvre is painfully narrow. Since the central bank was allowed
to set interest rates independently of the government at the end of last
year, Mr Jean-Claude Trichet and his colleagues have reduced cuts in
short-term French rates to a trickle. The constraints were underlined by
yesterday's decision to keep the bank's money market intervention rate
unchanged, in spite of Thursday's  1/4 point reduction in the Bundesbank's
interest rates.
As a reward for caution, the bank can point to a partial decoupling of
French capital market yields from those in the US. After yesterday's Federal
Reserve tightening, cuts in short-term European interest rates may however
peter out before too long. That would leave French monetary policy at the
mercy of potentially adverse interest rate moves in the US and Germany at a
time of possible strain within Mr Edouard Balladur's government in advance
of the May 1995 presidential elections.
The Bank of France argues that the present mix of short- and long-term
interest rates is the best available in the unfavourable international
circumstances. In view of the importance of long-term interest rates for
French housing finance, there is a more pressing need than in Britain to
maintain low bond rates. However, long-term French yields, although up by
less than in the US, have risen by nearly 1.2 points since late 1993. With
French inflation down to only 1.5 per cent, real interest rates, long- and
short-term, are far too high to support self-sustaining recovery.
One reason for Bank of France prudence lies in the build-up of FFr1,200bn in
non-resident holdings of franc-denominated securities. Any attempt to cut
rates faster than the Bundesbank, it fears, could provoke a bond market
sell-off. However, the Balladur government's fiscal measures to counter 12.5
per cent unemployment are already adding to bond market worries about the
rising structural budget deficit. Long-term fiscal disarray will spell the
end to France's dreams of European monetary union. Yet the longer sluggish
French growth lasts, the more unpalatable will be the measures needed to
reduce the budget deficit to the Maastricht target of 3 per cent of GDP.
France's best hope is that it will be able to follow more inch-by-inch
Bundesbank cuts in coming months. If Germany starts to show firm signs of
economic recovery ahead of France, tighter interest rates in both New York
and Frankfurt later this year could subject French monetary policy to an
increasingly cruel test.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940419

