FT941-5485

FT  05 MAR 94 / Despatches: Confucius or convenience? - Asian leaders say
their ideology must be taken seriously by the west, but critics say the
philosophy is cynically self-serving


   By VICTOR MALLET


   BANGKOK


Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad has asked Malaysians not to accept
western-style democracy as it could result in negative effects. The prime
minister said such an extreme principle had caused moral decay, homosexual
activities, single parents and economic slowdown because of poor work
ethics.
 - Voice of Malaysia radio 29 May 1993
A resurgent Asia is spurning the dogma of western liberalism and forging for
itself a new and improved set of political and social beliefs, if we are to
believe east Asian leaders such as Dr Mahathir, the Malaysian prime
minister.
Trumpeted across the region as 'The Asian Way', this emerging ideology is
loosely based on the teachings of Confucius, who championed family values
and respect for authority 2,500 years before John Major. Not all supporters
of the Asian way claim that democracy makes you decadent and gay, but they
reject many of the western liberal democratic ideas that seemed poised to
dominate the world after the collapse of European communism in the 1980s.
In speeches and newspaper columns throughout Asia, the neo-Confucianists
argue that authoritarian governments such as China's are acceptable, even
essential, because discipline is necessary to bring prosperity to developing
countries. Full democracy as understood in the west would lead to chaos.
Freedom of expression is undesirable, the argument continues, because it
encourages instability and could provoke conflict between ethnic groups. The
rights of individuals must be respected only insofar as they do not impinge
on the greater rights of the community as a whole; in Asia, says Anwar
Ibrahim, Mahathir's deputy, there is none of the 'corrosive individualism'
found in the west.
The Asian way is pragmatic. Asians reach agreement by consensus, rather than
through the open and sometimes damaging confrontation of opposing views
favoured in the west. The Asian way is applicable in domestic politics, in
foreign policy and in business, and it should be accepted by the west; the
west should stop arrogantly trying to impose inappropriate western standards
of human rights, democracy and environmental protection on Asia, especially
since Asia is on the rise and the west is declining as the 'Pacific century'
approaches.
International British businesses are by now painfully aware of their
country's new-found notoriety as an offender against the Asian way.
First the British government angered Beijing with its attempts to introduce
a limited democracy to Hong Kong before the colony was absorbed by China in
1997. Now the British press has offended Malaysia by investigating
allegations of corruption and mismanagement involving British companies and
the governments of both countries.
The recent popularisation of the Asian way doctrine has been assured by the
economic success and resulting boost to the self-confidence of authoritarian
east Asian governments. Perhaps it was not surprising that Mahathir should
use an economic weapon to punish the British, barring British companies from
Malaysian government contracts and depriving them of up to Pounds 4bn of
expected business.
Already the Asian way (or its local variants: the 'Thai way', the
'Indonesian way' and so on) is a phrase blithely used by diplomats,
businessmen and politicians - Asian and western - to explain anything about
Asia they do not understand or do not want to discuss further, including
corruption.
But does the Asian way really exist as something separate? Do ordinary
Asians believe in it?
Leave aside for a moment the obvious objection that Indian democracy and
Vietnamese communism, Thai corruption and Singaporean government
incorruptibility, Malaysia's controlled media and the Philippines' free
press, are all 'Asian' but all as different from each other as chalk from
cheese.
Consider instead whether the philosophy can shed any light on the present
confrontation between Britain and Malaysia, whose government vigorously
promotes the Asian way and bitterly resents what it sees as the racism and
arrogance of the west.
'We believe the foreign media must learn the fact that developing countries,
including a country led by a brown Moslem, have the ability to manage their
own affairs successfully,' said Anwar in announcing the sanctions against
Britain.
If Asia was indeed the scene of a clash between western and Asian values,
one would expect to find the westerners ranged on one side and the Asians on
the other.
The reality is that the British and Malaysian governments, and British and
Malaysian big businesses, are united in their horror at the substance and
impact of the revelations by the British media: so far, these show that
there was a link between Pounds 234m in British aid for the Pergau
hydroelectric dam in Malaysia and a Pounds 1bn package of British arms
sales, and that the dam project was uneconomic and therefore harmful to
British taxpayers and Malaysian electricity consumers alike; they also
allege that British companies were prepared to bribe Malaysian officials,
including Mahathir.
Just as there are illiberal Britons who agree with Mahathir that such
reports should never have been published, so there are many liberal
Malaysians who would like a free press and who believe that corruption
charges should be investigated. Lim Kit Siang, the Malaysian opposition
leader, said the sanctions would be seen as 'an attempt at a cover-up' and
as 'self-serving'.
The philosophy of the Asian way is used to justify not only the existence of
relatively benign Asian governments such as Malaysia's - dubbed 'soft
authoritarianism' by political scientists - but also the repressive actions
of anti-democratic groups such as the Burmese junta. Its soldiers killed
hundreds of civilians, and it refused to accept the results of an election
in which its opponents won four-fifths of the seats.
This has given rise to suspicions among Asian liberals that the Asian way is
a pretext for existing Asian governments to stay in power rather than a
coherent ideology to explain the supposedly unique social and political
values of Asian people.
To some Asians, a 'consensus' merely means the view of whoever is in charge.
For every Asian who attributes success in, say, Singapore, to
authoritarianism, it is possible to find another who attributes failure in,
say, Burma, to the same thing.
The favourite butt of Asian authoritarians such as Lee Kuan Yew, the
Singaporean leader and father-figure of neo-Confucianism, is the
Philippines, where the undoubtedly unproductive bickering and lobbying of
US-style democracy is regarded as the reason for the country's inability to
match the economic performance of its south-east Asian neighbours.
But Filipino democrats protest that 13 years of dictatorship by the late
Ferdinand Marcos ruined their country. When Lee told Filipino businessmen
that they needed discipline more than democracy, president Fidel Ramos
replied: 'This prescription fails to consider our ill-fated flirtation with
authoritarianism not so long ago.'
One of the main weaknesses of the Asian way is that it is often portrayed as
a reaction to western liberalism rather than a set of ideas in its own
right. This is particularly true in Malaysia, where British colonialism
seems to have left deep scars. It was the Malaysians who brought up the
subject of 'brown Moslem' leadership in the dispute with Britain; the
British press was more interested in corruption and in the lies told by the
British government. Even Singaporeans, who better appreciate their
dependence on western markets and a western defence umbrella, see the Asian
way principally as an antidote to decadent western values.
Most of the supposedly 'Asian' values - hard work, strong families, home
ownership, and morality, to name but four quoted by Tommy Koh, a Singapore
academic and columnist - would in any case be regarded as unexceptionable by
John Major. So supporters of the Asian way resort to wilful exaggeration of
the west's (very real) social problems, while underplaying their own
(equally real) difficulties as their countries are transformed at breakneck
speed from agrarian to industrial societies. Typically, the narrowest
western liberal attitude towards the world - every country must have
one-person-one-vote democracy immediately - is set up as a man of straw and
knocked down as impractical.
It is instructive to see what the proponents of the Asian way have not done.
They have rarely suggested new, 'Asian' forms of 'consensus' government;
instead they have usually adapted or distorted western or communist systems
to their own ends, raising the question: if Asian authoritarianism is such a
good idea, why pretend to be democratic? Academics have spent many happy
hours pondering the way in which the governments of Singapore and Malaysia
use democratic systems but become agitated - punishing offending
constituencies - when their opponents win too many votes.
References to culture and civilisation, apart from the occasional token
gesture, are also often curiously absent in the new official Asian thinking.
Ask an Asian government minister about progress and achievement, and nine
times out of 10 he will tell you by how many per cent the gross domestic
product of his country has risen in the past year: western materialism at
its worst, some might say.
'A strong economy is a precondition for domestic health, military strength
and global influence,' wrote Morton Abramowitz of the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, in a recent article* casting doubt on the notion of the
Pacific Century. 'But in an interdependent world, those that aspire to lend
their name to centuries must also have political strengths and value systems
that enable them to project influence persuasively.'
Many Asians agree, including a group of academics, bankers and former
ministers who recently produced a report called 'Towards a New Asia'; it
advocated democracy within the rule of law and, while paying tribute to the
importance of economic growth, suggested that Asia should 'move to higher
ground' and 'become a greater contributor to the advancement of human
civilisation'.
Ironically the very economic growth which the authoritarians have used to
justify their rule is rapidly creating an educated Asian middle class whose
members do care about such supposedly 'western' notions as individual rights
and press freedoms, and who are prepared to protest publicly against
government corruption, incompetence and authoritarianism. In recent years
such democratisation has been visible in South Korea, Taiwan and Japan; and
if the free market is a form of liberalism, then liberalism is visible all
over Asia. The democratic uprising against the armed forces in Thailand in
1992, in which about 50 people were killed, became famous for the number of
mobile telephones carried by the pro-democracy demonstrators.
Such people understand how quickly the world is becoming inter-dependent.
Whereas Malaysian politicians tend to say that western companies are 'taking
advantage' of Malaysian economic success, the fact is that both sides are
profiting from each other. Malaysia depends heavily on western education and
on western and Japanese technology for its success. Asian countries,
furthermore, are becoming so rich and successful that many Asian companies
have started to invest in the west in the same way that western companies
have for years invested in them.
Of course Asians are different from Europeans, but then the Thais are
different from the Vietnamese, and the French from the English. To talk
defensively of the Asian way is no substitute for vigorous public debate
(forbidden in much of the region) about the challenges confronting
authoritarian Asia: political successions, the gap between rich and poor,
population growth, and the environmental devastation which threatens to
undermine the very basis for future development. Orientalism - the practice
of depicting eastern civilisations as mysteriously alien and subject to
special treatment - is no more fitting for modern Asian rulers seeking to
protect their fiefdoms than it was for the European colonialists of the
past.
* Pacific Century: Myth or Reality?. Morton Abramowitz, Contemporary
Southeast Asia, Vol. 15, No. 3, Dec 1993, Institute of Southeast Asian
Studies, Singapore.

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940305

