FT941-4068

FT  12 MAR 94 / Equestrianism: Enter the aristocrats


   By LYNN WILSON


Seven aristocratic visitors from the east are currently stretching their
legs in the green shoots of the Russian Horse Society's paddocks at Epsom,
in Surrey.
Four stallions and three mares of the rare Caspian breed of horse arrived in
the UK on February 22 at the end of a journey which took them by truck from
Tehran, through Azerbaijan and Georgia, across the Caucasus mountains, and
through the Ukraine to Brest in Belarus, where they were quarantined before
continuing to England.
Their arrival is a milestone in the history of the breed.
The Caspian, believed extinct, was rediscovered almost 30 years ago by
Louise Firouz, an American married and settled in Iran. It was first
imported to Britain in the early 1970s.
Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, was given a stallion and a mare by
Firouz, forming part of the UK's foundation stock for these stylish horses,
acknowledged now to be one of the oldest breeds in the world and a
forerunner of the Arab.
Approximately 19 horses were imported from 1971 until the revolution in 1977
stopped exports and dispersed existing stocks in Iran.
Their discovery has a fairy-tale ring. Firouz had been searching for mounts
for younger pupils at her riding school and discovered a small bay stallion,
perfectly proportioned, in a village on the shores of the Caspian sea.
Further sorties uncovered more horses, their diminutive, fine-boned bodies
contrasting sharply with the heavier, coarser Mongolian and Turkoman horses
of the area.
The Caspians proved perfect school horses, popular with parents and pupils,
encouraging Firouz to research and foster the breed. By the late 1970s she
held a herd of 200 horses, only to be dispersed and almost lost in the
revolution.
The second revival of the breed in Iran owes much to the chance discovery of
a handful of Caspians in a barn of more than 1,000 horses being sold off by
the Revolutionary Guard in 1989.
The Caspian stands between 10.3 and 12.3 hands, with an Arab-type head,
slender limbs and fine, silky coat.
They are intelligent gentle, move with elegance and panache and are equally
at home under saddle, in harness or on lead-rein.
Their disposition makes them ideal children's mounts, particularly fond of
jumping, but they are also extremely successful as driving horses, proving
themselves genuine all-rounders that the whole family can enjoy.
The UK has approximately 260 registered Caspians, spread throughout six
large studs and numerous smaller operations. There are also studs in
Australasia and the US.
Two of the new arrivals are currently in quarantine in Epsom before going to
the US to augment the bloodlines of foundation stock.
Meanwhile, their companions can breathe easy and deep in the security of the
English countryside, a far cry from a rolling truckride across Russia.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940312

