FT943-12870

FT  22 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Subsidised elegance - but can you
bank on it?


   From Mr DAVID SAWERS


Sir, it is obvious that Clement Crisp considers that one purpose of
government subsidies to the arts is to foster gracious living ('The decline
and fall of elegance', July 18). But if the objective is to ensure that the
audience at the Royal Opera House is dressed in a style that is appropriate
to the faded elegance of that Victorian building, surely it would be
inefficient to give the management of the opera house a larger subsidy:
experience suggests that it would spend the extra money on more lavish
productions rather than cheaper seats, or fewer sales of drink and food.
Subsidies to the audience are more efficient than subsidies to the managers,
and in this case they should be related to the audience's dress. The Royal
Opera House, and other theatres, should be awarded additional subsidies so
that they can offer discounts on ticket prices to those who guarantee to
attend in appropriate clothes.
Such discounts could be graded to the standard of dress worn - say 25 per
cent off for evening dress and 15 per cent for suit and tie, with special
discounts for those who wear clothes from a list of designated tailors and
designers.
The National Lottery would be the obvious source of funds for such
additional subsidies. What would be more appropriate than to take money from
the proletarians who are likely to be the biggest users of the lottery,
because they are too thick to calculate the odds against winning, and give
it to those people who appreciate the finer things in life. It is, after
all, the principle behind the government's existing plans to use revenue
from the lottery to increase its support for the arts.
David Sawers,
Crosby,
10 Seaview Avenue,
Angmering-on-Sea,
Littlehampton,
West Sussex BN16 1PP
From Mr Malcolm London.
Sir, Re discussion on 'The decline and fall of elegance', the governor of
the Bank of England, Eddie George, is photographed (July 19) emerging from a
meeting on Monday with the chancellor of the exchequer at 11 Downing Street,
wearing a blazer and flannels. Next week, shorts and an Hawaiian shirt?
Malcolm London,
St Andrew's House,
20 st Andrew Street,
London EC4A 3AD

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940722

