FT943-912

FT  27 SEP 94 / Leading Article: The state of the presidency


When the outsider Bill Clinton won the 1992 US presidential election,
pundits most commonly attributed his victory to two things. On the one hand,
there was a hostility in the country at large to political incumbents in
general and to the Washington establishment in particular. On the other, Mr
Clinton was seen as promising solutions to America's lengthening list of
domestic problems - an agenda almost wilfully neglected by his predecessor
George Bush, who made no effort to conceal his much greater interest in
foreign affairs.
It thus seems cruel that the Clinton presidency should have arrived at its
current pass. Nearly two years on, Mr Clinton is suffering from the same,
sour, anti-Washington mood that produced Ross Perot and brought the
president his wafer-thin victory, with polls suggesting that the
congressional mid-term elections in November will create a Republican
majority in one or both houses of Congress. He has failed to deliver on the
most important element of his domestic agenda: healthcare reform will
certainly not pass this year, and may be doomed next as well.
Worse, the administration is mired in a foreign policy adventure, in Haiti,
whose outcome is at best uncertain and at worst disastrous. With such a
record, it is tempting to conclude that the presidency is already mortally
wounded, and that Mr Clinton himself bears most of the blame.
Tempting, but premature. For Mr Clinton's problems, though undoubtedly
daunting and certainly exacerbated by his own indecisiveness and naivete,
reflect more than the failings of one man. They testify to the uncertain
state of the nation he governs - anxious about its perceived social and
economic ills despite a robust economic recovery; divided about how to cure
those ailments; undecided about its place in the world.
Forgotten successes
The collapse of healthcare reform is not only a failure by Mr - or Mrs -
Clinton: it reflects a paralysis of the US's entire body politic, which when
asked to tackle the biggest issues seizes up or succumbs to a multitude of
high-spending interest groups. Mr Clinton scored some notable and easily
forgotten successes in his administration's first year: on the budget and on
north American free trade. But now - on crime, on trade, even on badly
needed reform of America's outmoded telecommunications regime - Congress
seems to experience the greatest difficulty in passing coherent or
constructive laws.
Likewise in foreign policy. Mr Clinton may be having trouble formulating a
clear view of his country's international role, or in consistently applying
principles once formulated, or in showing resolve under pressure. But in all
this he is not alone. At a time when the US has emerged as the world's only
superpower and is being asked by the rest of the world to take on
commensurate responsibilities, Americans are probably more divided about
whether, and how, to do so than at any time since world war two.
Simplistic postures
In the face of a public turning increasingly towards isolationism, Mr
Clinton has on occasion shown admirable willingness to plead the cause of
international engagement, notably in persevering with the Uruguay round of
multilateral trade negotiations. But his ability to pursue a consistent or
coherent foreign policy remains strictly circumscribed: by the simplistic
postures often struck in Congress on such issues as Bosnia; by his own need
to shore up his position among such domestic constituencies as Irish
Americans and Cuban exiles; by his past insistence on giving precedence to
domestic over international issues. It is not at all clear that any of Mr
Clinton's often vicious assailants would fare better in similar political
circumstances.
The truth is that the post-cold-war world presents challenges of a similar
order to those that broke Woodrow Wilson and underlined Franklin D.
Roosevelt's greatness. Mr Clinton is more a Wilson than a Roosevelt, and his
country's mood more akin to 1919 than 1945. America's allies should resist
the temptation to gloat or to wring their hands. Instead, they should
concentrate on damage limitation - seeking to engage America in multilateral
forums and actions wherever possible, and doing nothing that might turn the
country further in on itself.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940927

