FT941-12951

FT  27 JAN 94 / Markets Report: Profit-takers chip at Pounds


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Technical factors caused sterling to lose ground yesterday during London
trading, but analysts said it remained underpinned by sound economic
fundamentals, writes Philip Gawith.
Against the background of another quiet day in the markets, the pound
weakened against the D-Mark on profit-taking following the currency's recent
failure to break through the DM2.62 level. It also ended lower against the
dollar.
The atmosphere in the markets was likened to a 'phoney war', with currencies
trading in fairly narrow ranges awaiting fresh information to give them
renewed impetus. The relative weakness of the D-Mark continued to trigger
some activity, particularly in European currencies, with the Portuguese
authorities yesterday following the example of the Spanish and Belgian
central banks in announcing a rate cut.
The yen remained fairly stable yesterday following the apparent breakdown of
trade talks between the US and Japan. The Japanese currency finished in
London at Y110.420 to the dollar, up from Tuesday's close of Y111.155. It
ended New York trading at Y110.09.
Mr Gerard Lyons, chief economist at DKB International, said: 'The yen is
remaining well underpinned despite the political and economic uncertainty.
The market perceives the Japanese political situation as indicating the US
authorities wanting to keep the yen firm.' Economic and political
uncertainty normally undermine a currency, but in this case a firmer yen is
seen as assisting the US in achieving its aim of narrowing the trade deficit
with Japan.
Earlier the dollar had weakened during Japanese trading following reports
that Mr Fred Bergsten, director of the US think-tank, the Institute for
International Economics (IIE), would revise his target range for the dollar
to Y90 to Y110 from Y100 to Y110. Dealers said Mr Bergsten was believed to
have considerable influence in US government circles.
Others questioned the logic that had taken the US currency lower, saying a
dollar around Y90 to Y100 would not be good either for Japan or the world
economy. It was noted also that the US Federal Reserve intervened last
August to support the dollar when it weakened towards Y100.
Mr Lyons said that while he still regarded the yen as a strong currency in
the longer term, there remained a short term risk if the Japanese
government's current political difficulties lead to an early election, which
would make the yen vulnerable.
Sterling fell against the dollar, closing in London at Dollars 1.4926, down
from Dollars 1.494 on Monday. It also declined nearly a pfennig to DM2.6089,
from Monday's DM2.6187.
Observers said the pound appeared to have run out of steam, having
appreciated steadily against both currencies in recent weeks. That it has
not retreated further was due to underlying bullish sentiment, based on a
raft of recent figures indicating solid economic growth with little
inflationary threat.
Analysts said it was unlikely that yesterday's decline by the pound
reflected concern about the government's political weakness. Mr Steve
Barrow, economist at Chemical Bank, commented: 'The political factors have
been here for quiet a while, and if they were going to have any bearing they
would probably have done so a few weeks ago.'
The newly independent Bank of France will be in the spotlight today as its
monetary council meets again. The bank will be setting monetary targets for
1994, but more attention will focus on whether it is prepared to ease
monetary policy independently of a Bundesbank lead. Although underlying
economic conditions are thought to support a rate cut, it is not expected.
Most observers anticipate that the bank will not want to compromise its
credibility with an early monetary easing. Mr Barrow said: 'The bank is
still finding its feet as far as monetary policy is concerned. It would run
the risk of losing its credibility before it was even gained if it is seen
so soon doing something different from its predecessor.' The French franc
closed slightly easier against the D-Mark at FFr3.393, after Monday's
FFr3.390.
The D-Mark was generally higher in European trading. Hopes of lower interest
rates declined in spite of encouraging inflation figures, because of the
prospect of poor German M3 money supply data for December and the recent
weakness of the currency.
Bundesbank deputy president Mr Johann Wilhelm Gaddum said German money
supply growth will miss the Bundesbank's 6.5 per cent target ceiling in
December, a judgment endorsed by Mr Otmar Issing, another Bundesbank board
member. The D-Mark closed at DM1.7480 to the dollar, up from DM1.7528 on
Tuesday. In New York it finished at DM1.7450.
The Bank of Portugal cut its regular intervention rates by  1/4 percentage
point to 9.50 per cent yesterday. The rate cut initially prompted a strong
move ahead in the escudo, but later in European trading it returned back to
levels seen late on Tuesday of around Es100.36-41 to the D-Mark.
The Bank of England yesterday provided late assistance of about Pounds 420m
in its daily money market operations. It had earlier provided the market
with Pounds 219m of assistance at the established rate of 5 3/8 per cent.
The early forecast of a shortage of Pounds 950m was later revised to about
Pounds 800m.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

940127

