FT941-4099

FT  12 MAR 94 / The Long View: Taxing the Titanic


   By BARRY RILEY


Like other British financial columnists this spring I am suffering from what
might be called Budget deprivation - the absence of the mad March annual
publicity-grabbing exercise by the chancellor which has been transferred to
November. We are left glumly to ponder how badly demand in the economy will
be affected when the impact of the pre-programmed tax rises begins to be
felt next month.
A talk to the Confedration of British Industry this week by Stephen Dorrell,
one of the junior Treasury ministers, on his review of savings and the flow
of funds through the economy, was not exactly a substitute for a meaty red
dispatch box exercise. Nevertheless there were some fascinating pointers to
the way the Treasury views its functions and how politics and economics
become tangled.
In a thoughtful talk, Dorrell could not resist remarks such as 'savings are
the life blood of the economy'. Well, the political spin is nearly always
that savings are virtuous but consumption is self-indulgent and
shortsighted. The irony is that the Treasury, in its macroeconomic rather
than microeconomic mode, is gambling that a drop in savings next year will
offset the extra taxes it is loading on the economy.
If consumers insist on tightening their belts, rather than raiding their
piggy banks, the growth rate of the economy will falter, the higher tax
revenues forecast for 1994-95 will fail to materialise, and interest rates
may have to go up to maintain confidence in sterling and in the government's
ability to finance its deficit smoothly.
The idea that savings might be not so much the life blood as the cholesterol
of the economy was a foundation of Keynesian theories in the 1920s and
1930s. The private sector might decide to save too much to maintain full
employment. If there were too many misers their depressing influence might
need to be offset by some public sector spendthrifts. Spend now, tax later.
Trouble was, politicians tended to forget the second part of the formula, or
at any rate they replaced it with the modified version 'inflate later'.
The private sector of the economy has been saving on a massive scale
recently, in an attempt to reduce the debt burden it acquired in the late
1980s. The personal sector has been in massive financial surplus for a
couple of years now, and the company sector turned itself around during
1993, so that in the third quarter of last year the combined private sector
surplus was running at about 6 per cent of gdp. The public sector was forced
to dissave in order to prevent an economic collapse; hence the nervousness
about its efforts to pass part of the parcel back again by reducing the
deficit.
The personal savings ratio jumped from 7.2 per cent in 1989 to 12.6 per cent
in 1992, and it is generally forecast to fall back below 10 per cent by next
year. At this level it would be slightly below the international norm, but
well above the notoriously low US figure of about 4 per cent (although the
definitions vary).
Of course, politicians do not say that people should save less. They do not
eliminate tax shelters such as Peps, and indeed there is some logic in that
because these are long-term incentives and should not be imperilled by
temporary problems. Cutting short-term interest rates is the most common and
effective means of hitting savings. Again, this is not expressed directly,
and other reasons for changes tend to be given. Relative to the inflation
rate, however, short-term interest rates are not particularly low and,
ironically, the cut in mortgage interest relief coming next month will have
the opposite effect of discouraging borrowing and thus of boosting the
saving ratio.
But, although saving remains comparatively high, the really odd thing about
the British economy is that consumption is high too. We are living beyond
our means as a nation, with an external current account deficit of Pounds
10bn or more. Government consumption is offsetting private sector frugality.
The way back to external balance is through more saving and investment. But
that would cause a collapse in government revenues. Stand by for a tricky
balancing act.
The Dorrell review, however, appears to be mainly about the microeconomic
aspects of savings and investment flows: whether pension funds are too
greedy for dividends, for instance, or whether clearing banks are too
obsessed by the availability of collateral when financing small companies.
Perhaps the government is struggling to develop some kind of philosophy,
after Norman Lamont suddenly imposed what amounted to an extra tax on
company dividends in the final spring Budget 12 months ago. The reasoning
behind that has never been explained, except to the extent that the move
raised a significant amount of new tax revenue.
There may be an attempt to dump some Thatcherite baggage. The Thatcher
government originally had some clear dogmatic objectives, such as levelling
various playing-fields including those relating to the taxes on dividends
and debt and the taxes on personal income and capital gains. Market forces
were to be supreme. But eventually the clarity became buried beneath an
accretion of Peps, Tessas and Business Expansion Schemes.
Stephen Dorrell appeared to offer little in the way of principles, just a
series of questions about whether maybe the UK should seek to channel
resources to a British recreation of the German Mittelstand, or medium-sized
manufacturers, and whether British companies pay out too much in dividends.
Was that the reason, perhaps, for the dividend tax changes a year ago?
But we are going over some very old ground, albeit beloved by meddlesome
politicians. Changing the tax allowances on the Titanic will not provide
much protection against icebergs, or even medium-sized U-boats. Enough of
reviews, roll on the next Budget.

The Financial Times


London Page I

940312

