FT941-17170

FT  06 JAN 94 / Cambodian offensive planned


   By IAIN SIMPSON


   PHNOM PENH


Senior Cambodian generals say they are preparing their forces for an
offensive against the Khmer Rouge but they concede their intention is a
propaganda victory rather than a military one.
At least 20 soldiers have been killed and 60 injured in sporadic clashes
between government and Khmer Rouge forces in western Cambodia since New
Year's Day, but it is not clear what strategic gains, if any, have been made
by either side.
Diplomats in Phnom Penh believe the government is eager to hold peace talks
with the Khmer Rouge but say the national army wants to show it is ready to
fight if necessary.
Progress towards talks between the two sides has been painfully slow, held
up at every step by haggling over conditions. The Khmer Rouge has said it
will only hold talks with no pre-conditions. This has in turn become a
serious stumbling block because the government wants to see a clear
commitment to a ceasefire before it is willing to negotiate.
Informal contacts have already taken place, notably on December 17 when the
senior prime minister, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, met the nominal leader of
the Khmer Rouge, Khieu Samphan. However, Prince Ranariddh and his officials
have since been eager to point out that these were 'just talks, not
negotiations'.
As if to prove the point, a week after the meeting, government forces
launched what senior generals have been calling a 'Christmas offensive'. So
far there has been no sign of large-scale fighting, only skirmishes.
This is the time of year when fighting has traditionally started in
Cambodia's long civil war. The beginning of the dry season brings relief for
both sides from the muddy roads and impassable terrain of the monsoon rains.
The government side, which has a collection of ancient tanks and armoured
personnel carriers, is able to use them, as well as moving its heavy
artillery into position.
According to one general in western Cambodia, the order to launch the
Christmas offensive was accompanied by a warning that this was designed to
'put pressure on the DK (Khmer Rouge) for talks, not to ensure a military
victory'. In any case, he said, the government side was so short of arms and
ammunition it could not sustain a big offensive for more than a few days at
a time.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940106

