FT943-12829

FT  22 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Shoprite shares halve to 30p on warning -
'Disappointing' trading performance and store openings curtailed


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Shares in Shoprite, the Scottish discount food retailer, halved in value
yesterday after the group issued a profits warning and said it was 'severely
curtailing' its store opening programme for this year.
The statement - which came less than two months after the group revealed
half-year profits substantially below market expectations - knocked the
shares down from 60p to 30p. They reached a high of 243p in February.
Mr Charles Good, managing director for Scotland, said trading had remained
'extremely difficult' since the interim announcement, and sales had not
reached their anticipated levels.
'On the cost side we have made very big strides and our problems are not on
that front', he said. 'Margin management has also been good. The problem is
that our actual trading performance has been disappointing.'
As a result, profits for the year to October were expected to fall
'significantly short of expectations' given at the time of the interim
result, when Shoprite said they were likely to be about the same level as
last year.
Shoprite has also decided to reduce its opening programme for this year
strictly to those stores to which it is already committed, and expects to
open a further 24, taking the chain to 107. That will make 44 total openings
for the year compared with the 50-plus previously expected.
The group has also begun moves to dispose of its portfolio of non-core
assets, which have a book value of about Pounds 17m.
Mr Good said a marketing and promotion campaign designed to counter the
price-cutting initiatives of superstore rivals had been delayed but was
about to begin, and was expected to produce an uplift in sales.
Initiatives to cut overheads and improve margins through better product mix
and buying would continue, and the board had initiated a strategic review,
he added.
The group had also renegotiated its banking facilities following the failure
last month of a sale and leaseback deal on 11 of its stores on to a 'secured
and on demand basis' pending completion of the strategic review.
The company expected to begin negotiations for the provision of revised
facilities after the review.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

940722

