FT944-11144

FT  08 NOV 94 / World Trade News: Volume of N American air freight surges


   By REUTER


   TORONTO


The air freight sector in North America is experiencing one of the best
pre-Christmas peaks in recent memory, with most airlines or cargo agents
reporting rising volumes to and from North America, Reuter reports from
Toronto.
'There's just an explosion of world trade occurring, and cargo is reaching a
new plateau,' according to Mr Mike Canney, a senior cargo manager at
Singapore Airlines in Los Angeles.
The recovery has been mounting on most big North Atlantic and Pacific
routes, eastbound and westbound. Some analysts attribute the rise to the
paradox that North American economies are strong while their currencies are
weak, stimulating imports and exports. Others say world trade reforms and
the North American Free Trade Agreement have lowered trade barriers.
The strongest surge this autumn is in traffic from Europe. Pacific traffic
has been growing rapidly in the last two years, but capacity growth has
tended to keep pace and, as yet, there is no capacity squeeze. Autumn is the
peak period for air cargo in North America as stores stock up for Christmas
while airlines scale back flying schedules from the summer passenger travel
peak.
The industry has been full of talk of a capacity crunch, but airlines were
reluctant to raise capacity, especially using freighters, to avoid being
stuck with the cost of flying empty.
'The capacity that's there is basically the same as last year's peak,' said
Mr Jack Veracoechea, the New York-based vice-president of national accounts
for British Airways World Cargo.
He said BA had not experienced significant backlogs in the US but demand was
very strong for all US routes.
On the other hand, Toronto and Montreal, cities where freighter services
axed during the recession have not been replaced, are experiencing serious
delays this year.
Although Danzas of Canada, is a big global freighter, it has taken up to 20
days to move goods from Italy to Toronto. Mr George Kuhn, president of
Danzas (Canada), said that a lack of sufficient direct services between
Italy and Canada meant cargo was being trucked to Paris, Frankfurt or
Zurich, where it became backlogged.
Lufthansa, the world's leading carrier for international air freight, also
raised ex-Canada rates on November 1 by up to 8 per cent. Industry experts
said Lufthansa's move confirmed their belief that cargo rates - long
depressed by overcapacity - might keep inching up for some time.
Air France and British Airways are among others which have already
implemented similar rate rises from North America, and virtually all
airlines have raised rates to North America by 5 to 15 per cent in the last
six months.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941108

