FT942-14624

FT  19 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Gains reversed following Federal
Reserve move - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The recovery of confidence in the London stock market, extended in early
trading yesterday, was abruptly challenged when the British government bond
market collapsed after the US Federal Reserve moved to tighten interest
rates by a quarter of a point. Equities reversed their initial gains to
close with a fall of 30.1 on the FT-SE 100 Index, which moved through a 53
point range during the session.
There was no great rush to sell equities, although stock index futures
suffered heavily, with the June contract on the Footsie Index wiped off the
screens at one time, while the September contract quotation became a 'fast
market' - in which market makers are not obliged to deal at quoted prices.
Once the shock was over, equity strategists expressed surprise at the
market's violent reaction to a move by the Federal Reserve which has been
widely predicted; many US strategists have warned that Federal Funds rate
was likely to be raised before the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
The FT-SE Index closed virtually at the day's low, its 30.1 point fall
taking it to 3,138.2, with the important support level of 3,150 brushed
aside. London's dismay deepened as Wall Street opened lower before rallying
to show a 27 point loss in London trading hours; New York bonds and equities
resumed their downturn after the UK market closed.
The setback in UK stocks was all the more disturbing for traders because, in
the early past of the session, the market had shown significant confidence
in prospects for a base rate cut in the very near future. A trading
programme worth nearly Pounds 60m was identified at mid-morning.
This was largely based on Friday's disclosure that domestic inflation has
remained low, but was buttressed by further economic data published
yesterday.
The latest survey of opinion in the distributive industry from the
Confederation of British Industries indicated that retail sales had slowed
last month. Official statistics showed that UK producer prices had risen by
only 0.1 per cent in March, below expectations.
Both reports raised hopes in the market that base rates might be cut quickly
in order to foster economic recovery. Market analysts believe that the
decision to cut rates could come this week, if the March retail sales
statistics, due on Thursday, show further weakness.
These views took the Footsie ahead by 23 points in early deals, although
this gain was soon clipped back when bond markets across Europe began to
soften as the US dollar eased. But London was still some 10 points up when
news of the Federal Reserve move flashed across the trading screens in
London.
In spite of the day's setback, analysts were hopeful that the UK market
could remain firm - but only if global bond markets can hold safely
establish themselves at new levels. Rumours of renewed heavy losses among
bond traders circulated yesterday.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index fell 10.6 to 3,814. Seaq volume increased sharply as
futures markets plunged, sparking off heavy arbitraging between stock index
contracts and the underlying stocks. But non Footsie stocks made up around
63 per cent of the day's total of 683.5m shares. On Friday, 698.8m shares
were traded, worth Pounds 1.32bn in retail business.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

940419

