FT942-16371

FT  11 APR 94 / Arts: Merchant of Venice - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Shylock and his office computer; Bassanio amid the champagne-swigging hooray
Henries; Launcelot Gobbo with his sandals and mug of coffee. . . Seeing The
Merchant of Venice relocated into the modern world, as it is in David
Thacker's RSC staging, is a very salutary shock. No Renaissance glamour
here, no glowing Venetian colours. This production, new last May in
Stratford and now at the Barbican, reminds us that Shakespeare's Venice is
simply a hub of finance and trade. It is here a very FT world, with city
gents busy at their screens.
The most distinguished such gent is Shylock. As David Calder plays him -
with great distinction, and with marvellously eloquent vocal tone - he is
the most civilised man in Venice. This Shylock only turns to usury and his
bond because the Christian gents keep brandishing their antisemitism in his
face. This highly tendentious reading smooths over the unpleasant fact that
Shylock stipulates a pound of Antonio's flesh in the very first scene we
meet him (Calder suggests this forfeit like a mere whim of fancy), and it
proposes that Shylock only starts to behave like an orthodox Jew because
everyone else insists on casting him as such. Shylock is more sinned against
than sinning.
As far as it goes in whitewashing Shylock, this production is very
satisfying. But it is better in satisfying our modern liberal instincts than
our knowledge of Shakespeare's play. The Belmont scenes - Portia, the
caskets, and the final act of lovers' reconciliations - become grey and
lightweight.
And Thacker is so pc that he edits out Portia's racist remark about the
Prince of Morocco's failure: 'Let all of his complexion choose me so'.
(There are other editorial alterations, too, mainly to help the new-look
Shylock.)
Calder's Shylock and Penny Downie's Portia have acquired a wealth of new
nuances. Too many, in fact. All of Calder's effects are individually
sensitive and intelligent, but I am now aware that some of them are just
that: effects. He pauses too long and too often. Downie has gained in
authority, but not in conviction or fluency.
One supporting role is brilliantly taken - the Launcelot Gobbo of
Christopher Luscombe, a ineffectual little chatterbox whose every silly word
becomes vivid, funny, and telling. The production is better spoken than
before; every word carries into the Barbican's difficult auditorium. But too
many of the supporting roles are weakly played. I cannot conceive why the
RSC is casting Mark Lewis Jones as Lorenzo. He speaks high-flying poetry
about moonlight, love and music, with a voice so tight and manner so tense
that he wrecks the scene.
This is still a bracing and exciting production. Of all the stagings that
will come from Stratford to London this year, this is the one I would most
urge people to see. It has changed my conception of Shylock and
Shakespeare's Venice. A shame that it affords only incomplete pleasure.
In repertory at the Barbican

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940411

