FT942-15515

FT  14 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Special deals dominate a weaker share
market - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A handful of special situations kept traders occupied in the London stock
market yesterday, and the broader range of equities was left to drift lower
behind a weakening government bond sector. The placing by Transamerica
International of its 21 per cent stake in Sedgwick Group, Britain's largest
insurance broker, boosted trading volume. Sedgwick and four other stocks
accounted for around 37 per cent of the day's total business in equities;
without these deals, it would have been a thinly-traded day.
Although firm at first, London succumbed to a general malaise in European
markets after the fixed repo tender in the German money markets brought only
a modest dip in rates, leaving investors to wait for news from the
Bundesbank's policy meeting this morning.
London flagged towards the close when Wall Street was 11 Dow points down
early in its new trading session. Statistics on US retail sales and consumer
prices, while favourably received, gave markets little encouragement.
At the final reading, the FT-SE 100 Share Index showed a fall of 13.3 at
3,145.8, virtually the low of the day. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index closed at
3,801.2 for a net fall of 7.1 as the second line stocks reacted to the
overall lack of support but without seeing much genuine investment activity.
The day's Seaq volume totalled 885m shares compared with 907.8m in the
previous session, when retail business was worth a healthy Pounds 1.87bn.
The lion's share of yesterday's volume figure consisted of 236m shares
traded in Sedgwick as Morgan Stanley and SG Warburg placed the share stake
they had taken aboard from Transamerica. The shares were placed successfully
with a range of institutions in a smoothly-handled operation.
Hints of an impending rights issue were confirmed when Lasmo, the oil
exploration and production group, called for Pounds 219m from shareholders.
The move had been predicted and the share price held up comfortably. Market
specialists believe that other rights issues from UK companies are waiting
in the pipeline and will be brought forward when market conditions are
judged appropriate.
Weakness among insurance stocks towards the end of the session bore down on
the Footsie since many of these are components of the index. Traders
believed that the dip in share prices reflected liquidation of a life
assurance sector investment fund. The rest of the blue chip sectors lacked
support. After rising sharply last week on revived optimism on crude oil
prices, oil shares extended the minor losses suffered in the previous
session. Pharmaceuticals gave little support to the market.
Strategists expressed some disappointment with the relatively weak
performance by UK equities yesterday. In particular, analysts pointed to the
inability of UK shares to escape the influence of British government bonds.
The immediate outlook for interest rates appears uncertain, with markets not
looking for too much from the Bundesbank today. At best, the stock market is
looking for a cut in the Bundesbank's Lombard Rate and will be pleasantly
surprised if the Discount rate is cut at this stage.
Kleinwort Benson Securities, the UK securities and investment house,
reiterated its belief that UK base rates will fall to 4.75 per cent by the
end of the year, although it judges the likelihood of 4.5 per cent rates to
have receded.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

940414

