FT942-14346

FT  20 APR 94 / International Company News: Pechiney to press on with
sell-off despite tumble


   By JOHN RIDDING


   PARIS


Pechiney, the French state-owned aluminium group, fell into a net loss of
FFr980m (Dollars 167m) last year, compared with a profit of FFr203m in 1992.
The group was hit by the depressed state of the aluminium market and an
exceptional charge to cover losses on forward purchases of metals.
In spite of the losses, Mr Jean Gandois, chairman, said he hoped the group
would be privatised this year, claiming that the conditions for the sale of
the company could be set this summer.
Mr Gandois saw signs of encouragement for 1994, pointing to improved
economic conditions in the US and Europe and a strengthening of aluminium
prices. 'Recovery to break-even for 1994 is within our reach,' the chairman
said.
Group sales, which fell to FFr63.03bn last year from FFr65.37bn in 1992, had
risen by between 9 and 10 per cent in the first two months of this year, he
said.
Pechiney is one of the 21 companies slated for privatisation by the
government. However, it is not on the list of the next three companies being
prepared for sale. Pechiney's privatisation has been complicated by its
earnings performance and by the government's desire to create an alliance
with Compagnie Nationale du Rhone, the hydroelectricity producer, before
privatising the group.
The plan has drawn opposition from Electricite de France, the state-owned
utility, which has a virtual monopoly on French electricity sales. As a
result, industry observers believe the project could be delayed.
According to Mr Gandois, the principal cause for the downturn in profits
last year lay in its aluminium operations, which suffered a loss of FFr302m,
compared with a profit of FFr621m last year. The reversal was blamed on the
fall in aluminium prices which declined by an average of about 9 per cent,
as a result of excess supply.
Losses from aluminium operations were exacerbated by an exceptional
provision of FFr298m. This resulted from what Mr Gandois described as a
management error in metals purchasing by American National Can, the US
subsidiary of Pechiney International, the packaging group which is 67 per
cent owned by Pechiney.
Pechiney said in December it would have to take provisions to cover ANC's
forward purchases of aluminium at prices well above market levels.
See Lex

The Financial Times


International Page 16

940420

