FT943-13092

FT  21 JUL 94 / Reclusive Kim acclaimed leader: Some fear eruption of power
struggle in North Korea


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


Mr Kim Jong-il was proclaimed as North Korea's new leader yesterday at a
memorial ceremony in Pyongyang for his father, the late president Kim
Il-sung.
The reclusive Mr Kim did not speak to the hundreds of thousands of people
that crowded into Kim Il-sung square, but Mr Kim Yong-nam, foreign minister,
led a group of officials who vowed support for the 52-year-old Dear Leader
and referred to him as 'head of state'.
Mr Kim is expected to assume the positions of general secretary of the
Korean Workers' Party and president after the party and parliament hold
formal sessions.
The new North Korean leader, dressed in a black suit and wearing a mourning
armband, looked haggard in the sweltering heat of Pyongyang as he gazed at
the grim-faced and weeping crowd.
The foreign minister refrained from criticising the US, in an indication
that the new leadership will continue the policy of reconciliation recently
pursued by the late president. The US hopes to resume talks with North Korea
in Geneva at the beginning of August in an attempt to resolve the dispute
over Pyongyang's nuclear programme, according to US officials.
The 75-minute ceremony, broadcast live to foreign countries, 'was meant to
send a message to the world that the situation in North Korea is stable and
that there will be no sudden changes in policy,' said Mr Michael Breen, an
analyst on North Korea for Seoul-based Merit Consultancy.
Nonetheless, other analysts suggest a power struggle is looming in
Pyongyang. They note that Ms Kim Song-ae, the president's widow who is
believed to oppose her stepson's assumption of power, had a prominent place
in the funeral services on Tuesday.
She advanced to 14th in the hierarchy at the funeral from a ranking of 104th
on the state funeral committee, which was announced last week. This could
indicate that her influence and that of the conservative old guard is
growing.
But Mr Kim Pyong-il, her natural son and a potential rival to his
stepbrother, was not mentioned as being present at the funeral.
The body of Mr Kim Il-sung is expected to be laid to rest temporarily at the
presidential palace to await completion of the Kim Il-sung memorial hall,
where he will go on permanent display in a glass coffin.
Meanwhile, South Korean President Kim Young-sam warned that radical students
who have held mourning ceremonies for the North Korean leader will face
harsh punishment.
'The government cannot continue to be so tolerant. The government will never
tolerate those students who blindly follow communism and indiscriminate
violence,' he said.
The South Korean government has claimed that leftist radicals are formenting
student and trade union unrest on instructions from Pyongyang.
The students can be prosecuted under the national security law, which
prohibits contacts with North Korea or expressions of sympathy for its
government. Mr Jose Ayala-Lasso, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, yesterday criticised the law after meeting officials in Seoul.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940721

