FT942-16205

FT  12 APR 94 / Poll row over council conduct


   By JAMES BLITZ and ROLAND RUDD


The Conservative and Labour parties were yesterday locked in bitter
recriminations over the conduct of local government as the campaigning for
next month's council elections hit a new level of intensity.
Tory party managers issued a sharp denunciation of Mr John Smith, the Labour
leader, arguing that he had ignored a string of 'appalling activities'
carried out by elected Labour officials in his Monklands constituency in
Strathclyde.
Mr Gerald Malone, Tory party deputy chairman, accused the council of
nepotism in its recruitment policies, bias in its allocation of capital
spending, and incurring huge losses in companies established to run its
services.
Mr Malone said: 'If Labour say nothing and do nothing, either in terms of
national politics or local government . . . then they will be condemned for
their record.'
The Conservatives came under attack as Labour unveiled another method of
examining the latest round of council tax levied by local authorities.
In recent weeks the Tory and Labour parties have looked for more and more
ingenious ways to show that they levy lower levels of council tax than their
rivals.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's environment spokesman, yesterday issued figures
claiming that, on average, Labour-controlled local authorities had increased
council tax by much smaller amounts than either the Conservatives or the
Liberal Democrats between 1993-94 and 1994-95.
He claimed that Labour councils had increased the Band D schedule of council
tax by an average of 1.2 per cent between those years. By contrast, the
Conservatives and Liberal Democrats had levied increases of 2.1 per cent and
5.7 per cent respectively.
The Liberal Democrats, meanwhile, concentrated their fire on the prime
minister, presenting evidence that large sections of the Tory party no
longer had any confidence in Mr John Major's leadership abilities.
They presented a dossier of about 60 quotes from leading Conservative
figures which they said derided the prime minister and showed that the
Conservatives were 'divided and leaderless'.
Mr Matthew Taylor, the Liberal Democrat campaign co-ordinator, said he would
focus on 'more positive' issues later in the local election campaign.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940412

