FT942-16121

FT  12 APR 94 / Ice packs form a useful buffer: The oil majors' Russian
venture


   By ROBERT CORZINE


The need to operate in extreme temperatures in some of the most desolate and
isolated areas of the world is an occupational hazard of the international
oil industry. Sometimes, however, such isolation has its advantages.
Yesterday three US oil majors, Texaco, Exxon and Amoco, along with Norsk
Hydro of Norway, announced a joint venture to assess and develop the oil
reserves of the vast Timan Pechora basin within European Russia's Arctic
Circle. Tens of billions of dollars will eventually be needed to develop the
reserves, which the companies conservatively put at 2bn barrels and which
Russian experts believe exceed 5bn barrels.
Texaco, which began studying the region in 1990, acknowledged that the
project posed an 'enormous logistical challenge' in an area that Mr Peter
Bijur, senior vice-president, described as 'desolate, cold tundra'.
The proposed sea terminal - the first in arctic Russia - will have to
withstand extensive ice packs. The special shuttle tankers that the partners
envisage using to get the oil to a warmer trans-shipment point will have to
be strong enough to break their way through the ice.
But the very isolation and hostile environment of Timan Pechora may mean
that the consortium will be able to avoid many of the political problems
which have dogged so many western oil projects in Russia.
The absence of a well developed oil infrastructure, such as the one in
Siberia, means there is no 'single, strong local oil company' of the type
which has hindered some other western projects, according to Mr Thane
Gustafson, a Washington-based analyst with Cambridge Energy Research
Associates.
The consortium will have a service contract with Arkhangelskgeologica, a
local company which has drilled 130 wells in the area, but there will be no
direct Russian equity participation.
Mr Gustafson also points out that the consortium intends to build a
dedicated export terminal on the Pechora Sea, thus eliminating dependence on
the often clogged Russian oil transportation system or the need to arrange
swaps through Transneft, the Russian monopoly oil transporter.
The political sensitivity of a foreign consortium having full control of
such a large export project is lessened by the fact that the Russian
industry lacks the financial and technological ability to tackle the scheme,
which is likely to be in production for up to 50 years.
The consortium has not been entirely free from the political uncertainty
which surrounds foreign involvement in Russia's oil industry. 'It has been a
tortured route' to secure the necessary approvals for the project, according
to Mr Bijur. Expert committees have spent three years reviewing the project,
and negotiations are still going on with the Ministry of Fuel and Energy
over the details of a production sharing contract.
The partners are also seeking approval from the Russian parliament.
Meanwhile, assessment work will continue.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940412

