FT944-10884

FT  09 NOV 94 / Russians seek imported goods at any price


   By JOHN LLOYD


The growing wealth of Russia's new rich and its burgeoning bourgeoisie has
made it a mecca for exporters of consumer goods - from Cherokee Jeeps
selling at around Dollars 60,000 (three times the US price) to packets of
cornflakes selling at Dollars 3.50 (double the average western price).
Foreign consumer goods now make up the bulk of Russia's imports because of
four factors: the liberalisation of trade from 1992; the explosive growth of
private trading companies; the increase in medium and high salaries; and
'the continuing crisis' in Russia's consumer goods industry. The trend is
particularly marked in Moscow and St Petersburg.
In these two cities, imports make up a huge 70 per cent of consumers'
purchases of food, according to a report* by the Russian company, Business
Analytica. In Moscow alone there are now some 6,500 trading companies, while
individuals can enrich themselves by becoming 'shuttles' - people who make a
living bringing in consumer goods in their personal luggage from abroad.
The 'shuttle' business is in fact a whole industry operating outside the
framework of normal foreign trade turnover, the reports says.
The 'shuttles' bring no profit to the national budget and until recently
were virtually beyond the scope of customs statistics. Their operations have
no legal provisions whatsoever. The prices fixed by the 'shuttles' are not
liable to national taxes, enabling them to undercut the prices of the
official importers.
Records of customs clearance of air travellers from Turkey and the United
Arab Emirates, the report says, showed that 3 per cent of the passengers
brought in as many goods as the remaining 97 per cent. The 'shuttle'
business involves bringing in up to 70 per cent of imported clothing; most
cheap jewellery; about half of all leather articles; and up to 30 per cent
of audio and video equipment.
The report says that consumer goods accounted for 70 per cent of total
imports last year - estimated at Dollars 26.9bn (Pounds 16.4bn), Dollars
10bn down from 1992 - and remain at roughly the same level this year. This
tendency will grow, the report says, because of the growth of real incomes,
up 80 per cent over the past three years.
Imports of foreign cigarettes have all but wiped out the local cigarette
industry, except for those plants which have concluded joint ventures with
western manufacturers. Imports now account for 90 per cent of all cigarettes
smoked. However, increased customs duties imposed in July are curbing the
sales growth of some consumer goods.
Food, for example, attracts duties of between 10-25 per cent of its customs
value. These import duties were aimed at protecting the domestic market.
However, according to the report, it is only when the price gap widens to 50
per cent between imported and domestically-produced foodstuffs that
consumers begin switching heavily to the latter.
*Distribution of Imported Consumer Goods in Russia: Markets, Legislation and
Infrastructure. Business Analytica; 23 Ulitsa Profsoyuznaya, Moscow 117859;
Russia. 7095-128-1850.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

941109

