FT941-16967

FT  07 JAN 94 / Germany may face longer recession


   By ARIANE GENILLARD


   BONN


DIW, the Berlin-based economics institute, yesterday warned that Germany's
recession will continue this year despite recent improvements in the economy
and urged policy-makers to change course and stimulate investment.
'The chances that that situation will be worse this year are greater than
those for an improvement,' the institute said in its January report. It says
demand and investment are set to continue declining in 1994, thus hampering
prospects for a sustainable recovery.
DIW's pessismistic outlook was highlighted this autumn when it broke ranks
with Germany's other economic institutes and predicted a 0.5 per cent
decline in GDP for this year. The other institutes are forecasting modest
GDP growth of 1 per cent in 1994.
Their brighter prognosis was recently bolstered by a pick-up in foreign
orders reported by the economics ministry, paving the way for export-led
recovery in 1994.
Foreign orders, while down in December by 1.5 per cent, rose on a two
months-basis by 3.5 per cent in October-November.
The economics ministry favours two-months comparisons because they remove
the impact of short-term influences.
The ministry expects GDP to continue rising in the fourth quarter of 1993
after it climbed by 0.5 per cent for the two preceding quarters.
But the DIW yesterday warned that such improvements would not be enough to
promote stable growth as long as demand and investment remained depressed.
It pointed out that GDP rose for three consecutive quarters in the 1981-1982
recession while plunging again because of lagging demand.
Private demand, which was hit by increases in petrol taxes and pension
contributions at the beginning of the month, is expected to decline by 1.5
per cent this year, according to DIW and the other economics institutes.
And over 40 per cent of German companies said in recent polls that they did
not plan to increase investments this year.
The institute argues that the government should change to an investment
stimulation programme instead of continuing to squeeze public sector
spending. Structural cuts in public sector spending - such as those proposed
by Bonn to keep the budget deficit under control - should be carried out as
soon as economic recovery is under way, but not before, it says.
It also calls on the Bundesbank to accelerate the pace of lowering
short-term interest rates in order to push investments up, instead of
continuing slow and steady downwards moves.
However, despite claims earlier this week that the Bundesbank council was
agreed that lower short-term interest rates were needed to ease the effects
of recession, it made no changes at its meeting in Frankfurt yesterday.
A decision to continue offering securities repurchase, or 'repo', deals at a
fixed 6 per cent rate for a further two weeks was seen as a way of
maintaining calm in money markets.
At its next meeting on January 20 the council will have more key data
available on which to base its decisions, including the initial effects on
inflation of a round of January 1 tax and duty increases. Up-to-date money
supply figures, also crucial to the bank's deliberations, were not ready.
Economic forecasts, page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940107

