FT941-17125

FT  06 JAN 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Branded bargains -
Plans for factory outlet centres throughout the UK


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


As the fuss dies down over the arrival in the UK of warehouse clubs, the US
bulk-selling discount format, retailers are waking up to a new threat from
the US: factory outlet centres.
After warehouse clubs, these discount centres or malls have been the
fastest-growing form of selling in the US over the last decade, with sales
reaching Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.7bn) last year.
Now, both UK and US developers are planning to build on the success of the
first two factory outlet centres in Britain - Hornsea Freeport and Clarks
Village. Hornsea Freeport, which opened three years ago in Humberside,
attracted 1.4m visitors last year and Clarks Village at Street in Somerset
had 1m visitors between opening in August 1993 and the end of the year.
Developers have at least 15 further projects in the pipeline for the UK and
then plan to move into continental Europe. These projects will put pressure
on traditional retailers, particularly on small independent stores, and
expose the clothing sector to the kind of price competition that has
developed in the UK grocery industry in the last three years.
Discount factory shops, often situated on factory premises, where
manufacturers sell off overmakes, slight seconds, or retailers' returns, are
already well-established in the UK. Corporate Intelligence, the retail
consultancy, estimates there are at least 1,400.
What developers started doing in the US in the early 1980s, and now want to
do throughout the UK, is to group such outlets together in purpose-built
malls. Shoppers can then choose from a wide range of branded goods from
manufacturers such as Calvin Klein, Nike, Aquascutum or Laura Ashley, at
prices up to 50 per cent below conventional retail outlets.
There are almost 300 factory outlet malls in the US, with about another 150
planned. Average size is around 150,000 sq ft, but some are more than 1.5m
sq ft - as big as the largest UK out-of-town shopping centres. Forecasters
expect total turnover to double to Dollars 20bn by the end of the decade.
The centres offer advantages to both manufacturers and consumers. Shoppers
have the chance to buy branded goods they otherwise might not be able to
afford. They can also turn a shopping trip into a day out, as factory outlet
centres are designed as 'destination' shopping venues, offering facilities
such as playgrounds and restaurants.
Manufacturers enjoy the ability to sell surplus stock at a profit, and in a
controlled way that does not damage the brand. Traditionally, surplus stock
has been sold into the discount wholesale and retail trade, which can
include market stalls, where manufacturers do not control their brand image.
'Initially, profit was not the driving factor, it was turning distressed
stock into cash,' says Paul Knight, retail and factory outlet development
manager at shoe manufacturer C & J Clark, which operates Clarks Village.
'But in the US people have realised these malls are not just means of
disposing of stock, they are successful profit centres in their own right,'
says Knight.
US manufacturers have turned factory shops into a powerful marketing tool.
Some companies use them to test-market products before launching them in
high street stores.
The outlets can also be used to sell current lines - for example,
avant-garde designs that have not caught on in the mainstream retail market.
But opinions are divided on how successful the format is likely to be in the
UK. Robert Clark, director of Corporate Intelligence, says there could be
scope for up to 50 outlet centres, with annual sales of Pounds 1bn.
'We reckon they will prove very popular indeed. There is a thirst for that
kind of retailing, and a realisation that these places not only offer good
value but a good day out.'
Others are more cautious. Richard Ashworth, partner specialising in
out-of-town retailing at Hillier Parker, the commercial property agents,
says there may be scope for fewer than 30. 'The UK is not big enough for
them to proliferate,' he says.
US operators have built most factory outlet malls an hour or more's drive
from the nearest large city. In the smaller, more densely-populated
countries of Europe, few such sites exist.
Another potential problem is opposition from retailers unhappy at seeing
their prices undercut by manufacturers selling directly to the public. So
far, there has been little opposition from US retailers to the centres,
partly because they have been sited well away from cities. McArthur/Glen,
one of the biggest US factory outlet operators, says it is sensitive to high
street retailers, and does not, for example, use specific brand names in
advertisements for its centres.
But European retailers may defend their markets more aggressively. Costco,
the US warehouse club operator, had to go to the High Court last year to
fend off a joint legal challenge from the UK's three biggest supermarket
chains Sainsbury, Safeway and Tesco, aimed at overturning planning
permission for its first warehouse club in Britain.
Both the size of the market, and opposition from retailers, may depend on
who factory outlet centres appeal to. In the US, where brand-buying is well
established and designer labels sought after, factory centres have a broad
appeal. In the UK, where retailers such as Marks and Spencer offer quality
own-label alternatives more cheaply, it is less clear who the centres'
target audience will be.
Knight says research at the Clarks Village suggested it appealed to
'brand-conscious, aspirational people. Those who didn't aspire to brands
were the ones who went away disappointed,' he says. 'They were looking for
'cheap', but we are not 'cheap'.'
But while factory outlet centres do not sell 'cheap' goods, and their share
of the UK market could be limited, they are still expected to have a
significant impact on UK retailing. Only 10 per cent of clothing in the UK
is sold through discount outlets, compared with almost 50 per cent in the
US, and factory centres are likely to narrow the gap.
By establishing new lower price 'floors' for branded goods they will further
increase price competition among retailers, and help turn the 1990s into
what retailers are already calling the 'value' decade.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940106

