FT941-12801

FT  28 JAN 94 / Technology: Computers come face to face - New personal
conferencing products allow users to hold meetings through their PCs


   By LOUISE KEHOE


The personal computer industry has for years sought the 'killer app' - a
compelling new application of PCs that would boost sales and draw new users
into the market.
Intel, the world's largest chip maker and dominant supplier of
microprocessors to the PC industry, may have found this elusive prize in the
form of 'personal conferencing'. This week, the company launched PC add-on
products that enable users to conduct video conferences from their desks,
viewing each other in one corner of their computer screens while
simultaneously reading, discussing and updating the displayed documents.
'Personal conferencing will change the way people in business communicate by
bringing the power of the PC to one-on-one communications,' predicts Andrew
Grove, Intel's president and chief executive. 'We are entering an era when
people will use their PCs to make and to receive calls and to solve business
problems together.'
Intel's PC-based technology does not match the standards of dedicated
video-conferencing systems. The video image of participants is small and
rather jerky at 15 frames per minute. But it is a relatively low-cost and
easily installed system.
Intel is already using the technology in its own offices. Colleagues at
distant sites can, for example, edit a report together. With the draft
version displayed on their screens, they may each suggest changes - pointing
to relevant sections, highlighting important words and inserting new text as
if they were sitting at the same desk. Both parties can see each other's
reactions.
Personal conferencing 'addresses the contemporary problems of commerce,'
says Grove. It improves the flexibility, helping employees in separate
locations to collaborate more easily. It eliminates time-consuming shuffling
of work from one individual's computer to another. It can cut travel time
and costs, and facilitate 'telecommuting'.
Personal conferencing 'is very processor intensive,' says Grove. 'Clearly,
it works better on high-performance personal computers.' That should
translate into a sales boost for Intel's latest Pentium microprocessor, he
believes.
Intel is spending Dollars 100m (Pounds 67m) a year on developing personal
conferencing technology, says Grove. The market may be huge. 'We will play a
part in it, we hope a big part, but if this is going to be as big as it can
be, it will require the work of dozens, if not hundreds, of companies.'
Intel has already secured the support of software developers Lotus
Development, Microsoft, Novell, Software Publishing and WordPerfect, which
have announced their interest in developing personal conferencing software.
Computer manufacturers AST, Compaq, Digital Equipment, Dell and Gateway 2000
have also endorsed the technology.
'We believe this is going to be a very important new PC application,' says
Eckhard Pfeiffer, Compaq chief executive. Sales of computer-based
videoconferencing systems will grow from Dollars 70m last year to more than
Dollars 3bn by 1997, market researchers predict.
To take full advantage of Intel's new technology the user needs a
high-performance personal computer, based on either an Intel 486DX or a
Pentium microprocessor and an ISDN (integrated services digital network)
telephone line.
In the US, Intel has forged marketing agreements with AT&T and several
regional telephone companies, which will provide ISDN telephone services
along with Intel's ProShare software and hardware package. This includes
video and communications PC add-in circuit boards, a monitor-top video
camera, hands-free headset with microphone and ProShare software. Prices
will range from Dollars 1,200 to Dollars 2,500.
Intel plans to launch its personal conferencing products in Europe this
year, and has already made an agreement with one European telephone company,
says Grove.
For those willing to sacrifice video telephone features, personal
conferencing will cost much less. Intel will offer its ProShare software
alone for Dollars 99. The program can be run on a standard 386 model
personal computer equipped with a 9600 baud modem. The software includes a
tool set with pointers, markers, highlighters and text tools. A 'jumpstart'
feature allows another user to take part in a conference without buying the
ProShare software.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940128

