FT942-16137

FT  12 APR 94 / Adapt, rejig and survive: There are ways for machine tool
companies to prosper in the UK


   By ANDREW BAXTER


As UK machine tool manufacturers meet this week at the Metcut '94 exhibition
in Birmingham - a show intended to prove that, after two decade of decline
and three years of recession, the industry is still alive - there will be a
noticeable absentee.
Missing will be FMT, the machine tool company based in Brighton, Sussex,
which since the 1950s has absorbed companies that once employed thousands of
people. In February it called in the receivers. Last month US competitor,
Giddings & Lewis, bought most of FMT's spares and service business, brand
names and intellectual rights - and took on just 30 of FMT's employees.
G&L has yet to decide whether to continue making FMT machines. If, as is
widely expected, it does not, the deal would mark the end of production of
large machining centres - big, multi-function machines which drill and cut
metal components - by UK-owned companies.
Whatever happens, the collapse of FMT seems to make a mockery of the 'show
of strength' slogan chosen by the Machine Tool Technologies Association for
this week's event. 'It's a disaster - who's left at the high-tech end of the
industry?' asks one observer.
FMT's demise looks like another example of a UK machine tool company on the
wane, joining names such as Alfred Herbert, the Coventry-based company,
which was once Europe's largest producer but which collapsed in 1983.
Since the 1970s, UK machine tool production has slumped, falling in value
from Pounds 1.4bn in 1970 to Pounds 456m in 1992, in constant 1985 prices.
The collapse has been due partly to the decline of UK manufacturing. But it
also reflects the success of overseas machine tool companies, particularly
from Germany and Japan: imports have risen to more than 50 per cent of UK
machine tool consumption, and the market is fiercely competitive.
Typically, British machine tool companies have contracted severely - or are
subsidiaries of foreign companies, such as Bridgeport and Cincinnati
Milacron of the US, and Yamazaki of Japan. The industry is scattered around
120 manufacturing sites in the UK.
To survive, many smaller machine tool manufacturers have avoided mass
markets dominated by Japanese producers and exploited niches: in
sophisticated technology such as laser-cutting; or in under-exploited
markets such as manual, non-computerised machines; or in accessories.
One of the best examples of the niche approach is Ren-ishaw of
Gloucestershire, which last month reported half-year pre-tax profits of
Pounds 2.81m on sales of Pounds 23.3m. It has become a world leader in tiny
measurement probes, which are attached to machine tools to check they are
cutting components correctly.
Larger companies can still compete with foreign competition. For instance,
600 Group this week launches its new CNC (computer numerical control) lathe,
aimed at small engineering companies. However, it has gone through a painful
restructuring of its lathe manufacturing operation, including the closure in
1992 of its Colchester plant which employed 280 people.
But FMT was different. Though small, it tried to stay in the mainstream,
with products competing directly with the large machining centres built by
Japanese, continental European and US companies.
FMT's slide into receivership dates from 1990, when Iraq invaded Kuwait and
the UK Department of Trade and Industry refused to renew export licences to
Iraq, costing the company Pounds 1m in lost orders. Then came the UK
recession, which further weakened its order book.
In response to these pressures, FMT drew up a two-pronged business strategy:
moving from Brighton to a smaller site and forging joint ventures to exploit
growth opportunities in China and India. To succeed financially, the
proposals depended on securing planning permission to sell the Brighton site
for use by retailers.
But when in February it became clear that there would be delays before that
permission was granted, FMT's bank, the Midland, cut the company's borrowing
limit.
The lesson for the industry is that it is hard for small British-owned
machine tool builders to survive in the mainstream market - and it is even
more difficult without the financial backing of larger, international
groups. FMT had annual sales of just Pounds 7m when it called in the
receivers. Financing was crucial, because of the long lead-times - as much
as 18 months - involved in making large, sophisticated machining centres.
Whatever the competitive weaknesses of FMT, however, managers of machine
tool companies - as well as of banks - would be wrong to be too gloomy about
the prospects for companies that have adapted to a harsh trading
environment.
According to American Machinist magazine, the UK remains the world's
eighth-biggest machine tool producer. There are still a 'good number of
innovative, reasonably healthy companies around to maintain our market
position', says Mr Simon Brown, director general of the Machine Tool
Technologies Association.
Though many machine tool manufacturers have cut output, there are signs that
investment in product development has been spared. For instance, Jones &
Shipman, the Leicester-based grinding machine producer, has subcontracted
out almost all of the components of its tools, allowing it to concentrate on
designing, assembling and marketing.
At the same time, the UK's relatively low inflation and interest rates,
along with relatively low manufacturing costs, have enhanced the industry's
competitiveness in overseas markets.
Activity in the world machine tool market has also picked up. 'We are
experiencing greater demand from markets in the UK, the US and the Far East.
People are investing in new machines again,' says Mr Mike Colvin, export
sales and marketing manager at Cincinnati Milacron UK.
Too late, unfortunately, for FMT. It seems condemned to become another name
on a long list of machine tool companies that did not realise soon enough
that, in a competitive industry, strategies for survival have to be designed
with as much precision and thought as machine tools themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940412

