FT943-13152

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (1): The secret country opens its doors -
After the collapse of Europe's most repressive Stalinist regime, Anthony
Robinson and Laura Silber examine Albania's first steps in freedom


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON and LAURA SILBER


After 50 lost years as one of the most isolated countries in the world,
Albania has re-emerged over the last three years with a strong desire to
rebuild its economy and shattered society.
Like other post-communist states it also seeks to re-integrate into Europe
while playing a more active role in the volatile Balkan region where
millions of ethnic Albanian live across the border in Kosovo, Macedonia and
Montenegro.
Much progress has been made since 1990-91 when this small, mainly
mountainous country of 3.2m people was on the verge of anarchy while the
hated secret police of the dying communist regime installed by Enver Hoxha
in 1945 sought vainly to forestall its collapse.
Wild rumours swept the country as thousands of desperate young people
clambered on to ancient boats or slipped across the frontiers by mountain
tracks to seek a new life in a wider world known only by listening to
forbidden foreign radio and TV programmes.
Italy, just across the Adriatic, was most fearful of incipient civil war and
of destabilising waves of immigrants and hastily put together an emergency
relief programme. For 18 months the Italian army delivered food and other
aid throughout a country whose invasion by Mussolini's troops in 1939 marked
one of the least glorious chapters in Italo-Albanian relations.
It was a great success. The exodus was halted, but not before more than
300,000 people, mainly young work seekers, had found some form of refuge and
employment abroad.
Three years later these emigrants have become the mainstay of an economy
kept afloat by a cocktail of remittances and foreign aid.
Emigrant remittances totalled Dollars 330m last year, compared with the
Dollars 300m received in foreign aid, although Albania would have been in
dire straits without the nearly Dollars 1.5bn in food aid, grants and low
interest loans which governments and international institutions poured in
over the last three years, and which they have pledged to continue at a rate
of around Dollars 300m annually until 1996.
Stability started to return after the general elections of March 1992.
Western governments, the EU Phare programme, international financial and
other institutions moved in with technical assistance and financial support
for President Sali Berisha and the Democratic Party-led coalition
government. The coalition emerged from elections with an absolute majority
and a programme for completing free market reforms begun by the interim
government under the aegis of economists Mr Gramoz Pashko and Mr Genc Ruli,
both of whom are now out of government.
The army and secret police were purged but the inherited administrative
organs remain ill-equipped to provide the services demanded of a modern
state.
The democratic credentials of Albania, meanwhile, will not be fully
recognised until a new constitution and new civil and legal codes are
introduced to replace the amended versions of the old Hoxha-era documents
still in force.
All three are expected to be finalised this year although the constitution
requires a two thirds majority in the parliament which currently eludes the
government led by prime minister Alexander Meksi.
Albania, which achieved independence from Turkey after the third Balkan War
in 1912, has no real democratic tradition and the 50 year totalitarian
dictatorship established by Enver Hoxha destroyed the economic and social
basis which would normally have given rise to a middle class. Under these
circumstances, politics tend to be highly personalised while institutional
and legal guarantees are weak and often unenforceable.
Strengthening the social, economic and above all legal underpinnings of
Albania's fledgling democracy will take time and imposes a steep learning
curve on both the government parties and the opposition. The latter is
headed by the socialist party successor to the communists whose most capable
leader, Mr Fatos Nano, is in jail.
Albanians, from the president down, constantly repeat that 'changing the
mentality of people is the hardest task' and seem aware that democracy and
stability will best be guaranteed by sustained economic growth and the
avoidance of conflict over the status of ethnic Albanians in the
neighbouring former Yugoslav states and tension with Greece over the status
of ethnic Greeks in the southern part of Albania.
Western embassies in particular stress that Albania's continuing access to
western credits and investment reflect its strategic importance and require
Tirana to play a constructive and cautious role in support of regional
stability.
The over-riding imperative of the US and EU governments is to prevent
conflict between the two regional Nato states - Greece and Turkey.
Albanian politicians can help by calling on the Albanian diaspora to show
patience and moderation, especially in Kosovo and Macedonia which has ethnic
Greek as well as Albanian and other minorities and where Bulgaria, Greece
and Turkey all have competing historical claims.
Diverting Albanian energies into economic reconstruction and the acquisition
of modest wealth is seen by western embassies and institutions as a key to
national and regional stability.
Progress to date is encouraging. The first economic reforms were dictated by
necessity. Most of the large, heavily polluting and loss making factories
built with obsolete technology by Soviet and later Chinese technicians in
the 1960s and 1970s have been closed and the hated collective and state
farms have been abolished.
At first unemployment soared in urban areas while in country districts,
where 65 per cent of the population live, collective farm buildings were
looted, machinery was broken and trees were cut down for fuel. Unemployment
is still officially around 30 per cent of the non-farm workforce and
poverty, although not hunger, remains widespread.
But the abolition in May 1992 of unemployment pay at 80 per cent of previous
salary, introduced by the last communist regime to ease the pain of plant
closures, forced the jobless to find new employment. Thanks mainly to
emigrant remittances and the abolition of all restrictions on foreign
exchange dealing and foreign trade, thousands rapidly found employment in a
fast growing private trading sector.
The service sector as a whole provided only 12 per cent of employment under
the old regime with its heavy bias towards heavy industry and collectivised
agriculture. It is now expanding fast as deregulation, privatisation and the
abolition of subsidies have combined with emigrant remittances to create
fast rising disposal incomes.
The highly visible result is a frenetic demand for all sorts of consumer
imports - from luxury foods to televisions, satellite dishes and second hand
cars. This demand-led economy has created new jobs in retailing, storage,
transport and other services.
At the same time de-collectivisation created 400,000 new peasant farmers
able to feed themselves and freed from the onerous restrictions which for
decades had prevented private citizens from even raising chickens or other
livestock. Last year food output rose by at least 15 per cent and food
imports plummeted 50 per cent.
With macro-economic stabilisation achieved by 1993, policy makers are now
moving ahead to tackle the structural deficiencies which must be removed if
the state as a whole is to be modernised and Albania's resources fully used.
These resources are substantial. Albania boasts the third largest deposits
of chromium in the world after South Africa and Kazakhstan, and related
deposits of copper and other non-ferrous metals. Most of the mines, operated
for decades by prison labour, are currently moribund.
The country also has extensive onshore and offshore oil and gas deposits,
although the former have been badly exploited by ancient technology for over
half a century and the latter are not yet proven in commercial quantities.
Canadian Occidental, Agip of Italy and Premier Oil of the UK are among
foreign oil companies currently searching for viable deposits.
Above all, decades of enforced isolation have left Albania with more than
320 kms of virgin coastline suitable for the development of high quality
tourism, and a wealth of hardly visited Greek, Roman and Byzantine
archeological sites and 'museum cities' such as Gjirokastro.
Exploiting these resources in a profitable and ecologically satisfactory way
will require heavy investment over many years, not just in specific projects
but above all in the associated infrastructure required to underpin the
modern, market-oriented economy on which Albanians are setting their sights
by the end of the century.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940721

