FT944-14432

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: Lifting the lid on Sylvia Plath - With this morally
challenging book, post-modern biography has come of age


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


THE SILENT WOMAN: SYLVIA PLATH AND TED HUGHES by Janet Malcolm Picadore
Pounds 14.99, 215 pages
The Silent Woman is about one of the loudest literary voices this century.
In the icy winter of 1962-3, Sylvia Plath wrote her pitiless, death-obsessed
Ariel poems, stuck her head in a gas oven and killed herself. Her words have
reverberated ever since - 'dying - is an art', 'every woman adores a
fascist' - and yet because they are so powerfully emotive, they have also
been distorted, misinterpreted, muffled.
This book tells two tales: how Plath gained the courage to speak with this
electrifying voice in the first place, the story of her life; and what her
desire to interpret that voice reveals about our own culture - the story of
her afterlife. It is a brilliant mix and a landmark in the history of
biography.
Plath was a clean, golden-haired American girl with dark lipstick who came
to England in the 1950s and married the poet Ted Hughes. She looked like an
advertisement for soap powder, but beneath the gloss was a tormented,
tempestuous woman who was rarely nice to know.
She broke up a family Christmas, stole food from other people's
refrigerators, fantasised about killing some schoolgirls who took flowers
from a park. Her relationship with her mother was sick, and she devoured men
for breakfast, writing afterwards of the 'orange-juice-and-broiled-chicken'
and 'plain steak and potatoes with nothing done to them taste' of the dull
ones. Hughes by contrast was a giant who filled 'that huge sad hole I felt
in having no father.' On their first meeting she bit him until he bled;
months after he left her, she died.
It was Malcolm, who calls 'her courage to be unpleasant', that made her a
feminist heroine. 'I see you have a concentration camp in your mind, too,'
Plath once told the poet George MacBeth. Hughes has described how she fought
to find her authentic voice - beautiful, severe, glacial. Malcolm sees this
as part of a key historical moment in which the 'uneasy, shifty-eyed' 1950s
generation finally threw off 19th century repression and embraced the brave
new world of feminism, Vietnam protests and the civil rights movement.
Plath was the voice for the times; no post-war poet has expressed more
eloquently the anxieties - womens' struggles, political tyranny and
repression, psychological breakdown - of our century. But Plath's life was
also emblematic, for she was the first great woman writer in creativity and
domesticity who waged war. Jane Austen, Emily Bronte, George Eliot, Virginia
Woolf, none attempted everyday family life. Plath, by contrast, fumed at
being 'a prisoner in this house, chained to the children,' while Hughes
swanned off. She wrote the Ariel poem in a blaze of domestic misery and
marital break-up.
In the private lives obsession of the 1980s and '90s, this is the part of
Plath's story which, fuelled by Hughes reticence and his control over the
Plath estate, has become the stuff of legend. Malcolm is inspired on the
transgressive nature of biography - the only explanation she says, for the
genre's popular appeal - and wittingly invites the reader to tiptoe with her
'down the corridor together to stand in front of the bedroom door and try to
peep through the keyhole.'
Her genius however, is to turn the tables and to rough up Plath's
biographers and critics as they have roughed up Plath - reading their mail,
quizzing their friends and gossiping about their houses. Thus she draws us,
deeply and uneasily, into what really happens in the making of the modern
biography.
Malcolm is not someone to invite home lightly. Take her visit to Ann
Stevenson, whose 1987 Life of Plath was vituperatively reviewed for
pandering to Hughes and for its omissions. Around the kitchen table,
Stevenson reveals her problems in working with Hughes, her dissatisfaction
with her book - she eventually published in part because she could not
afford to repay the advance.
Malcolm purrs sympathetically, then turns the knife with a story of
Stevenson cooking lasagne, omitting the white sauce, serving up the dish
reluctantly because there is nothing else.
Domesticity as metaphor, life as art; Malcolm has the novelist's ability to
convey the essence through an exquisite piece of bitchiness. A critic who
sometimes misjudges Sylvia lives in a crooked Hampstead house and serves
coffee out of rigid square cups. The handsome flat of the handsome
structuralist academic with the crisp voice and the crisp handsome ideas . .
. the trains and plumbing that do not work in the cold winter of 1991, when
Malcolm came to England from New York to research the book and which
recalled the icy months in 1963 when Plath was an American alone in a
primitive country . . .
With The Silent Woman, post-modern biography has come of age. Ventures of
this kind usually fail because post-modern theories - that there is no
truth, that no one owns another's life - are never as compelling as a well
told story. Malcolm overcomes this with a dazzling method of rendering the
best of traditional biography, choice snippets which sum up a life, the
making of an artist, cultural history - without the longueurs. It is
intellectually explosive, morally challenging and enormous fun.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

941022

