FT943-12716

FT  23 JUL 94 / Rising building costs 'to push up prices by 10%'


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


Prices quoted by building groups bidding for contracts are forecast to rise
by up to 10 per cent in the next year as they seek to recover profit margins
and pass on increased material and labour costs.
EC Harris, international construction cost consultants, said yesterday that
in spite of the rise, tender prices were expected to remain 15 per cent
lower than at the peak of the development boom in 1989.
It forecast that construction tender prices nationally would rise 5.5 per
cent in the next year with an identical increase over the next 12 months, to
autumn 1996.
Prices in London, where the resurgence in construction has been greatest,
are forecast to rise by as much as 7 per cent on average in 1994-95.
Mr Christopher Vickers, EC Harris chairman, said the rises 'could surprise
customers who, after two years of virtual stagnation in construction tender
prices, have become accustomed to fairly constant prices'.
Prices of building materials rose 6 per cent on average in the 12 months to
the end of April - more than twice the increase in the retail prices index
over the same period.
Plasterboard and constructional steel prices rose by more than 10 per cent
on average. Prices of bricks, concrete blocks, cement, concrete roof tiles
and clay pipes also rose more than the sector average.
The figures mask wide regional variations. Structural steel prices
nationally averaged Pounds 836 a tonne compared with about Pounds 950 a
tonne in London. Concrete floor-slabs were priced at Pounds 70 a cubic metre
in London compared with Pounds 59 nationally.
The pace of recovery in the housing market continued to slow last month
although sales of new homes are holding up better than those in general
market, the Housebuilders Federation reported yesterday.
Almost half of the 471 housebuilders questioned in a survey said that agreed
sales on which a deposit has been paid, less any cancellations, had fallen
since May.
Most builders, however, reported that these agreed sales were higher than in
June last year, when the housing market also fell, after starting the year
strongly.
The federation said: 'Although growth in the new-homes market has been
sustained, the June survey showed that the rate of growth has slowed
significantly. Sales of new homes have continued to out-perform sales in the
second-hand market.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940723

