FT941-4176

FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (6): Prepare for the costs of
moving home - You may be able to afford the mortgage, but have you allowed
for all the additional bills of buying and selling? Gerald Cadogan makes a
list / Moving house


   By GERALD CADOGAN


What does moving to a new home cost? Hassle and family stress for a start,
and a grim coming to terms with the detritus of one's past when sorting out
old belongings. And the costs can make a sizeable charge at the bottom of
the overall bill. The more you investigate beforehand, the better.
Selling
I asked the local offices of Lane Fox and Savills, two national estate
agents at the top end of the market, and Nationwide what they charge. All
are represented in the north Oxfordshire town of Banbury. Houses for sale on
their patch range from old village cottages and 19th century workmen's
terrace houses, through recent lower and middle income estates to old
rectories, manor houses and a few stately homes. In assessing fees, bear in
mind that they may be different at other branches or in London.
Lane Fox and Savills sit side by side in Banbury, but their prices differ. I
asked them the cost of selling two houses, one in the Pounds 450,000-Pounds
550,000 range, and the other a Pounds 60,000 property, which is roughly the
average house price in the Department of the Environment and Halifax
indices.
Lane Fox suggested around 2 per cent of the selling price plus the necessary
VAT as a fee for the large house. To market it effectively, this house would
need a colour brochure and national advertising, which we trust would mean
the Weekend FT as well as Country Life (where a half-page colour
advertisement would cost Pounds 1,500). The vendor pays these expenses
totalling around Pounds 2,000-Pounds 3,500 (plus VAT). The fee for the
Pounds 60,000 house would be 2 per cent, to include a simpler brochure and
local advertising.
Savills suggested much the same: 2-2.5 per cent as an inclusive fee for the
cheaper house, and 2 per cent plus the expenses, which might amount to
Pounds 2,000-Pounds 4,000 (plus VAT), for the larger house.
Nationwide would ask for 2 per cent plus VAT for sole agency, as a set fee
to include local advertising and photography; no sale, no fee.
Account-holders with Nationwide might obtain a 10 per cent reduction, so
ask.
When selling:
Ask at least two agents who know your type of home to quote.
Do not necessarily choose the firm with the cheapest fee or which suggests
the highest asking price. It may have over-valued in order to gain your
instructions, in which case buyers will not come to view. A
reasonably-priced house can sell at close to the asking price, or above when
there is competition. Look hard at the firms which sell your type of home.
If you think fees are high, they are much higher on the Continent and in the
US.
Surveys
Still in Banbury, I asked chartered surveyor Paul Lester, of Lesters, what
he would charge for the two houses. He offers three types of survey. A
home-buyer's report suits a modern property and most buyers. It uses a Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors printed form which has a paragraph on
every aspect of the building as the basis of a thorough inspection. The
charge would be Pounds 175-Pounds 250 (plus VAT). An intermediate survey for
Pounds 300-Pounds 350 would look harder at the principal defects, such as
settlement, dry rot and damp.
A full structural survey could cost anything from Pounds 350 to Pounds
1,000, depending on the size of the property and the difficulty of access to
roof spaces and other hidden parts. Most surveys of this type are in the
Pounds 400-Pounds 450 range. Lester is surprised how many people do not take
surveys. If they do, 'they are not grateful when you have found something
wrong'. They do not want any threat to stop their new dream coming true.
But on a full survey it is rare that the buyer cannot save Pounds 1,000
(provided his offer is subject to contract and survey). Local surveyors with
local knowledge are vital.
Conveyancing
For the Pounds 60,000 house, Will Arber of solicitors Bower & Bailey, a firm
with branches in Oxfordshire and along the M4 corridor between Reading and
Bristol, suggested a likely bill of Pounds 250-Pounds 325 plus VAT to
include minor expenses such as copying and stamps.
The main fee depends on how much work is involved, which is unpredictable.
This figure is about the same as in 1980 - because of the competition among
solicitors to service the smaller number of property transactions in the
recession years. It does not include disbursements for local authority and
other searches, which have risen and vary from one authority to another -
but the authorities are now quicker at producing the information.
'It is the mortgage offer that holds things up. That is usually the last
piece of the jigsaw,' said Arber.
There is also the land registration fee, which rises in bands, and stamp
duty starting above Pounds 60,000 at 1 per cent of the total price (not of
the excess over Pounds 60,000).
For the Pounds 500,000 house stamp duty would be Pounds 5,000, and the land
registration fee Pounds 1,800. A likely solicitor's bill would be Pounds
750-Pounds 1500 plus VAT, Arber said, because it is usually more work and
there is an element of insurance in the bill. If something goes wrong, the
solicitor is liable for much more.
I then asked one of the solicitors in Bedford Row, London what he would
charge. He pointed out that the cheap house could make as much work as the
expensive one, and suggested as a rough guide half the agent's fee - thus
around 1 per cent plus VAT.
Both solicitors stressed how important it was to find a good lawyer who
checked everything. 'Unqualified people are doing more of the work now,'
said Amber, 'and they make mistakes.' That can lead to trouble in years
ahead. If you get a low estimate for the solicitor's bill, ask who in the
office will actually be doing the work. The local solicitors' advantage is
that they know the area and have the contacts.
Mortgages
The Weekend FT's Finance and the Family pages regularly report on mortgages
and the ever-changing menu of packages that building societies, banks and
other lenders offer. They want business and it is wise to shop around.
Nationwide for instance has no application fee at present and the basic
valuation is free. For fixed rates mortgages there is a reservation fee,
ranging from Pounds 95 for a two-year term to Pounds 300 for a 10-year term.
There is no further fee for variable rate mortgages.
All borrowers who take out their mortgages receive Pounds 250 'cashback'
about a month after completion - which virtually pays the maximum Pounds 300
fee.
Cheltenham and Gloucester has removed application and valuation fees for
home-buyers taking out a new mortgage or a further advance. The society
estimates that this saves about Pounds 160 for a Pounds 55,000 property and
Pounds 450 for Pounds 750,000 house. But there is still a reservation fee
for fixed rate mortgages.
Moving
On the day of moving comes a bill that is difficult to predict, as each
collection of household belongings is different. You can hire a van and do
it yourself with the help of friends, but if you call in the professionals,
they will want to see what furniture you have and where you live. Are you in
a third floor flat? How many antiques, pianos, grandfather clocks and
chandeliers do you have? How much will you pack yourself? For journeys of
less than 100 miles, labour is a large part of the cost.
Banbury Removals suggested a possible range of Pounds 250-Pounds 350 plus
VAT for moving the contents of a three-bedroom semi 80 miles (and perhaps
Pounds 155-Pounds 200 for 10-15 miles). An old rectory might come to Pounds
800-Pounds 900. Bishop's Move suggested Pounds 250-Pounds 450 for the
smaller house (and Pounds 200-Pounds 400 for 10-15 miles), and Pounds 400-
Pounds 800 for the larger. These estimates can only be rough.
Ask for several quotations, and light a candle for a sunny day.

The Financial Times


Survey PRO Page 5

940312

