FT944-14405

FT  22 OCT 94 / Who will wake us from our slumber?: Peter Aspden says the
need for a new Nietzsche - a wild and wise thinker - has never been greater


   By PETER ASPDEN


Considering he was regarded as one of the towering intellects of his
generation, appointed a university professor at the age of 24, and
acknowledged as a seminal influence on some of the greatest literary and
philosophical figures of the century, Friedrich Nietzsche has been
ill-served by the caprices of historical judgment.
There are certainly easy jokes to be made at his expense. His invention of
the Ubermensch was a gift to today's pop culture plunderers, who never miss
an opportunity, as in the cover of Philosophy for Beginners, to dress him in
underpants-outside-tights and flowing cape.
In more sophisticated circles, mere mention of his name is enough to raise a
guaranteed hoot of derision. In A Fish Called Wanda, Kevin Kline's loose
hold on reality is confirmed when he wanders around reading extracts from
Ecce Homo. Woody Allen, in a characteristic fog of existential angst in
Hannah and her Sisters, contemplates becoming a Nietzschean, but decides
against because the theory of eternal recurrence means he would 'have to sit
through the Ice Capades again'.
The pathetic intellectual decline of Nietzsche's final years, as he marauded
the elegant squares of Turin in a syphilitic haze, have not helped his cause
either. As the tone of his aphorisms became more savage, as his vision of
transcendence turned into an unhinged apparition of despair, yes, he did
indeed become mad. But should that remain the final word on his legacy?
Nietzsche died, with untypical neatness, in 1900; but has any figure cast a
greater shadow over the torments of the 20th century?
Over the past week, select groups of devotees all over Europe and the US
have celebrated the 150th anniversary of Nietzsche's birth. At the
Goethe-Institut in London, on a Friday night, three philosophers attracted a
near-capacity audience to hear their difficult papers.
It would not be too much of an exaggeration to talk of a thriving cottage
industry; as one member of the audience remarked during a tetchy exchange:
'I don't think too many of us would be here if this was an evening about
Kant.' Nietzsche has pulling-power; he speaks, with increasing authority, to
the modern sensibility. The philosopher who announced the end of God has a
place in the cosmic debating chamber, it seems, after the end of history.
In truth, like Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud, his fellow 'modern masters of
suspicion' as the French philosopher Paul Ricoeur put it, Nietzsche has been
too easily marginalised by today's cultural commentators. Knock down the
Berlin Wall, expose a few fraudulent psychoanalysts, laugh at the lunatic
excesses of Zarathustra and we are rid of all three in one fell swoop,
primed and proud for the post-historical, post-industrial, post-modern age
of . . . well, what exactly?
It is not as if we are over-flowing with fresh ideas and original values for
the new millennium (we can't even decide, in Britain at least, how to spend
the money allotted to trumpet its arrival). Many of today's philosophers
spend their time huddled over grammatical oddities or looking for truth in a
software programme. They publish papers on it, and the more papers they
publish the more research money they receive. It is considered rude to ask
them what they are doing, and naive to look to them for genuine illumination
on how to live our lives.
The need for another Nietzsche has never been greater: a bracing thinker,
wild and wise, who can wake us from our slumber. He and his cohorts set the
dark, disturbing agenda for the new century; instead of listening, we
wilfully misunderstood and ended with the atrocities of two world wars.
The post-war western world settled into the comforting homilies of
consumerism and the playful banter of the mass media to try and forget, but
it has not proved easy. In Bosnia, in parts of Africa, in the Middle East,
we are reminded daily that we are, in the great man's words, human, all too
human.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

941022

