FT941-3601

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (2): Fearful of protection - Why
Japanese investment motives matter / Aspects of Japan


   By PETER MONTAGNON


Does Ownership Matter?
Edited by Mark Mason and Dennis Encarnation
Oxford University Press, Pounds 39.95
459 pages
Although Japanese investment in Europe goes back as far as 1878, when Mitsui
opened its first office in Paris, it is only recently that it has reached
significant proportions.
Early investments, interrupted of course by the second world war, were
mainly concerned with providing services to Japanese companies. Hence
shipping, insurance and finance played a prominent role. The change since
the 1970s is the growth of manufacturing investment, which has been heavily
motivated by fears of trade protection.
This book is an early academic attempt to analyse these more recent flows.
In particular, it seeks to compare the behaviour of Japanese companies in
Europe and in the US, as well as setting Japanese patterns of investment in
Europe against those of the US. Its origin is a conference in 1992, for
which the papers are being published, together with commentaries from
rapporteurs that are either bafflingly censorious or gushing in their
praise.
That format is bound to restrict its readership to academic specialists. As
so often before, the lay reader is struck by the slowness of academic
publishing, the sloppiness of the editing and the poor quality of much of
the writing. Moreover, such a wide-ranging list of contributors is never
going to agree entirely with one another. But the book does assemble some
new sets of data, and it does have a certain message to impart, which is
that ownership does matter.
By establishing wholly-owned subsidiaries in Europe, Japanese companies have
not only secured the distribution of their products; they have also
maintained control over the production process. Compared with US owners,
they still import a large number of components - or did so when the research
was carried out.
In that sense, the motivation behind Japanese foreign investment is more to
do with trade supremacy in an environment of increasing physical barriers.
European companies rarely establish wholly-owned subsidiaries in Japan; it
may be that the culture which prevents them from doing so is one which also
wants to ensure Japanese supremacy in its own market.
It follows, the book argues, that European policymakers should be concerned
with investment. The book speaks in quite admiring tones of the way in which
the European side implicitly put pressure on Japanese car manufacturers not
to flood previously restricted markets with output transplanted to European
sites when barriers came down in the single market. It suggests there may be
lessons for US policymakers here, too.
That, however, is dangerous stuff. Ultimately it is in nobody's interest
that governments should discriminate in matters of investment. Competition
is distorted, efficiency gains lost and consumers suffer just as they do
when trade in goods is protected. European companies would benefit more from
an open environment, in which they could forge alliances that allow all to
benefit from what technology has to offer.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940315

