FT944-10966

FT  08 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Peruvian purchase to boost
Cominco zinc output by 50%


   By SALLY BOWEN


   LIMA


Cominco of Canada, one of the world's leading producers of refined zinc,
will increase its total output by around 50 per cent with its purchase of
Peru's Cajamarquilla zinc refinery.
The Vancouver-based company, in association with the Marubeni Corporation of
Japan, bid Dollars 193m for the refinery at a public auction on Friday that
produced no rival offers. Cominco has 83 per cent of the consortium,
Marubeni - a holder of Peruvian secondary debt paper - the remainder.
According to Cominco's Mr Richard Mundie, the Cajamarquilla purchase 'will
permit highly attractive synergies' with the company's Canadian-Alaskan
operations. Customers in Asia will be served with zinc refined in Canada,
while Cajamarquilla - just 30 miles east of Lima's port of Callao - will
ship zinc to Europe. Cominco's Trail refinery in Vancouver at present
produces almost a tenth of the world's refined zinc.
Cominco's offer was Dollars 33m above the base price fixed for the sale of
Dollars 120m cash and Dollars 40m in secondary debt paper. Under highly
favourable conditions, apparently designed to encourage local bids for the
refinery, the bulk of the cash payment will be spread over the next fourteen
years.
There is also a Dollars 20m minimum investment commitment for upgrading and
expanding the refinery over the next four years. Mr Mundie expects that,
with 'marginal improvements', Cajamarquilla's production can be boosted from
its present 90,000 tonnes to around 140,000 tonnes of refined zinc a year.
Production costs in Peru, despite expensive energy, will not be
substantially different from those in Canada, company officials said.
Cominco recently set up a local office in Peru and has around a dozen people
working in exploration. It participated in the auction for the La Granja
copper deposits last February, which went to another Canadian company
Cambior. Cominco says it is also considering a bid for the Peruvian copper
deposits of Michiquillay, scheduled for sale shortly.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

941108

