FT942-14736

FT  19 APR 94 / Solution to S Africa's election stalemate near: Chief
Buthelezi's Inkatha may take part in poll


   By PATTI WALDMEIR and MARK SUZMAN


   PRETORIA, JOHANNESBURG


A breakthrough in South Africa's political crisis that would encourage Chief
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the Zulu leader, to participate in next week's
all-race elections appeared suddenly within reach last night.
After a day of talks with President FW de Klerk and African National
Congress officials in Pretoria, Chief Buthelezi said he was confident of
positive results when the talks resume today.
It is understood that the proposed deal would involve the recall of the old
white-dominated parliament to entrench the powers, largely symbolic and
ceremonial, of Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini in the interim constitution.
Neither the South African government nor the ANC appear to have conceded
ground in the fundamental issue that has led to the stalemate - Chief
Buthelezi's demand for what amounted to autonomous status for the Natal
province which includes his KwaZulu 'homeland'. Election officials were last
night investigating the possibility of a last-minute amendment to ballot
papers that would allow the inclusion of Chief Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom
party. Should that not be possible, the agreement might be in jeopardy,
officials warned.
Asked whether Inkatha would participate in the poll, Chief Buthelezi said
that it was possible but noted that there would be practical difficulties,
including the fact that his party would have only a few days in which to
campaign. He added that he saw little likelihood of the election being
delayed.
Any deal would allow political violence to abate. In March nearly 300 died
in the Natal province and more than 240 lives have been lost there this
month alone.
Mr Nelson Mandela, ANC president, will join Chief Buthelezi and Mr de Klerk
at a summit in Pretoria this morning which officials hope will produce
endorsement of a deal understood to have been agreed in principle yesterday.
The deal has been endorsed by Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, the ANC secretary-general,
and Mr Joe Slovo, the South African Communist party chairman who is also one
of the most influential figures in the ANC. Both participated in yesterday's
session.
Those close to the talks said that Chief Buthelezi demonstrated much greater
willingness for a settlement.
Apparently crucial in yesterday's initiative was the involvement of Prof
Washington Okunu, a Kenyan member of the team of international mediators
that arrived last week.
The financial rand, the main indicator of foreign investor sentiment,
strengthened on renewed hopes for a settlement, finishing in London 5 cents
higher at R5.345 to the dollar.
New South Africa rises in Boer heartland, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940419

