FT942-14348

FT  20 APR 94 / Russia expects release of Dollars 1.5bn IMF loan: Foreign
fears over growing budget pressure


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


The Russian government expects the board of the International Monetary Fund
to release today a Dollars 1.5bn loan, agreed provisionally last month with
Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF's managing director.
The loan represents an act of faith by the IMF in the government of Mr
Victor Chernomyrdin, and is meant to encourage international financial
institutions and private investors to step up activity in Russia. The World
Bank is expected to lend Dollars 2bn this year, and there are signs of
increased financial investment in Russian companies.
The government has fulfilled the relatively light conditions imposed upon it
by Mr Camdessus and has also kept tight control of credits and money supply.
It has signed a memorandum with the IMF on its economic policies for the
rest of this year, and has laid before its parliament a series of decrees
which would raise the budget revenue by Rbs20,000bn from its present level
of Rbs120,000bn.
The memorandum sets limits on the issuing of central bank credits to the
government and to commercial banks which have resulted in falls in monthly
inflation from about 20 per cent a month to the present 7 per cent.
A budget has been passed 'in principle' by the state Duma, with the demand
that estimated spending of Rbs180,000bn be raised and that the budget return
to the Duma in two weeks' time. This tug-of-war is expected to continue
until the summer.
However, foreign observers fear that the pressure on the budget will soon
prove insupportable, especially when the agrarian lobby demands money for
harvesting and subsidies are paid to Arctic circle cities before winter. In
addition, many large enterprises which are lying idle for lack of supplies
and customers are threatening massive layoffs if they are not supported.
The most evident of these is the giant Zil plant, famous for producing
massive limousines. In a passionately angry interview in the daily Trud
yesterday, Mr Yevgenny Brakov, the Zil general director, accused the
government of forgetting the plant and interfering with its attempts to
attract foreign partners.
In a graphic illustration of Zil's decline, he said production of trucks had
more than halved between 1985 and 1993, from 212,000 to less than 100,000,
and fell sharply again this year.
Editorial Comment, Page 13

The Financial Times


International Page 14

940420

