FT941-3350

FT  16 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Europe's farmers face stark
choice over production


   By ALISON MAITLAND


European farmers face a stark choice before the end of the decade between
tighter restraints on the use of land and chemicals or the complete
abolition of price support.
This is believed to be the central message of a detailed strategy document
to be considered today by the council of the National Farmers' Union of
England and Wales.
The NFU's long-term strategy group, which produced the report, believes the
recent Gatt deal will lead to another shake-up of the Common Agricultural
Policy before 2000.
'Current CAP policies are not going to increase consumption or bring down
the production of cereals and beef sufficiently to allow the EU to meet its
obligations under the Gatt settlement,' it says. 'EU farmers are approaching
a fundamental policy choice.'
This runs counter to assurances from the European Commission and the UK
government that no further fundamental change will be needed in sectors
subject to current CAP reforms to comply with EU commitments under the Gatt
deal.
The report is understood to rule out the option of exit bonds, under which
current agricultural support systems would end overnight and farmers would
be compensated with a fixed, finite payment, which would be tradeable.
The strategy group says this could push up the EU's annual spending on
agriculture - currently Ecu29bn - by 60-70 per cent in the short term and
would be politically unacceptable because it would lead to high rural
unemployment.
It also dismisses the extension of output quotas - such as those on milk -
to new sectors, saying this would be complicated to administer and would
conflict with the general reduction in government intervention in industry.
The choice, therefore, would be between tighter controls on inputs - for
example, by increasing the amount of set-aside land or reducing the amount
of nitrogen used - or abolishing the link between support payments to
farmers and their production levels.
Farm incomes would be better protected under a system of input controls,
assuming these would continue to be accompanied by subsidised exports and
import tariffs. 'But they may not be sustainable (beyond the 1990s) if
future Gatt rounds force lower levels of border protection and export
subsidies,' says the report.
The decoupling option would expose EU farmers to competition with world
prices, putting the full burden of support payments on the taxpayer. The
report suggests EU cereal prices could fall by a further 30 per cent before
reaching world price levels and that this might entail an unacceptably high
level of compensation.
The NFU plans to consult its 100,000 members, as well as the government, the
wider agricultural industry, and other European farming groups, in the
difficult task of achieving a consensus on future strategy.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

940316

