FT942-16333

FT  11 APR 94 / UK Company News: Aegis directors expected to quit -
Shareholder pressure grows for top board changes as big write-offs revealed


   By ANDREW JACK


Up to three directors of Aegis, the London-based holding company of Europe's
largest media buying and planning group, are expected to depart in the next
few months following growing shareholder pressure.
The details emerged as the company was preparing to reveal exceptional
write-offs of up to Pounds 40m in its 1993 results, due on Thursday.
Underlying performance is expected to be in line with City forecasts, but
the company is likely to report a substantial one-off charge for the
restructuring arranged with Warburg Pincus, the US investment firm which
owns 32 per cent of the company.
Aegis has come under criticism from analysts and investors for the strongly
French management of a company that has increasingly diversified its
operations and profits away from that country and is now listed only in
London.
Mr Michel Lefebvre, chief financial officer, is believed to be among those
departing, and headhunters are seeking out replacements for him and a
further two directors.
In addition, Mr Charles Hochman, the chief executive officer, may retire by
the end of next year.
Several dozen further redundancies of senior staff from the French
operations are expected to be announced shortly, in addition to about 300
job losses that have occurred in the past few months.
Last week the company announced its intention to move from its lavish
headquarters in Avenue Raphael in central Paris to La Defense within the
next two months.
The move will cost Aegis several million pounds in outstanding lease
payments and write-offs of expensive fixtures and fittings. Last year the
company also sold its two corporate jets.
Further exceptional write-offs of more than Pounds 10m are likely to be
shown in the accounts as a result of a restatement of the cost of the
company's Pounds 102m in bonds and loan stock which were part of the
refinancing last October.
Recasting the figures in the accounts using FRS 4, the new financial
reporting standard on capital instruments, would trigger debt interest
payments on Eurobonds of nearly Pounds 7m and refinancing costs of more than
Pounds 3m.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940411

