FT942-16392

FT  11 APR 94 / Regional voices with Whitehall's ear: Appointment of 10
civil servants to oversee urban funds wins guarded welcome


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, JOHN WILLMAN and CHRIS TIGHE


Ten new government regional offices open their doors today to provide
businesses, local authorities and voluntary bodies with a single point of
access to the Pounds 1.4bn annual budget for urban regeneration in England.
Each is headed by a senior civil servant who will act as regional director
for the departments of employment, environment, transport, and trade and
industry.
They will administer more than Pounds 3bn a year of government programmes on
behalf of each of the four government departments.
According to Sir George Young, the environment minister, the regional
directors will act as 'the eyes and ears' of the government in the regions.
But they will also provide a strong regional voice in Whitehall, he
believes, strengthening the input of the regions into policymaking. 'They
will be the people that local people can do business with,' he said. 'They
in turn will feed their opinions and experiences into the policy process.'
The move has been generally welcomed in the regions by business and local
government, in spite of worries over whether the offices will have the
freedom to make a difference.
The theory of devolving decision making and listening to local views
commands strong support in the north-east. But there are doubts about just
how much will change.
'It's a good idea in principle,' said Mr Jeremy Beecham, leader of
Labour-controlled Newcastle upon Tyne City council and chairman of the
Association of Metropolitan Authorities. But he has doubts over many aspects
of the new approach, including the absence of guidelines for bidding and the
unclear role of the training and enterprise councils (Tecs).
'I would be far from happy if Tecs were meant in some way to be in the
driving seat for regeneration,' he said. 'They have no legitimacy or
accountability for that role.'
Mr Derek Horsfield, chief executive of the Tyne and Wear Development
Company, which is funded by land investments and the property portfolio it
inherited from the defunct Tyne and Wear County Council, worries that not
enough has been done to merge different Whitehall interests.
'We need a single organisation, effectively a regional development
organisation, government-led with input from local politicians,' Mr
Horsfield said. 'Why didn't they roll them up into one super-ministry? They
have missed a great opportunity.'
Birmingham will be home to the west Midlands regional office, whose
director, Mr David Ritchie, has been featured in half-page advertisements in
local newspapers to drum up interest.
There are political misgivings in the region about the attempt to strengthen
the government's regional administration, even if, as Mr Ritchie suggested,
'it is not about taking powers away from local government. It is about
taking decisions down from Whitehall to a more local level.'
Mrs Theresa Stewart, Birmingham's Labour leader, finds a 'democratic
deficit' in what she calls 'regional government with neither answerability
nor accountability'. However, she conceded that integration of government
offices is 'probably useful' for administrative purposes.
In spite of the Pounds 1.4bn total in the single urban regeneration budget,
the regional offices will have little to distribute this year, since most of
the money is already committed to existing projects. There will be about
Pounds 100m to be awarded in the bidding round for next year, which begins
in the autumn.
The north-east expects to get between Pounds 10m and Pounds 15m in the first
year. Newcastle's Mr Beecham worries about the time and effort which will be
spent on bidding for relatively small sums.
Mr Neil Etherington, chief executive of Teesside Tomorrow, a business
leadership team supported by 65 of Cleveland's big companies, said he hoped
that the pot would grow if the new unified budget was seen to work.
'While Pounds 100m doesn't seem a lot of money one would hope political
pragmatism would follow the quality of the bids. If we are up to the job the
money should be up to the mark,' he said.
In Birmingham there are hopes that the new regional offices will help in
obtaining the Pounds 300m of European Regional Development Fund money
available for declining industrial regions.
'Increasingly, when you're looking at European Union money, the way in which
it is looked at and distributed is on a regional basis,' said Ms Sue Battle,
deputy chief executive of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce.
But there remains scepticism over how much will really change. Previous
experience suggests the offices will be advocates, selectively, of the
region in Whitehall.
If the regional directors are to contribute local views to the formation of
government policy, that raises the question of the independence of civil
servants, another observer commented. 'It would be helpful if we had an
outspoken, charismatic maverick,' he remarked. 'We have our own corner to
fight and we need somebody who is pretty good with a pair of gloves on.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MAKING CONTACT: THE NEW REGIONAL OFFICES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Region                    Senior regional director     Contact
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Eastern                   John Turner                  0234 363131
East Midlands             Mark Lanyon                  0602 506181
London                    Robin Young                  071 211 4193
Merseyside                John Stoker                  051 227 4111
North-east                Pamela Denham                091 201 3300
North-west                Marianne Neville-Rolfe       061 832 9111
South-east                Gillian Ashmore              071 605 9000
South-west                Brian Leonard                0272 273710
West Midlands             David Ritchie                021 212 5000
Yorkshire & Humberside    Jeremy Walker                0532 8363000
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940411

