FT942-12561

FT  29 APR 94 / Intelligence points to IRA-Iran drug connection


   By JIMMY BURNS, DAVID OWEN and PAUL ABRAHAMS


The IRA has been drawing on financial support from Iran, possibly linked to
drugs transactions, and may have been on the verge of securing a large arms
shipment.
This information, gathered by intelligence agencies, including Britain's
MI6, appears to be behind the decision by the Foreign Office yesterday to
warn the Tehran government to desist from further contacts with the Irish
terrorist organisation.
British officials insist they had no alternative to taking yesterday's high
profile action because of the firm nature of the information gathered.
Although some money is believed to have been exchanged between Iran and the
Irish Republican Army, the action was largely pre-emptive and designed to
stop the links from strengthening.
UK intelligence has been monitoring political links between the IRA and
Tehran since the early 1980s.
Recently the suspicion has grown that the IRA may have been aiming to secure
financial and military support from Tehran as an alternative to Libya, which
has been a main supplier of weapons and explosives.
The tilt towards Tehran follows intense efforts by the FBI and UK security
forces to stop funding and logistical support from the US, and a crackdown
on racketeering in Northern Ireland linked to the IRA.
Yesterday's announcement follows the recent arrest in Greece of two German
subjects allegedly linked to a drugs operation involving the IRA and the
Middle East.
The latest disclosure comes at a particularly sensitive time in Northern
Ireland, with violence again on the increase and the main political parties
in the province - including the IRA's political wing Sinn Fein - gearing up
for the European election. This will inevitably be seen in Northern Ireland
as a referendum on the Anglo-Irish peace initiative.
According to observers, there would be few more effective ways of
undermining support for Sinn Fein in advance of this crucial poll than by
linking the IRA to drug trafficking.
Republican leaders have traditionally been careful to disassociate
themselves from drug-related crime and have frequently resorted to gun law
to punish alleged traffickers.
Earlier this week the IRA killed one alleged dealer and injured 16 others in
an offensive whose timing was felt by observers to have been heavily
influenced by the election.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940429

