FT941-4258

FT  11 MAR 94 / International Capital Markets: DTB fills gaps in yield curve
with two new products


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


Futures traders are gearing up for the launch of two interest-rate contracts
on the Deutsche Terminborse, Germany's financial futures exchange.
Today is the first day of trading in the DTB's long-term 'Buxl' future,
based on bonds issued by the German government and the Treuhandanstalt with
a remaining maturity of between 15 and 30 years. Next Friday, the
screen-based exchange plans to launch its long-awaited Fibor future, a
three-month interest-rate contract based on the Frankfurt inter-bank offered
rate.
'Now the spectrum will be complete - anyone who trades this market can play
the whole yield curve without any gaps,' said Mr Ralf Lemster, head of
derivatives sales and trading at Dresdner Bank in Frankfurt. The DTB already
lists five-year and 10-year bond futures.
Mr Jorg Franke, DTB chairman, said the Buxl future had been launched to meet
increased demand for long-dated debt, especially from international
investors.
'The rise in issuance at this part of the yield curve has shown that there
is a real need for long-dated bonds in the cash market,' and a hedging
instrument was needed to round off the picture, he said. Since December
1993, Germany has issued DM27bn of 22-year and 30-year bonds.
Despite some concern over the liquidity of the underlying market, most are
confident that the Bundesbank's commitment to reinforcing Frankfurt's
position as a financial centre will ensure a steady supply.
'I expect to see at least one 30-year bond every six months - that's not a
lot, but enough,' said Mr Peter Kerger, head of futures and options at
NatWest Markets in Frankfurt.
Volatility in the 10-year bund future has jumped sharply following recent
market turbulence, and an even longer dated instrument is likely to be even
more volatile.
'It's not the easiest instrument to trade, but if we want to be an
international market, we have to offer these types of products,' said Mr
Lemster.
Moreover, said Mr Franke, the contract would offer cash investors a way to
hedge their very long dated positions during turbulent market conditions,
while providing short-term traders with a speculative instrument.
The Fibor future may be slower to take off, largely because Liffe already
lists a similar contract based on the British Bankers Association interest
settlement rate for three-month Euromark deposits.
'The Fibor future could be a flop,' said one dealer, noting that
'duplicating another exchange's products has never worked'. Moreover, he
feels that there is not enough Fibor-based business around to justify
creating a Fibor contract.
But others say that is precisely why it is needed. 'Once the Fibor future is
in place, it could spur the development of more Fibor-based instruments,'
said Mr Franke.
Some fear the underlying market may not be broad enough without issuance of
short-term government paper but hopes for such debt were dashed yesterday
when Bundesbank council member Johann Wilhelm Gaddum said the issuance of
treasury bills could interfere with the central bank's monetary policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940311

