FT943-984

FT  27 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Japan tries again to avoid US sanctions


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan's international trade and industry minister,
will today make a last-ditch attempt to resolve the deadlock in US-Japanese
trade talks and avoid sanctions.
Mr Hashimoto's decision to fly to Washington for further talks coincided
with a warning from Mr Walter Mondale, US ambassador to Japan, that US trade
law obliges it to impose economic sanctions if there is no accord by the
Friday deadline.
'It's not something we'd want to do, but it would be something we would be
compelled to do under the law,' said Mr Mondale.
Mr Hashimoto will meet Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, and
plans to return in time for the opening of the next parliamentary session on
Friday.
He takes the baton from Mr Yohei Kono, the foreign minister, who had to
break off talks to prepare for a United Nations speech today.
There were signs of progress in talks on foreign access to Japan's public
procurement of telecommunications and medical equipment, and on the
insurance market, said Mr Mondale.
Agreement on these would be 'the key to a more positive tone in the whole
trade matter', he said.
Access to Japan's car and car parts market, representing nearly 60 per cent
of its trade surplus with the US, and access to the market for flat glass,
where the economic stakes are small but symbolic, are the other outstanding
matters.
Cars - the main subject of Mr Hashimoto's mission - were 'not quite ripe'
for an accord and the outlook for a deal on glass was unclear, Mr Mondale
said.
The US ambassador could give no indication whether Washington might postpone
the sanctions deadline - as it did in a row over the Japanese construction
market last year - if there was an accord on public procurement or
insurance.
'I don't know if we will accept a partial package. . . but if we can't, the
provisions of our law will take place,' he said in reference to the US Trade
Act. Under this, sanctions would be announced in the event of failure to
agree on public procurement on Friday, to apply after a 30-day comment
period, on October 30.
Other sectors are covered by Super 301 of the act, an 18-month process which
has never yet led to penalties in other trade rows.
Mr Mondale said the latest negotiations were more productive than in
February, when the US and Japan broke off trade talks after a summit between
president Bill Clinton and former prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa ended in
impasse. Tax cuts proposed by the Japanese government last week were a
'positive' move towards stimulating consumption and reducing the current
account surplus, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940927

