FT942-12350

FT  29 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Early gains sharply reversed towards
the close - Market Report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


The return to business in the US securities markets soon reversed the
optimistic mood in London yesterday afternoon, sending share prices down
sharply towards the close in the wake of weakness in British government
bonds. The stock market also reacted sharply to a profits warning from
British Gas which topped the active stocks list as its shares fell heavily
as worries gathered regarding the dividend outlook.
The FT-SE Index was more than 17 points ahead in early dealings, buoyed by a
firm start in bond prices in the UK and in other European markets. The
equity session opened with the widely expected bid for Lasmo from Enterprise
Oil, which offered Pounds 1.45bn, wholly in shares and warrants valued by
Enterprise at 150p for each Lasmo share.
Shares in Lasmo remained comfortably above the Enterprise terms, with the
market clearly looking for a rival offer, perhaps from British Gas. Later
its profits warning was regarded as not relevant to any plans it might have
for Lasmo, although some institutions sold Lasmo shares near the end of the
session. Selling appeared to reflect fund managers' preference for cash
rather than Enterprise paper.
The stock market came back from its best levels, with ICI giving some ground
in spite of generally satisfactory profits figures. ICI shares had performed
well ahead of the results, encouraged by good trading news from leading
chemical groups in Germany and the US, and profit-taking was enough to turn
the shares lower following the statement.
However, UK equities continued to trade confidently until US markets
re-opened in the face of statistics on gross domestic product and durable
goods orders which failed to please either equities or bonds in New York.
The apparent slowing of growth in the US first quarter depressed Wall
Street, while the rise in price deflator, hinting at inflation, hit Federal
bonds. In London, gilts turned down by a full point and the Footsie by more
than 20 points to show a final reading of 20.1 at 3,129.9.
Trading volume jumped smartly as marketmakers recognised that London was
still unable to resist the influence of both Wall Street and the bond
markets. The final Seaq total of 756.5m shares was more than one-fifth down
from Wednesday's figure, which in turn showed a lower retail, or customer,
value of Pounds 1.27bn; recent daily averages have been closer to Pounds
1.50bn.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, slower to respond to US influences than the blue
chip Footsie list, closed 3.5 up at 3,797.4. The London market has been slow
to respond to this week's flow of improved corporate results and increased
bid activity, and traders were disappointed to see the sharp reaction
yesterday to the bad news from British Gas. Confidence in the pace of
economic recovery has now replaced near term base rate hopes as the
significant factor behind UK stocks.
By the close, when the FT-SE 100 was virtually at the day's low and the
futures contract on the Index was showing a substantial discount to the
underlying equity stocks, the overall picture was decidely negative. Not
even the sharp rise in profits at General Motors seemed likely to brighten
the picture on Wall Street and nervousness regarding the timing of the next
tightening move from the US Federal Reserve unsettled investors in London.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

940429

