FT943-786

FT  27 SEP 94 / Two groups plan Nigeria divestment: Unilever, UK bank
reshape holdings


   By PAUL ADAMS


   LAGOS


The UK-Dutch consumer group Unilever and Britain's Standard Chartered Bank
are divesting from their Nigerian affiliates over the next month with two of
the largest ever share issues coming to the country's flagging stock
exchange.
Both companies emphasise their decisions are dictated by worldwide strategy,
not by the recent political instability and economic downturn in Nigeria.
But sales of their assets in UAC Nigeria and First Bank of Nigeria
respectively coincide with low investor confidence in Nigeria's economy.
Both cases underline the problems created by the 40 per cent statutory limit
on foreign shareholdings in manufacturing, energy and banking companies in
Nigeria.
UAC evolved from a pioneer trading company in west Africa into Nigeria's
largest manufacturing and distribution conglomerate, with the 60 per cent
Nigerian-owned shares held by individual and institutional investors.
Unilever will keep its 40 per cent share in UAC's Tractor & Equipment
division (the Caterpillar dealership), which is to be a separate joint
venture, and acquire all the shares in the consumer goods division.
These and the cash from the sale of the rest of its shares will be
re-invested in the newly formed Unilever Nigeria. Unilever's UAC holding was
valued last December at about Dollars 46m at the official exchange rate of
N22 to the dollar. Since then, the naira's parallel market rate has weakened
from around N48 to N75. After tax, profits in 1993 came to N432.3m (Dollars
19.6m), an increase in naira terms from 1992 of 29 per cent, below the rates
of inflation and devaluation. Inflation is running at nearly 70 per cent and
the naira's sharp devaluation has eroded domestic demand and put pressure on
profits.
Standard Chartered agreed yesterday to reduce from 38 to 9.9 per cent its
stake in First Bank of Nigeria, which last year was one of two quoted
companies in Nigeria to make pre-tax profits over N1bn.
The shares will be sold via a public offer beginning next month. Last year's
privatisation of the Nigerian government's majority stake made Standard
Chartered the biggest shareholder, but did not allow it to acquire a
controlling interest. Under UK law this made the group responsible to the
Bank of England for the management of the bank although it lacked a
controlling interest, unless it cut its stake to less than 10 per cent.
The sale of the government's majority holding in Nigeria's other leading
commercial bank, United Bank for Africa, to Nigerian private investors has
made another foreign bank, Banque Nationale de Paris, the largest
shareholder without a controlling stake.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

940927

