FT942-16363

FT  11 APR 94 / Matriarchal era in the making: America


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


Why does Hillary Rodham Clinton attract such venomous criticism, especially
from males of a conservative bent? I suspect the attacks reflect her gender
as well as her politics: some men are unsettled by the presence in the White
House of a genuinely powerful First Lady.
This thought was prompted, oddly enough, by a history of intellectual ideas:
Richard Tarnas's The Passion of the Western Mind (Ballantine Books, Dollars
16). Tarnas, a Californian academic, believes we are about to experience a
transformation in our 'world view' as profound, say, as the shift from
classical Greek culture to medieval Christianity. It will involve the
'death' of the aggressive male ego and its replacement by a more inclusive,
holistic, feminine approach to the world.
Nonsense, I thought at first. Yet change is under way. The shift of women
out of the home and into the market economy in recent decades is an economic
and social transformation without precedent in western history. As women
gain influence in every sector, from medicine to financial services, they
surely will begin to shape the world in their image. In contrast to past
periods, the 21st century may well turn out to be the 'century of women'.
Today's career women still face some discrimination - because men still
occupy most of the very top positions. But educational trends suggest their
daughters will be unstoppable. In the US, a higher proportion of women than
men now attends college. And in an age of 'knowledge-based' capitalism,
women are at least as likely as men to possess the qualities needed for
economic success. Brute strength and aggression are no longer advantages;
today you need perseverance, flexibility and inter-personal skills - virtues
that women possess in abundance.
Women's empowerment is already bringing fundamental social change, as
illustrated by last month's Washingtonian magazine. A local career woman in
her late 30s decided she wanted a baby without the hassle of finding a
suitable partner. She found the genes she required (high IQ, good eyesight
and tall physique) in a Californian sperm bank, and now has a bouncing baby.
Modern man's position is not entirely secure in either the home or the
workplace.
Tarnas is not content with purely economic or technological explanations for
this revolution. Put briefly, his thesis is that the rise of women is
necessary to resolve an impasse in a western cultural tradition long
dominated by masculine values.
The absence of women in any list of great minds from Plato to Freud, he
claims, reflects the nature of western man's intellectual quest as much as
social repression. Man started in a state of primordial unity with nature,
worshipping 'earth-goddesses'. But from the Greeks onward, he strove to
differentiate himself from the natural world and to dominate it. By
exploiting a cold and fiercely rational intelligence, he scaled breathtaking
intellectual heights: in the age of Newton and Descartes, everything seemed
within his grasp.
Yet as man compulsively analysed the world, the certainties of the
Enlightenment began to dissolve. After Darwin, man lost faith in God. After
Freud, he lost faith in his own rationality. After Heisenberg and the rise
of quantum mechanics, he even lost faith in the simple verities of science.
By the 20th century, complexities seemed to be multiplying in all
directions. Solid matter was superseded by fuzzy, indeterminate wave
functions, just as strict ethical codes were superseded by a pervasive moral
relativism. The analytical approach left man feeling alienated, without a
deep sense of purpose.
At the same time, man's parallel project of gratifying his ego by subduing
nature ran into unexpected difficulties. Capitalism produced a stupendous
increase in economic productivity, but it did not eliminate poverty. And by
the late 20th century it hit a new set of ecological constraints. The
masculine desire to ravish nature found itself battling a feminine desire to
protect it.
In Tarnas's view, the rising influence of women is an inevitable response to
this whole battery of problems. Women are beginning to assume a leadership
role because the masculine analytical tradition is exhausted. It achieved
scientific and economic miracles, but has not led to harmonious relations
between people nor catered for spiritual needs. The 'green movement' is just
one element in what is likely to be a more general 'feminisation' of social
and economic relations. The intellectual rebirth of the 21st century will
require a new synthesis, stressing holistic approaches to knowledge,
'oneness' between man and nature, and participatory solutions in the social
sphere.
Is this merely politically correct verbiage, designed to placate feminists?
Not necessarily. Tarnas admittedly fails to realise that less competition
and individualism in the economic sphere would have disastrous consequences
for living standards. Nor is it clear that masculine and feminine values can
be separated in the way he claims: as women take on the former functions of
men, their values may change. Mrs Clinton seemed to be more macho than
nurturing in her career as a cattle futures trader.
Yet Tarnas is surely right to pinpoint the rising influence of women as the
most significant social trend of our times and to link this with perceived
(if often illusory) shortcomings in a network of beliefs and institutions,
or world view, created largely by men.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940411

