FT942-16286

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (5): Doubts cloud outlook -
Venezuela


   By JOSEPH MANN


Last year, Venezuela's capital markets had to cope with a swarm of
uncertainties. These included three different presidents during a 12-month
period, terrorist bombings, an economic recession, high inflation, a large
fiscal deficit and weak prices for petroleum exports, which are the main
source of export receipts for this South American republic of 20m and a
vital source of revenue for the government.
In 1994, the markets must still deal with sagging oil prices, inflation, a
deficit and a recession, now in its second year.
But the country now has a new president, Mr Rafael Caldera, 78, who began a
five-year term on February 2. The political situation has stabilised, at
least for the time being, and the only bomb came in January, when the
failure of the country's second-largest bank, Banco Latino, set off a crisis
in the financial system and caused a run on the government's foreign
currency reserves.
Investors still have plenty to worry about in Venezuela, especially since
the new government's economic programme (new taxes, budget cuts, price
controls, plus a commitment to privatisation and new private investment) is
just getting off the ground. It is too early to say what kind of results the
programme will produce.
Interest rates remain high, and are a prime target of the new
administration. Average nominal rates for commercial loans in February were
65.4 per cent, while average rates for time deposits were 47 per cent.
Inflation was 46 per cent in 1993 and is projected to be between 35-60 per
cent this year. The low figure comes from the government, while the high
figure reflects pessimistic thinking by some businessmen.
The CPI rose by 4.3 per cent in January of this year, but declined to 1.9
per cent in February. The drop was due mainly to the application of selected
price controls.
The failure of Banco Latino last January provoked a rush to buy US dollars,
and the government's international monetary reserves fell by USDollars 1.4bn
in January and February, compared with a decline of Dollars 519m for
full-year 1993.
The Venezuelan bolivar, which lost 25 per cent of its value vis-a-vis the
dollar last year, continues to decline on a daily basis under a crawling peg
system implemented by the central bank.
As a result, dollar purchases continue to be stronger than the norm, and
many Venezuelans are buying dollars as a hedge against inflation and
devaluation.
In spite of all this, the country's equity market has been surprisingly
strong. The Caracas Stock Exchange Index, which rose by less than 1 per cent
in January, was up 28 per cent by the end of February and by March 28 had
dropped to 18 per cent above the 1993 year-end figure.
In 1993, the Caracas index rose by 10 per cent in nominal terms, but in real
terms declined by 17.5 per cent. The market went through a series of strong
ups and downs last year, a pattern that seems to be appearing again in 1994.
One stock analyst, Mr Alex Dalmady, pointed out that the roller-coaster
performance of the Caracas exchange in 1993 produced strong gains for some
investors, especially those who picked up blue chips during the slumps.
This year, he said, market rallies in January and February have left some
Venezuelan industrials undervalued and quite attractive. These include
Sivensa, a steelmaker, Madosa, an appliance company, and HL Boulton, a
diversified industrial and commercial group.
However, the Caracas equity market's outlook for 1994 is clouded by the
threat of a proposed tax on bank debits. This new levy, which is still being
considered by Congress, would tax most private sector and individual debit
transactions at banks by 0.75 per cent. The tax would cover cheques and
electronic debits.
The Caldera administration argues that the tax will only be in effect until
the end of 1994, and that it is necessary to cover part of a large fiscal
deficit.
The president of the Caracas Stock Exchange, Ms Norys Aguirre, requested
that the government exclude exchange transactions from the proposed tax. She
warned that it would significantly raise transaction costs and drive much of
the exchange's business offshore.
A similar tax in Argentina, Ms Aguirre said, was eliminated several years
ago soon after it was implemented. The Argentine authorities discovered that
the tax had driven much of Argentina's stock trading to neighbouring
Uruguay, and had encouraged Argentines to conduct as many business
activities as possible in cash.
Issues of Venezuelan corporate bonds in dollars have declined this year, but
new issues denominated in bolivars are quite strong, according to Mr Stephen
A. Haecker, head of Bank of America's local capital market subsidiary,
Bamerinvest CA
Leading companies such as the CANTV, La Electricidad de Caracas and Corimon
find that commercial paper offers an economical alternative to bank loans.
However, the commercial paper market has been somewhat disorganised this
year as new government regulators take over.
Several Venezuelan companies have placed their shares on international stock
markets in recent years (for example, in the shape of ADRs), and a small
group of other companies are looking at ADR issues for 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940411

