FT943-876

FT  27 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Eurotunnel share fall casts doubt on
finances


   By SIMON DAVIES


Eurotunnel's share price fell 19p, or 7 per cent, to 250p yesterday, as
reports of leaks in the Channel Tunnel added to the challenge the company
faces in avoiding a further refinancing, following its May Pounds 858m
rights issue.
The salt water leaks were dismissed by the company as in line with the
design, with the only problem coming from the silting up of parts of its
secondary drainage system. Eurotunnel said it would cause no further delays
to the start of a paying passenger service.
If the share price remains depressed, however, this would have a knock-on
effect on anticipated capital from the conversion of warrants.
At the time of the rights issue, the company's financing plan gave Pounds
473m of leeway. However, this figure assumed that about Pounds 180m would be
raised from conversion of the 1993 warrants, expiring in October 1995.
The warrants have a conversion price of marginally above 300p, making this
source of capital far from certain.
In addition, the rights prospectus anticipated Pounds 137m of revenues for
the current year, which assumed the commencement of the passenger shuttle
service in October.
This has been put back by six weeks until mid-November. This is likely to
remove at least half the projected turnover from the passenger service for
the current year.
Mr Richard Hannah, an analyst at UBS Securities, said: 'The funding margin
is looking very tight, and it looks like a third rescue rights issue could
be in the offing during the next 12 months.'
The company's banks separate projections indicated a funding margin of only
Pounds 34m, excluding cash from the warrants.
With Pounds 48m of income due to have come in from Le Shuttle in 1994, much
of that margin will have disappeared through the delay in the customer
service.
The company has a further Pounds 50m from a fall back loan facility from
Morgan Grenfell and Warburg. It is also involved in arbitration over delay
in the start up of the Eurostar Service and is claiming up to Pounds 400m,
plus tariff increases.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940927

