FT942-16074

FT  12 APR 94 / International Company News: Goodyear rally extended with 30%
income gain


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Goodyear Tire & Rubber, the US tyre manufacturer that has staged a strong
recovery over the past three years, yesterday said it expected to report an
increase in first-quarter net income of between 30 per cent and 35 per cent
above the previous year's figure.
It also announced it was seeking to enter the Chinese market by setting up a
joint venture with a company manufacturing and selling tyres in China.
Mr Stanley Gault, chairman and chief executive, told shareholders at the
annual meeting in Akron, Ohio, that net profits should be in the Dollars
113m to Dollars 118m range, compared with Dollars 87.1m before accounting
changes last time.
Preliminary estimates suggested first-quarter sales would be 2 per cent
ahead of last year's Dollars 2.81bn, Mr Gault said.
Earnings per share should be in the 75 to 78 cents range, compared with 60
cents last time.
The Goodyear board also announced it had declared a 33 per cent increase in
the dividend to 20 cents from 15 cents a share for the first quarter. The
company's stock rose by Dollars  1/2 to Dollars 42 1/8 .
Mr Gault attributed the strong first-quarter results to a combination of new
products, cost reductions and efficiency improvements.
The same factors have underscored the sharp recovery in the company's
financial performance since Mr Gault took over as chairman and chief
executive in 1991.
The sales increase was more modest than the profit improvement because it
included a higher proportion of tyres for new cars, which sold at lower
prices than replacement tyres.
Concerning the group's plan to enter China, Mr Gault said Goodyear would
prefer a joint venture. But he added the company had also been approached by
Chinese provinces seeking to interest it in a greenfield venture - an option
Goodyear would consider if no suitable partner could be found.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940412

