FT942-16053

FT  12 APR 94 / International Bonds: Ecu traders clear the decks for the
EBRD


   By CONNER MIDDELMANN


The friendly tone in Europe's government bond markets lifted sentiment in
the Eurobond market, but issuance remained thin as market participants
stayed cautious ahead of this week's release of inflation data in the US and
the UK, as well as Thursday's meeting of the Bundesbank's central bank
council.
In the Ecu sector, players were clearing the decks for a bond issue by the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, expected by some as early
as today. The EBRD yesterday awarded the mandate for the issue to Banque
Paribas and Goldman Sachs International.
According to the lead managers, the timing and terms of the issue are still
uncertain and depend on market conditions. Syndicate sources expect a five
to seven-year global bond of Ecu500m to Ecu1bn. The Kingdom of Spain and the
Council of Europe are also said to be planning Ecu issues.
Most dealers expect Ecu supply to meet healthy investor demand. 'An enormous
amount of Ecu bonds mature this year and the money has to be reinvested,'
said one syndicate official. Moreover, rather than pinpointing any single
bond market, many investors are currently seeking broad exposure to European
bonds via the Ecu market, he said.
The sterling sector gave a warm welcome to Pounds 150m of four-year
floating-rate notes from Woolwich Building Society via lead manager Samuel
Montagu. The notes, which pay a coupon of three-month Libor plus 10 basis
points, yielded 16 basis points over Libor at the 99.79 fixed re-offer
price.
Meanwhile, several borrowers took advantage of continued investor demand for
lira paper and good swap opportunities to issue lira bonds, continuing a
recent trend.
L-Bank Finance and Sudwest LB Capital Markets both increased outstanding
10-year deals by L100m while Swedish Export Credit launched a L150m 9 1/8
per cent 10-year bond, callable after three years. All three deals ended the
day well inside fees.
Although some traders warned that the lira sector may start to get
congested, others expect steady investor demand to continue, boosted by
hopes of further declines in interest rates and a strengthening currency.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940412

