FT943-12982

FT  22 JUL 94 / Kok aims to break Dutch deadlock


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


The Netherlands' last chance to come up with a new government before autumn
rests firmly on the shoulders of Mr Wim Kok, the country's outgoing finance
minister and long-time leader of the Labour party.
At the request of Queen Beatrix, Mr Kok is working in secret on a government
programme which he hopes will break the impasse following inconclusive
general elections on May 3.
The fruits of his labours, begun two weeks ago, are expected to be revealed
on Monday. If his ideas are accepted by a majority of MPs, Mr Kok could
emerge as the next prime minister of a new coalition, succeeding Mr Ruud
Lubbers, the country's veteran leader who has kept the government ticking
over as a caretaker premier since May.
But if the Labour party rejects the proposals, Mr Kok might find he has
manoeuvred himself into a job as leader of the opposition.
The challenge for Mr Kok - to write a government programme single-handedly -
is unusual as Dutch coalitions are normally created through direct talks
between parties.
In May's elections the two biggest parties, the Christian Democrats and
Labour, lost heavily to the right-wing Liberals and D66, a left-of-centre
party. This fragmentation means that at least three parties will be needed
to form a government majority, in contrast to the outgoing two-party
coalition of Christian Democrats and Labour.
Queen Beatrix decided to appoint Mr Kok as a neutral 'informateur' above
party politics in early July, with his appointment coming days after a
six-week attempt to form a government between Labour, the Liberals and D66
failed.
However, it is looking increasingly likely that Mr Kok's efforts may yet
result in an historic 'purple' coalition between the three parties.
The term 'purple' comes from mixing the party hues; Labour's 'red', the
'Tory-blue' of the Liberals and the green logo of D66. But the term also
implies a coalition that would exclude the Christian Democrats from power
for the first time in modern Dutch politics.
The first attempt to form a government between Labour, the Liberals and D66
was scuttled by disagreement over future spending cuts.
The parties had reached broad consensus in other areas but still needed to
find additional spending cuts. Labour argued that savings should be found
within ministries while the Liberals insisted that greater economies should
be made in the country's social welfare system.
On Tuesday night, Mr Frits Bolkestein, Liberal leader, emerged from talks
with Mr Kok to say the Labour leader was prepared to take certain employees'
insurance schemes out of the public sector and leave them to employers. This
could be a concession to the Liberals' demands for radical changes in social
security.
At the same time, Mr Jacques Wallage, Mr Kok's deputy in the Labour party,
revealed that the expected shortfall in the social security budget over the
next four years could be only Fl 1.2bn (Pounds 444m) rather than the Fl 3bn
that was assumed last month. This could reduce the need to make sharp cuts
in social spending.
Mr Kok expects to reveal all to a politics-weary country next week. If his
solo efforts at forming a government fail, however, the search for a new
coalition could easily stretch into the autumn.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940722

