FT944-2607

FT  16 DEC 94 / France and US raise the stakes in Bosnia


   By BRUCE CLARK


   BRUSSELS


France and the US, the leading western players in the Bosnian poker game,
have both raised the stakes by promising to get more deeply involved, at
least in the short term.
That was the conclusion to emerge yesterday from a two-day meeting of Nato
defence ministers where ambitious plans for new multinational operations in
Bosnia topped the agenda.
Paris and Washington have both made it plain that deeper involvement for a
short time could be a prelude to abandoning the scene in Bosnia - something
neither wants to do, although it could become inevitable. And, according to
diplomats at Nato headquarters, each country has a hidden as well as an
overt agenda.
France is promoting a plan to regroup and reinforce the UN mission in
Bosnia, which would have the happy side-effect of making it much easier to
withdraw if that becomes unavoidable.
The US has thrown its weight behind the idea of a massive Nato operation to
provide 'cover' for an eventual UN pull-out from Bosnia. If it ever goes
ahead, this operation would also have a side-effect: it would satisfy the
long-standing US demand for effective intervention against the Serbs.
The French plan for upgrading the UN operation in Bosnia will be discussed
next week in The Hague at a meeting of military chiefs from the 11 Nato
countries which are directly or indirectly involved in Bosnia.
Britain, second biggest troop contributor after France, has serious
reservations about the French plans. One reason, say diplomats, is that
London fears a watering down of the authority of General Sir Michael Rose,
the British officer who is UN commander in Bosnia.
The French ideas include the securing of Sarajevo airport; the creation of a
safe corridor between Sarajevo and Split; and the regrouping of UN forces
near the corridor. Whatever their other merits, all these ideas would make
for an easier withdrawal.
As for the US-sponsored plan for a massive withdrawal operation, one effect
would be a transfer of operational control from the UN - whose caution in
Bosnia has infuriated Washington - to the Atlantic alliance. That could mean
that even as they withdrew, western forces in Bosnia would finally take the
action against the Serbs which US politicians have long been advocating.
The scale of the proposed operation, which would be by far the biggest
mission Nato has ever sent into a war zone, seems to grow with every news
report. Under one scenario circulating among Nato diplomats, the exercise
would require 29,600 ground troops and 4,000 airmen for combat roles alone,
plus many thousands more in communications and logistics roles.
Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, disclosed yesterday that the Nato
operation would also envisage removing or destroying the Serbs'
anti-aircraft batteries,something the US is already impatient to do.
However, the Nato withdrawal plan would present all countries with some hard
financial choices. On one hand, it has been estimated that getting the
necessary equipment into position would cost about Dollars 800m - roughly
the equivalent of Nato's entire military budget for the year - while every
month the operation lasted would cost about Dollars 270m.
These are big sums, and, spending them could leave Nato without funds to
finance military co-operation with countries in central Europe. On the other
hand, Canada and Nordic states deployed the best of their armour and
communications equipment in Bosnia, and the thought of abandoning or
destroying them in an over-hasty or poorly supported withdrawal would be
nightmarish.
The six-point ceasefire plan advanced by Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb
leader, has clouded the outlook for any of the plans discussed in Brussels
ever coming to fruition. As one Nato diplomat saw it, Mr Karadzic is clearly
hoping that his new show of reasonableness will divide the international
community by satisfying some countries while leaving others sceptical.
Mr Perry, and Mr Willy Claes, Nato secretary-general, both stressed
yesterday the ceasefire proposals were no substitute for a full-blown peace
plan. Mr Claes expressed doubt as to whether it was necessary for
ex-president Jimmy Carter, or any other high-level intermediary, to talk
ceasefire terms with Mr Karadzic. But Mr Perry was slightly more positive,
saying the Bosnian Serb initiative could help the humanitarian situation.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

