FT941-12996

FT  27 JAN 94 / International Company News: German group's Castle in the air
 -The relationship with the US oil trader


   By LAURIE MORSE


Large portions of Metallgesellschaft's financial distress are being blamed
on failed oil and gas hedging strategies of MG Corp, its US subsidiary.
However, MG's tangled dealings with Castle Energy Corp reflect more than
just a derivatives strategy gone wrong.
MG Corp's refinery contracts with the company, described by one oil expert
as irrationally beneficial to Castle, remain in force.
Five years ago, Castle Energy Corp was a Dollars 5m company whose sole
business was managing oil and gas partnerships. By 1989, tax law changes
forced Mr Joseph Castle II, the chairman, to look for other business. At the
same time, MG Corp was embarking on an ambitious expansion into oil and gas
trading and merchandising.
In the poker game that is global oil trading, owning a refinery or two
increases a trading company's options. The two found common ground.
In late 1989, Castle bought a mothballed refinery in Lawrenceville,
Illinois.
It was a marginal property in a troubled industry and the refinery required
eight months of refurbishing and large investments before it could operate.
Soon MG Corp was its sole customer.
In October, 1991, MG Corp initiated the first of a series of extraordinary
refining agreements with Castle. It paid Castle a fixed refining fee and
promised Castle any profits it made marketing the refined products.
Castle in return agreed to indemnify any losses that MG made trading the
products. Had Castle been an MG Corp subsidiary this arrangement may have
been understandable.
As a separate company, the agreement was unique in the refining industry.
Castle logged Dollars 31.6m in operating losses during the four months of
the agreement, all linked to paybacks to cover MG Corp trading losses.
Under a separate arrangement, if Castle needed operating funds or capital
for expansion, MG Corp lent the necessary cash, and received Castle stock in
exchange for the loans.
By November, 1993, Castle had a Dollars 363m revolving credit line from MG
Corp, and MG Corp had 3.5m shares of Castle stock, or 49.3 per cent of
ownership.
The tangled financial dealings between the two companies shed some light on
why, even now, MG Corp's bankers are having difficulty sorting out its
liabilities.
The story drew the attention of US securities regulators, because deals made
between Castle and MG Corp during 1992 and 1993 had the effect of pumping up
Castle's profits in advance of Castle's Dollars 42m public stock offering in
November 1993.
The share sale came as MG Corp's liquidity problems were reaching a crisis.
News of MG Corp's problems reached the creditors of its German parent one
week after Castle's share offering. Nearly all of the Dollars 39.5m Castle
gained from the offering was paid to MG to reduce dept, according to company
filings. Senior MG people were pulling the strings at Castle.
Mr Siegfried Hodapp, formerly MG Corp's president and formerly a senior
vice-president of the German parent, was made a Castle director within weeks
of Castle's venture into the refining business in 1989.
As MG's investment mounted, Mr Hodapp had replaced Mr Castle as company
chairman. Two other MG executives joined the Castle board. Mr Arthur Benson
was chairman of MG Natural Gas Corp, and Mr Joseph Rinaldi was head of MG's
US finance arm. The Castle's agreement to cover MG Corp's oil products
trading losses was brief.
After four months, MG revised the agreement so the refining company could
log profits. MG agreed to to pay Castle a fixed rate of Dollars 5 per barrel
above the near month market price for the benchmark west Texas intermediate
crude oil, unconditionally, to the year 2,000.
In the refining business, contracts to pay a fixed price over crude oil
prices are standard, but the margins are generally in cents, not dollars.
That Dollars 5 refining margin put Castle in clover.
Its revenues jumped 54 per cent, or Dollars 187.2m, in fiscal 1992. After
losing Dollars 36.6m in the first four months of 1992, Castle earned Dollars
1.9m for the year.
MG Corp would not comment on why it granted Castle such terms. However, it
could have been part of a larger strategy, because it was expanded to
include two other properties the following year. Using MG Corp loans Castle
bought a Texas natural gas pipeline and other gas interests from Arco for
Dollars 103.7m, and just a month before its stock offering, purchased a
second, smaller oil refinery in California. Castle got a better margin from
MG for the output of the California refinery - a set price of Dollars 10.20
per barrel over nearby Alaska North slope crude price, guaranteed for
several years.
The MG Corp contracts allowed Castle to burnish the otherwise stark business
realities laid out to investors in Castle's share offering November 24. In
the prospectus Castle clearly stated that it had, as of September 30, 1993,
a negative net worth of Dollars 9.4m and a total debt of Dollars 335.5m.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940127

