FT943-13149

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (4): We have lift-off - Economic growth


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


Albania's transformation from a closed economy of the absurd to an open
economy of frenetic consumerism within three years has taken everybody by
surprise, writes ANTHONY ROBINSON.
The International Monetary Fund, no stranger to economic turnarounds,
eulogises an 'economic miracle' which gave Albania an estimated 11 per cent
GDP growth last year, the sort of dynamic usually seen only in Asia and
Albania's old mentor, China.
Mr Gramoz Pashko, one of Albania's most prominent academic economists and
deputy prime minister in charge of economic reform in the interim 'stability
government' of 1991, puts events in proportion with the observation that
'even a clod of earth looks like a mountain on a flat plain'.
His remark is not a denial of Albania's leap forward over the last two years
but a reminder that between 1989 and 1992 liberalisation of the economy and
the shift to tight IMF-monitored monetary and fiscal policies was preceded
by an unprecedently drastic elimination of big loss making enterprises and
dramatic falls in industrial output.
All the post-communist countries have undergone some degree of 'constructive
destruction' following the collapse of Comecon trade and the shift to market
prices. But none matched Albania's purge of an industrial economy which was
obsolete even when it was being built with Soviet and then Chinese aid and
technology in the 1960s and 1970s. Most of the Hoxha-era industrial and
mining complexes which formerly employed tens of thousands of workers, like
the Elbasan steel works or the Tirana tractor factory and spare parts
engineering facilities, as well as many of the coal, chrome and nickel mines
worked for decades with prison labour, have been closed down.
Economic reform was begun by the transitional government in the fraught
months before the March 1992 elections. But difficult decisions were also
taken by the Democratic Party-led coalition government which emerged from
those elections. Perhaps the toughest was to end the 80 per cent
unemployment pay given by the last communist government to workers sent home
by factory closures.
The closure of loss-making plants led to a cumulative 60 per cent decline in
industrial output in the three years to the end of 1992, but eliminated a
double drain on the exchequer and provided a sharp incentive for workers to
seek other sources of income either in agriculture or self-employment.
More than 300,000 Albanians, or 10 per cent of the population, took the
opportunity presented by the chaotic opening of frontiers to emigrate
instead, mainly to Italy, Greece and Germany. This exodus eased the
political costs of transition, although official unemployment in 1993 still
hovered around 30 per cent of the remaining non-agricultural labour force.
Emigration, by leading to a rapid boost in remittances to relatives still at
home, became within a few months a crucial element in underpinning the
domestic economic recovery. For the last two years remittances and foreign
aid have been Albania's principal sources of income.
From practically zero, remittances rose to Dollars 150m in 1992 and doubled
to Dollars 334m last year. This was 10 per cent higher than the total inflow
of official foreign aid which dropped to Dollars 303m last year from a peak
of Dollars 374m in 1992 when the Italian-run emergency food aid programme,
Operation Pellicano, was at its height.
Without the remittances Albania would not have been able to finance the
large imports of consumer goods and second hand vehicles which have given
the country an unprecedented air of prosperity. Aid alone would have been
insufficient to finance last year's Dollars 509m trade deficit.
Remittances raised disposable incomes and the demand for food and imported
consumer goods. This in turn has stimulated a rapid rise in small scale
trade and investment projects, principally cafes, small food kiosks,
informal markets and, increasingly, petrol stations. The latter are busy
servicing more than 40,000 mainly second hand cars and thousands of trucks
and vans imported over the past year. Many of the new vehicles are of
dubious provenance, but the thousands of hooting cars roaming the streets
contrast sharply with the empty roads of the past.
Meanwhile, the return of land to the peasants in a country where 65 per cent
of the population still lives off the land or in villages has led to an
extraordinary growth in food production and higher rural incomes as
livestock, eggs, fruit and grain are traded in increasing amounts.
Higher domestic food output has reduced the need for basic food imports to
cooking oil and sugar and provides the basis for the future growth of a
domestic food processing industry and the export of early vegetables and
fruit.
In this way, an artificial economy of inefficient industrial plants and
collectivised agriculture has been replaced within three years by an economy
of small farmers, traders and businessmen.
The era of constructive destruction propped up by emergency aid is now over.
The dynamic growth of trade has permitted the rapid accumulation of capital
and the economy is entering the crucial second phase of infrastructure and
industrial investment, banking modernisation and institution building.
A largely aid-financed investment programme is getting under way which
requires additional foreign equity investment to redevelop the dilapidated
but capital and technology intensive oil and mining sectors and help develop
the tourism industry.
The first foreign investments are starting to come on stream, such as the
new Coca-Cola bottling plant on the road from Tirana airport, partially
financed by the EBRD which is also helping other foreign-financed
construction and infrastructure projects.
The most eye-catching is the Dollars 23m hotel and business centre complex
now being built by Smelt, a Slovene building company, for Rogner, the
Austrian hotel and resort group. The new Hotel Dea, is rising from a prime
site on Tirana's main boulevard between the prime minister's office and the
exhibition centre originally built to hold the body of Enver Hoxha.
There are early signs that an incipient boom in construction is leading to
rising investment in local building materials. Meanwhile, low wages of
around Dollars 60-Dollars 70 a month are starting to attract Italian and
Greek shoe, textile and other companies seeking Asian level production costs
combined with lower transport costs.
To maintain the growth and further raise the level of economic development,
the authorities know they must also eliminate the frustrations to would-be
foreign equity investors caused by an inexperienced and sometimes corrupt
administration and clarify key legal issues, including land ownership
rights.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940721

