FT942-12232

FT  30 APR 94 / UK Company News: Seasoned campaigner prepared for battle


   By KENNETH GOODING


Nobody will enjoy the hostilities to come more than Rudolph Agnew. He says
he gets bored easily so 'I'm motivated by a state of excitement.'
His style, mixing relaxed elegance with ironic humour and a very occasional
flash of hot-blooded Irish temper, should certainly add some theatricality
to the grim battle ahead.
Mr Agnew, 60, has been here before. For ten arduous months he took the lead
as chairman of Consolidated Gold Fields, one of the UK's leading mining and
industrial groups, resisting a bid by Minorco, part of the Anglo American
Corporation of South Africa. It turned out to be the UK's biggest,
longest-running and probably the most complex takeover bid ever.
Graham Hearne should beware. Mr Agnew took every opportunity to personalise
the battle by mocking Sir Michael Edwardes, then Minorco's chairman. Mr
Agnew criticised Sir Michael's lack of mining knowledge, his lack of
experience at running profitable companies and even his lack of physical
stature.
Gold Fields, against the odds, fought off Minorco but the strain it had put
on Mr Agnew was clearly visible. The Gitane cigarettes were ever-present. He
seemed worn out, haggard and much thinner.
It was no surprise when, shortly afterwards, the Hanson conglomerate, having
bought Minorco's near-30 per cent stake in Gold Fields, quickly won control
with a knock-out Pounds 3.5bn bid.
Mr Agnew then saw Gold Fields, where he had worked for 32 years and where
his family had connections going back 65 years, dismembered and disappear.
After schooling at Downside, the Catholic public school, Mr Agnew joined the
8th King's Royal Irish Hussars. There his love of a gamble proved difficult.
'It was impossible to live on army pay,' he once recalled. 'I liked backing
horses and was singularly unsuccessful at it.' He joined Gold Fields as a
management trainee and made his reputation by building its quarrying
interests, partly by the acquisition of Amey Roadstone, into the biggest
business of its kind in Britain. He became chairman of Gold Fields in 1983.
Although his his bare-knuckle approach in the bid battle was admired, Mr
Agnew was previously no City favourite. For example, he refused to budge
when analysts suggested Gold Fields sever its South African connections
because this would be good for the share price.
In the early 1980s, when Gold Fields was constantly criticised because of
those South African interests, Mr Agnew's matinee idol good looks and
languid charm did not help him. In public he appeared remote, arrogant and
given to making unhelpful facetious remarks.
His critics complained that he ran Gold Fields from its luxurious St James's
headquarters in London like a personal fiefdom. They whispered of a
ferocious temper, a playboy's lifestyle and a reluctance to do a fair day's
work when it was possible to go shooting - still his favourite pastime.
When Hanson grabbed Gold Fields in 1989, Mr Agnew not only lost his Pounds
300,000 a year salary, he also had to move out of two company-owned houses.
In the case of Lasmo, Mr Agnew has no other compensation than Pounds 150,000
a year for his chairmanship. His maximum pay-off, should things not work
out, would be one year's salary.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940430

