FT942-14333

FT  21 APR 94 / French brood on the pain of their past: Furore over trial of
Paul Touvier has caught the national mood of gloomy reflection


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


The eerily emotionless face of Mr Paul Touvier was splashed across the front
pages of yesterday's French newspapers following his conviction in the early
hours of the morning for crimes against humanity - ordering the execution in
1944 of seven Jews in the town of Rillieux-la-Pape.
The trial has generated a blaze of publicity in France. Revelations of his
collaboration with the Nazis and the role of the Roman Catholic church in
sheltering him after the second world war have brutally reminded the French
of one of their history's ugliest periods.
Yet the furore over the trial is only one aspect of the flood of maudlin
nostalgia that has settled over contemporary France, described by
yesterday's Le Monde as the 'new cult of memory'. The trial followed the
release of an unprecedented stream of books and documentaries about Nazi
collaborators during the war.
Ms Christine Ockrent, the influential broadcaster, believes that one reason
why the collaborator is attracting so much attention is because it is only
now, 50 years after the war, that the French feel able to be more honest
about the atrocities of that era.
'It's a sort of generational process,' she said. 'It has been initiated by
the young historians, lawyers and journalists of today who are free from the
contradictions of the past. It's a welcome phenomenon and it's important for
our collective mental health.'
Other commentators suspect the urge to dwell on such humiliating events is
linked to the gloomy mood of latter-day France, now in its worst recession
since the war and unsettled by violent industrial disputes and youth
protests.
Mr Jean-Marie Colombani, editor-in-chief of Le Monde, last week summed up
the state of the nation and the problems of Mr Edouard Balladur, the
centre-right prime minister, in a front page article entitled La France en
panne (France broken down).
'The climate is very depressed,' said Mr Jean-Luc Parodi, professor of
politics at L'Institut d'Etudes Politiques de Paris, the prestigious
graduate school. 'France's economic and social problems have created a sort
of masochism that tempts the French to brood over painful issues and to feel
impelled to purify themselves by facing up to the worst aspects of their
past.'
Nazi collaborators are not the only Gallic villains to have come under the
spotlight. The centenary of the Dreyfus affair was marked earlier this year
by the publication of several books mulling over that anti-Semitic episode
in French history.
Meanwhile, the French right is attempting to rehabilitate Mr Georges
Pompidou, the conservative president who in 1971 outraged the Jewish
community by granting Touvier a pardon. The 20th anniversary of his death
has been commemorated by so many biographies and seminars that Liberation,
the liberal-left daily newspaper, last week accused the right of indulging
in 'Pompidoumania'.
At the same time the left is steeling itself for the first anniversary next
month of the death of Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the former Socialist prime
minister who shot himself following his party's defeat in last spring's
parliamentary elections.
The anniversary is particularly poignant in the light of the suicide earlier
this month of Mr Francois de Grossouvre, a senior aide to Mr Francois
Mitterrand, the Socialist president.
Even the literary scene is glumly nostalgic. The hottest new novel in France
is Premier Homme, a previously unpublished work by Albert Camus, the most
pessimistic of the post-war existentialists. An autobiographical novel that
Camus was working on before his sudden death in 1960, it shares the same
gloomy sense of nihilism as his other works. It was published last week and
is already a best-seller.
'France is in a very nostalgic mood,' said Mr Parodi. 'Perhaps it's a
coincidence because there are so many anniversaries this year. But I don't
think so. It looks as though the French are choosing to wallow in the past
rather than facing up to the complications of the present and the
uncertainties of the future.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940421

