FT942-12336

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (13): Pacific Rim
may regain some of its lost funds - Equities / Regional reports


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


It was a poor first quarter for most of the Pacific Rim, as the majority of
south-east Asian stock markets were casualties of the turmoil stemming from
financial uncertainty in the US.
Since many of the previous rises in the region had been prompted by
investment by US fund managers, the effect of the increase in US interest
rates has been severe. However, many analysts reckon that the sell-off has
been overdone, and they expect some of the funds to be re-allocated to the
Pacific Rim region during the coming quarter.
Short-term players are likely to choose those markets that suffered most.
Hong Kong, which fell 24 per cent in the last quarter; Singapore, down 12.2
per cent; and Malaysia, which retreated 25.3 per cent, are expected to
rebound on bargain-hunting by investors who regard these markets as
oversold.
Mr Andrew Hunt, chief economist at Thornton Management Asia, predicts that,
as markets in the US stabilise, so too will the Hong Kong market.
Deflationary pressures are likely to ease in the second quarter, as fears
over economic tightening in China recede. Although the US decision to make
China's 'most favoured nation' trade status dependent on human rights
improvements will cause some volatility, he expects the floor for the Hang
Seng index to be around 8,000 to 8,500.
In Malaysia, monetary flows have surged, and the stock market has been
supported by excess liquidity. While both Malaysia and Singapore are likely
to see tightening in the medium term, short-term players should benefit from
such liquidity flows in the immediate future.
On a medium- to long-term view, Thailand, which lost 26.3 per cent last
quarter; Indonesia, which fell 16.3 per cent; and Korea, up 0.1 per cent,
seem to be attractive.
Such countries have been beneficiaries of the recent rise in the yen, as
exports to Japan have become cheaper and competitiveness against Japanese
products in the international markets has increased. South Korea is
experiencing a slight fall in short-term interest rates, and is expected to
see solid growth while authorities check inflation.
Taiwan, which lost 13.5 per cent last quarter, remains counter-cyclical to
China. Once the Chinese economy starts to fall, Chinese dissidents will
retain their funds within Taiwan, hence increasing domestic investment.
The high level of net buying of the Tokyo market, which rose 9.7 per cent
during the first quarter, by overseas investors seems to signal a shift from
the south-east Asian markets into Japanese shares.
Purchases by overseas investors totalled about Y2,250bn during the first two
months of the year, soaking up selling by Japanese companies that were
liquidating stock holdings to supplement their flagging earnings. However,
such support has started to slow, and at a price-to-earnings ratio of 100
the Nikkei index may be looking expensive.
Mr Jason James, strategist at James Capel, believes that, for the near term,
the stock market, relative to bond yields, has become unattractive, and that
domestic institutions are likely to allocate their cash to bonds rather than
shares.
Political uncertainty is also hampering buying by investors, and although a
corporate earnings recovery for the business year seems to be in place, the
Nikkei average is expected to fluctuate within a narrow range for the near
term.
Mr Hunt, at Thornton, expects further investor interest in India and Sri
Lanka to support the two markets. He expects easier monetary policy towards
the end of the year and a rise in demand from German and Japanese investors
supporting India; while the Sri Lankan market could rise by 100 per cent
over the next three months due the low value of the stocks.
Meanwhile, Baring Securities recommends that commodity-linked stock markets,
namely Australia in the Pacific Rim region, be bought in view of economic
recovery in the US and possibly in Japan and Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940429

