FT941-3533

FT  16 MAR 94 / US economy continues rapid growth


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


An unexpected increase in industrial production last month indicates the US
economy is continuing to expand rapidly, increasing the chance of another
rise in short-term interest rates.
The Federal Reserve said yesterday industrial production rose 0.4 per cent
in February after 0.5 per cent in January. Most analysts had expected
production to be flat or down as a result of severe weather. The figures
suggest output is growing at an annual 7-8 per cent in the first quarter.
This suggests little slowdown in economic growth from the second half of
last year when gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of more than 5
per cent.
The Fed also reported a sharp increase in the rate of capacity utilisation
in manufacturing industry to 82.6 per cent - only fractionally below the 83
per cent level traditionally associated with rising inflationary pressure.
Separately the Commerce Department said producer prices rose 0.5 per cent
last month. However, this mainly reflected higher energy prices. 'Core'
producer prices (excluding the volatile food and energy components) rose 0.1
per cent, less than expected.
On Wall Street, bond prices closed higher as investors interpreted the
encouraging core producer price figures as a sign that rapid growth was not
yet putting upward pressure on inflation. The benchmark 30-year Treasury
bond rose 24/32 to yield 6.89 per cent in late trading.
However, the strong production figures and higher capacity utilisation rate
indicate the economy is growing faster than its long-run potential rate of
growth. This raises the chance that Fed governors and regional presidents -
who meet in Washington next week to discuss interest rate policy - will
tighten monetary policy again in coming weeks.
On February 4, the Fed raised short-term rates a quarter point to 3.25 per
cent, the first increase in five years. This led to a sharp rise in long
bond yields on the assumption that this was the first in a series of
tightening moves.
Hopes on Wall Street that economic growth would slow sharply taking pressure
off the Fed to raise rates are evaporating. New York bank J P Morgan, for
example, is projecting growth at an annual rate of 6 per cent in the second
quarter, after a brief weather-related slowdown to 3 per cent in the present
quarter. That would be not far short of the 7.5 per cent in the final period
of last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940316

