FT941-4053

FT  12 MAR 94 / Cookery: Cakes to bake for mother


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


Tomorrow is Mothering Sunday, and Easter and spring weddings are nearly upon
us. All are occasions for celebrating with sweetmeats and cakes.
Mothering Sunday used to be a day on which devout people made a pilgrimage
to their mother church. Later, it became the day to visit and honour your
birth mother. Either event may be marked by baking a simnel cake.
This is one of the richest cakes of the calendar year, especially when made
with lots of whole almonds blanched and pounded to a paste with eggs and
sugar, and perhaps a splash of saffron or orange flower water to flavour it.
A circular slab of this mixture (marchpane or marzipan) is sandwiched in the
middle of the cake. The rest is re-rolled and used to cloak the cake and to
stud the rim with a ring of little balls said to represent the apostles.
Wedding cakes are the richest and most elaborate of all, iced fancifully and
tiered like edible Albert memorials. The crumb of a wedding cake is dense
and dark, more fruit than flour, held fast by a double layer of wrapping:
marzipan first, then an outer casing of cement-hard icing.
These cakes seem designed to endure as long as marriage itself. They should
be robust enough to travel the length and breadth of Britain unharmed - even
when sliced and boxed and consigned into the hands of the post office.
My tastes - and baking ability - do not stretch that far. I incline towards
simpler, plainer offerings:
FENNEL SEED CAKE
Ingredients: 6oz unbleached white household flour; scant 1 teaspoon baking
powder; 2oz flaked almonds; 1 1/2 -2 teaspoons fennel seed, bruised with
pestle and mortar; the finely-grated zest of an orange; 6oz unsalted butter,
cut into dice; 4oz caster sugar; 2 size 3 eggs, broken up with a fork and
mixed with 2 tablespoons milk.
Method: Grind the almonds in a food processor or spice mill (the results
will taste much more almondy than ready-ground almonds sold in a packet).
Sift the flour twice with the baking powder, then stir in the citrus zest,
fennel and almonds.
Cream the butter and sugar in a food processor. Beat in the eggs gradually,
adding a little of the flour if there is any hint of curdling. Take the
mixture out of the machine and fold in the (rest of the) flour by hand.
Spoon the mixture into a 1 1/2 pt loaf tin that has been buttered, lined and
buttered again. Make a dip in the centre and bake at 350`F/180`C (gas mark
4) for 45 minutes, then at 335`F/170`C (gas mark 3 1/2 ) for 30 minutes.
Cover the tin with a sheet of greaseproof paper if the cake begins to brown
too much.
LIME & COCONUT MUFFINS (makes 6)
Ingredients: 1 1/2 oz dessicated coconut; the finely-grated zest of a lime;
1 tablespoon of freshly-squeezed lime juice; 1 heaped tablespoon of polenta
flour, plus enough unbleached white household flour to make 4oz in total; a
scant 1 1/2 teaspoons baking powder; a pinch of salt; 1 1/2 oz caster sugar;
1 egg broken up with a fork and mixed with 3 fl oz milk; 1 1/2 oz butter.
Method: Sift together and mix the flours lightly, baking powder, salt and
sugar. Barely melt the butter. Away from the heat, quickly stir in the lime
juice, zest and coconut (in that order), followed by the beaten egg with
milk.
Tip the contents of the pan on to the dry ingredients and fold together
lightly. Spoon the mixture into six deep muffin tins lined with fluted paper
cases and bake for about 20 minutes at 400`F/200`C (gas mark 6).
Those who prefer to avoid baking of any sort may like to consider a
Mothering Sunday outing instead. This year, nearly two dozen National Trust
properties are opening specifically for the occasion and are offering
special Mother's Day lunches and/or teas. For details, ring 071-227 4802.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

940312

