FT942-14919

FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (3): Expanding base for international
bankers - Regional centre for financial services


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL


Singapore's credentials as a regional centre for financial services have
strengthened over the past year.
In common with other south-east Asian stock markets, Singapore's has
benefited from increased demand from local investors as well as an influx of
funds from US investors awakening to Asia's rapid development. The October
flotation of 7.3 per cent of Singapore Telecom was an important step
forward. Futures trading on the Singapore International Monetary Exchange
has also grown rapidly.
Meanwhile, Singapore continues to remain attractive to international banks
wishing to establish a regional base. Foreign exchange trading is growing
and a number of foreign houses have set up international fund management
activities.
The expansion of financial services was an important factor in the island's
much faster-than-expected 9.9 per cent economic growth in 1993. Financial
services, which contribute about one eighth of gross domestic product,
enjoyed about 20 per cent growth, according to officials.
In spite of the growth of trading activities, the backbone of the financial
industry remains international banking, which began in the 1960s as a
relatively unsophisticated loan booking business and has developed steadily
since.
The Asian dollar market, in which banks have set up some 200 separate
book-keeping entities called Asian Currency Units, had a total balance sheet
of Dollars 386bn by the end of 1993, representing a modest resumption of
growth after a decline caused by Japanese banks reducing the size of their
balance sheets.
Officials say that although Japanese banks are by no means withdrawing from
the Singapore market, they have become less aggressive and less keen on
capturing market share at the expense of profitability. Therefore, pressure
on margins has eased.
Singapore-based syndicated loan business has been growing, particularly for
regional lenders, including Thailand. Banks in Singapore have even begun to
take some Chinese loan business away from Hong Kong.
Domestic banking business has also been buoyant, with growth in loans to buy
property and cars, of which prices have been rising sharply.
Foreign exchange trading, for which Singapore is the world's fourth-largest
centre after London, New York and Tokyo, grew to a daily average of Dollars
85.4bn in 1993 from Dollars 80.8bn in 1992, the Monetary Authority of
Singapore estimates. Dealing in the D-Mark, the most actively traded
currency, exceeds that of the Tokyo market where the yen dominates.
The government has been seeking to stress Singapore's attractions for
international fund managers. By the end of last year, some 83 fund
management concerns were operating, mostly foreign, and had SDollars 61.8bn
under management compared with SDollars 37.4bn in 1992, according to
monetary officials. About 20 of the concerns have funds under management of
more than SDollars 1bn.
Among recent entrants is the People's Bank of China, China's central bank,
which last year established a subsidiary in Singapore both to raise funds
and to manage the country's foreign exchange reserves.
All of this suggests that Singapore poses a growing threat to Hong Kong, its
long-time rival as an Asian hub for international financial activity.
Although Singaporean officials will not be drawn into overt competitive
statements, they quietly point to the rise of office rents in Hong Kong.
One senior official said he believed Hong Kong would increasingly be geared
to serve the booming industries of South China as the economies became more
closely linked, and that Hong Kong's role as a more international centre
would diminish accordingly.
Mr Richard Hu, finance minister, says: 'One of our objectives is to develop
truly into a capital-raising market, like Hong Kong. . . We are different
from Hong Kong in that we are much more regulated, though Hong Kong is now
moving much closer to the Singapore model. . . In the long term, they will
become more like us and we more like them.'
A particular concern of the Singapore government has been to prevent
international financial business having undue influence on the domestic
economy. Because of Singapore's small size, the government has always
believed that to allow the Singapore dollar to become an actively traded
currency would make the island excessively vulnerable to the massive ebbs
and flows of international speculation.
This policy remains, although officials admit that the growth of
international purchases of Singapore stocks may make it harder to sustain.
Nevertheless, they are confident that even if foreign funds were for some
reason to flow out of the local market, large foreign exchange reserves will
permit the Monetary Authority of Singapore to continue to intervene in the
currency markets when necessary to steer a steady appreciation of the local
currency - its most important anti-inflation tool.
The expansion of the domestic financial markets last year exposed some
frailties. The flood of orders from local investors for Singapore Telecom
shares in October, coming on top of an already huge increase in trading
volume, was too much for stockbrokers. Because they could not handle the
burden, investors were allowed to make their applications via banks'
automated teller machines (ATMs). Subsequently, they were allowed to sell
Singapore Telecom shares at bank branches.
This has led the exchange to permit a by-passing of stockbrokers which
members of most stock exchanges would find scarcely tolerable. The exchange
announced in January that because 'stockbrokers are unable to fully service
the needs of the investing public and to provide investors with alternative
means of trading,' it would introduce a new dealing system through branches
of local banks.
Investors will be able to buy and sell all scripless shares at bank branches
without opening an account with a stockbroker. They will simply need an
account with the clearing institution to hold shares, and an ATM card from
their bank which can be used instantly to check and debit or credit their
accounts. Share trading is entirely computerised - the exchange's Central
Limit Order Book (Clob) system matches buy and sell orders automatically.
One of the reasons for the interest in Singapore Telecom's privatisation was
the relaxation of controls on the Central Provident Fund, to which both
employers and employees are required to make substantial contributions.
Individuals are allowed to withdraw money from their CPF accounts to make
share and property purchases - although if they subsequently sell those
assets, the capital must return to their CPF account. After the rules were
relaxed in October, the month of the Telecom sale, SDollars 4.5bn was
withdrawn from the fund of which SDollars 4.1bn went into share purchases.
More than half the population now owns shares.
CPF funds and further privatisations (although no further large official
sales are imminent) are likely to add considerably to the depth of the stock
market - a boost which it needs even though brokers had inadequate capital
and backroom strength to handle the October rush.
Nearly half of Singapore stock exchange trading is actually in Malaysian
stocks, and in 1993 the 17 most active stocks in terms of numbers of shares
traded were all Malaysian.
However, at least some of this business is expected to drain away from
Singapore as the Kuala Lumpur exchange adopts scripless dealing. The
Singapore authorities therefore have an urgent need to deepen the market in
local stocks.
Although the market capitalisation figure has risen sharply, the 'free
float' is far smaller as the government or other large holders retain
substantial stakes in many companies. Some shares also have limits on
foreign ownership.
Peregrine, the regional securities house, estimates that of theoretical
market capitalisation of SDollars 218bn, only about 30 per cent is truly
available of which about half is owned by overseas investors.
For fund managers, it is hard to get full exposure to the Singapore economy
because a large proportion is still in the public sector and foreign
companies account for more than 70 per cent of the island's manufacturing
output.
However, listed companies have generally shown strong earnings growth and
are expected to continue to do so, underpinning what analysts see as a
promising outlook even after the past year's sharp rise caused partly by the
sudden acceleration of economic growth.
The Singapore International Monetary Exchange has established itself as a
force in its own right in the futures business. Established in 1984, its
early years were dominated by its pioneering trading link with the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange. That contract expires this year but is being
re-negotiated. However, dealing in three-month Eurodollar deposit rate
futures - the main contract linked to Chicago - is now down to only about a
third of Simex volume.
Instead, the exchange is dominated by Japan-related contracts, particularly
three-month Euroyen deposit rate futures and Nikkei 225 stock index futures.
In October, Simex introduced a Japanese government bond contract to the
displeasure of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. 'We explained to them that this was
appreciated by the Managed Futures Association in the US,' says Mr Ang Swee
Tian, exchange president.
For the future, Simex is considering the introduction of more regional stock
index futures - it launched a Hong Kong index contract last year  - and is
discussing a link with the International Petroleum Exchange in London under
which it would launch a Brent crude oil contract to take advantage of
Singapore's important role as an oil refining and trading centre.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
                     STOCK MARKET PERFORMANCE
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Per cent
                                 1992              1993   change
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
STI Index                      1,524.4  2,425.68   +59.1
Total market capital  Sdollars 134.9bn  Sdollars 379.4bn   +181.2
Turnover (shares)               13.9bn            66.4bn   +377.7
Turnover (value)        Sdollars 29.44  Sdollars 127.8bn   +334.1
Number of new listings              15                21        .
Funds raised by
public offers          Sdollars 514.7m  Sdollars 6.84bn*        .
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
*Of which Singapore Telecom accounted for 60 per cent.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Data source: Singapore Stock Exchange
 ----------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

940418

