FT941-4095

FT  12 MAR 94 / Markets: A week of quiet torture in stocks - London


   By RODERICK ORAM


London's equity market managed this week to do a lot of damage to itself
without making much fuss about it. In contrast to the sound and fury a week
before when stocks ended barely changed, the atmosphere was quiet and
relatively calm but the drop in prices was marked.
Its instruments of torture were mostly foreign, particularly the US and
German bond markets, although stock derivatives also played a role at home.
Any tentative rally in the cash market was aborted by a sell-off in
derivatives.
The week opened on a positive note with a one-day rise in global bond
markets buoying equities. After that it was down hill all the way. The FT-SE
100 finished the week down 86.1 points at 3,191.9.
Economic fundamentals should have been more supportive. In the UK industrial
production accelerated in January, prompting the Central Statistical Office
to raise its trend annual growth rate for production from 2.5 per cent to 3
per cent. On a negative note, though, a widening trade gap hammered shares
yesterday. In Germany, metal workers settled for tiny wage increases and
called off their planned strike. In the US, the Federal Reserve Board's
latest Beige Book of economic conditions said only 'limited price pressures'
were apparent.
But markets continue to be uneasy about the direction of interest rates on
both sides of the Atlantic and about inflation and presidential political
problems in the US.
Investors have found few havens from the volatility of recent weeks. One in
the UK has been convertibles, whether preference shares, loan stock or
Eurobonds convertible into the issuing company's ordinary shares. They offer
better yields and security than ordinary equities but at the expense of some
of the capital growth. They usually underperform a sharply rising stock
market but outperform on the way down. But in a stock market driven by
falling interest rates they have not been performing to historical patterns.
One way to track them is via Kleinwort Benson's index of the 80 largest
convertible issues by UK companies. Last year, the COSI-80 gave a total
return of 25 per cent, nearly identical to that of the Footsie but below the
34.5 per cent of the FTA Long Gilt index.
Since then, convertibles have held up well under the downward pressure on
markets. From the beginning of this year to Thursday's close, the COSI-80,
which has a market capitalisation of some Pounds 14bn, had a total return of
minus 1.1 per cent, while the Footsie's was minus 4.8 per cent and the Long
Gilt index's was minus 6.7 per cent. The convertibles' yield spreads over
gilts have narrowed sharply.
But this outperformance has left convertibles looking over-valued. Moreover,
rising dividends on ordinary stock are making the convertibles look less
attractive. Kleinwort still believes, however, there are some worth buying.
Typically they would be issued by a company with good fundamental prospects
and would offer a superior yield to the ordinary stock. Crucially, they must
be available for only a reasonable premium over the ordinary shares. Two
current examples are British Airways 9.75 per cent 2005 and Tomkins 6.25 per
cent 2013.
Convertibles, admittedly, are instruments for the aficionados. Typical
investors are institutional income funds seeking higher income with security
and some capital gains bonus on underlying stock.
'A retail investor wouldn't know to go for them,' says James Higgins of
Chamberlain de Broe, an independent financial adviser. 'They are a hang-over
from the 1980s when people bought securities for income. Those days are long
gone and people are buying now for capital growth.'
Not that capital growth was on offer in the stock market this week. Even
hefty rises in corporate earnings and dividends failed to underpin equities.
More important than the results were a string of upbeat trading statements.
Most eye-catching was BTR's. The diverse industrial group has enjoyed a
sharp improvement in outlook since its interim comments in September.
Then it said: ' . . . Continental Europe declining very rapidly . . .
evidence that the recovery is translating into significant increases in
corporate profitability is still inconclusive . . . the outlook remains
uncertain for any meaningful upturn in the second half . . .'
This week it said: 'The improvement seen in the US and Australia in the last
quarter of 1993 have been maintained, and in the UK and Continental Europe,
with the exception of Germany, recovery, albeit slow, is beginning to
emerge. BTR enters 1994 with a confident view.' And this was after ending
1993 on a high note with a 19 per cent increase in pre-tax profits and a
13.4 per cent increase in dividend.
Yesterday, SG Warburg Securities yesterday its forecasts for corporate
earnings in 1994, using BTR's contrasting statements as examples of the slow
rise in optimism. Before recent reports from 58 large companies, it had
forecast that their 1994 earnings after exceptional items would grow by an
average of 14.2 per cent. After the reports, it upped the forecast to 20.7
per cent.
Overall, this reporting season is turning out close to Warburg's
expectations. Dividend growth has averaged 8 per cent against its pre-season
forecast of 7 per cent. Earnings pre-exceptionals are up 44 per cent against
a forecast 45 per cent.
The trends were borne out by results from many big companies this week.
Highlights included: Barclays and Standard Chartered in banking; RTZ,
Laporte, Portals and British Polythene in minerals, chemicals, papers and
plastics; Lloyds in the retail sector; Hillsdown Holdings and Cadbury
Schweppes in food and drink; Hays and WPP in business services and
advertising; Rolls-Royce and TI Group in engineering.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940312

