FT944-14611

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (18): New issues
abound, but tread carefully - Investment Trusts / From UK breweries to Asian
small companies . . . Bethan Hutton on the latest opportunities


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Summer is a quiet season for investment trusts, but come September, the
new-issues machine was once again cranking out a varied stream of new
products.
Areas as diverse as British regional brewers and international commodities
are to have their own specialist trusts.
Lazard Investors is bringing out a regional brewers trust, which will also
invest in pub companies and other drink manufacturers and retailers.
Two management groups have spotted a gap in the market for investment trusts
giving small investors access to international commodity markets. Fleming is
to run a natural resources investment trust, which will get exposure to
commodities by buying shares in companies involved in extracting and
processing natural resources. BZW has created a Jersey-registered investment
company (listed in London so it will behave like an investment trust) which
will use derivatives to try to beat a commodities index.
The trend is continuing for investment management groups that have
traditionally concentrated on unit trusts to move into investment trusts.
Earlier in the summer, Schroders launched a Japanese investment trust to
complement its range of Japanese unit trusts.
Now Fidelity, the large unit trust group, is adding a third investment trust
to its portfolio. The Fidelity Special Values trust will be a special
situations trust, to be managed by one of the UK's best-known fund managers,
European specialist Anthony Bolton. Fidelity's first investment trust was
European Values, also managed by Bolton, followed earlier this year by
Japanese Values.
Prolific, the fund management subsidiary of Scottish Provident, is dipping
its toe into investment-trust waters for the first time with a fairly safe
offering: an investment trust version of its dependable UK equity income
unit trust.
An unusual recent launch was the Emerging Markets Country trust, which was
created mainly by the conversion of units in the City of London Emerging
Markets unit trust into shares in the new investment trust. This gave the
fund assets of about Pounds 27m; and it immediately raised an extra Pounds
10.5m through a C-share issue. The unit and investment trust share an
investment strategy of putting money into emerging markets via other
closed-end trusts, rather than buying shares in companies.
Other newcomers include an emerging markets trust from Murray Johnstone (see
below), an Indian fund from Lazard, and a smaller Asian companies trust from
Hambros.
Nigel Sidebottom, investment trust specialist at Gerrard Vivian Gray, says
that the most exciting area for new issues over the summer was eastern
Europe - new funds have been launched to invest in Russia, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia and so on. However, most of these have been offshore
closed-end funds, not accessible to private investors at launch because they
carried minimum investments of Dollars 50,000 or more.
Small investors can pick up more manageable amounts in the aftermarket, but
Sidebottom warns: 'Russia is a very, very risky area - it really is pretty
hairy stuff - but there are tremendous opportunities out there as well.'
The lesson to be drawn from the fate of trusts launched in the past 12
months is to be choosy about which new issues you invest in. You should not
invest unless you are convinced that the trust is a sound bet for the long
term.
The two giant European privatisation issues of the first quarter, from
Kleinwort Benson and Mercury, are still languishing at below issue price,
even after warrants are taken into account. The Mercury trust is doing
slightly better than Kleinwort's offering, both in share price and asset
value terms, but it is still a disappointment given the great enthusiasm
surrounding its launch.
Anyone who had invested Pounds 1,000 in the Mercury fund would, by the end
of September, have had shares worth Pounds 820 and warrants worth Pounds 61;
the comparative figures for Kleinwort's trust are Pounds 780 and Pounds 59.
On the other hand, investors in 3i, the huge venture capital trust which
came to market in the summer, should be feeling pretty smug: its shares had
risen about 20 per cent by the end of September.
The average investment trust discount briefly reached a two-decade low of
about 4 per cent in January this year, but then widened as the markets
suffered in the aftermath of the first US rate rise. During the summer the
discount narrowed again, to about 5.5 per cent; it has since slipped, but
discounts are still narrow in historical terms.
As always, the average figure masks wide variations. The hefty premiums on
some high-income investment trusts - notable examples are Lazard High Income
and BZW Convertible, which have reached premiums as high as 20 per cent -
show that, despite the recent interest rate rise, there are still plenty of
investors looking for a better return than they can get from building
society deposits.
But anyone thinking of buying income investment trusts at a premium should
bear in mind that if interest rates rise any further, demand for the trust's
shares could fall sharply, changing the premium into a discount, and wiping
out a chunk of your capital.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

941021

