FT942-15739

FT  14 APR 94 / Clinton returns reporters' fire


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton yesterday said he was not about to shut down the
federal government so as to devote all his time to every minute Whitewater
detail.
Showing some irritation with the media, he told the Association of Newspaper
Editors meeting in Washington: 'I'm doing the best I can, while I do the job
I was hired by the American people to do. I have been as candid and
forthright as possible' in answering questions about financial dealings in
Arkansas.
He shot back at one questioner: 'Maybe you have total and complete
recollection of every question that might be asked of you at any moment of
things that happened to you 12, 13, 14 years ago. . . or maybe you think I
should have shut the whole federal government down and done nothing but
study these things for the last two months'.
Mr Clinton quoted approvingly remarks by Garrison Keillor at a media dinner
he had attended on Tuesday. The well-known humorist had scoffed: 'All I know
is what I read in the papers, so Whitewater is a mystery to me'.
In fact, the Whitewater story has gone almost underground in the last two
weeks. Right-wing publications have continued to froth over Mrs Hillary
Clinton's trading in commodities 15 years ago and Mr Clinton's alleged
sexual appetites. But the mainstream media has been more introspective, with
many columns and some news reports analysing press mistakes and
over-emphasis on Whitewater.
The Easter congressional recess, now over, also helped lower the temperature
as has the absence of any new damaging or substantive allegations. Hundreds
of pages of documents sold to the press by Mr James McDougal, former
Whitewater partner of the Clintons, have tended to prove it was no more than
a money-losing land investment, as the president has always claimed. Only
marginal interest has been excited by evidence that Mrs Clinton managed the
investment more closely than her husband.
The editors also came in for criticism yesterday from two previous Clinton
nominees for high office. Ms Lani Guinier, in line last summer to run the
Justice Department's civil rights division, complained she had been grossly
mislabelled as 'a quota queen' because few journalists 'were apparently
interested in the facts'. Retired Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, who could have
been secretary of defence, called newspapers 'the only monopolies left in
the country'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940414

