FT943-12837

FT  22 JUL 94 / British & Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - Leasing
liabilities that led to downfall / Flawed leases


   By SIMON DAVIES


John Gunn built British & Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
The heart of Atlantic Computer's dramatic rise and fall was the Flexlease,
which provided the basis for almost all of the group's computer leasing
business.
Flexlease was designed to give a company the benefits of taking a long-term
lease over a computer system, together with the flexibility to break that
lease at what appeared to be a minimal extra cost.
The basic lease had an average life of six years, and comprised an agreement
between a bank or other funder, and the party acquiring the system.
However, there was a separate management agreement, whereby Atlantic
provided an opt-out for the lessor. Under some agreements, the system could
either be returned to Atlantic in exchange for the replacement equipment (a
flex), and in others it could be terminated (a walk).
The Flex was generally triggered after three years, and the Walk after five
years. An increasing number of leases included both options.
Atlantic's sole means of mitigating losses from this area was by selling the
machinery, and generating a profitable replacement lease on a Flex.
Since the fall in the value of second-hand computer equipment was more rapid
than the outstanding lease obligations, this was a dangerous tie-up.
Atlantic had a hidden weapon: the Flex agreement was worded so as to be, in
the judgment of the investigators, legally unenforceable by the customer.
While it enabled an early break 'at no penalty', it also allowed for the
interpretation that subsequent losses could be recovered through the terms
of the new lease.
Ultimately, the only way Flexlease could remain profitable was by ensuring
sufficient new sales to cover its ballooning liabilities. The collapse of
the company that devised it was all but inevitable.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940722

