FT944-2889

FT  15 DEC 94 / International Company News: Australian groups to set up
joint petroleum venture


   By NIKKI TAIT


   SYDNEY


Caltex Australia and Ampol, which is part of the Pioneer International
building materials group, agreed yesterday to pool their respective
petroleum refining and marketing operations into a new company to be owned
equally.
If the merger wins necessary regulatory approval, the joint venture company
will be the leader of the country's petroleum refining-marketing sector,
with estimated assets of ADollars 3.1bn (USDollars 2.4bn), total annual
sales of almost ADollars 6bn, and 28 per cent market share.
At present, Ampol and Caltex Australia - which is 75 per cent owned by the
US-based Caltex group, whose owners are Chevron and Texaco - are the two
smallest companies in the five-player industry. The current market leader is
Shell Australia, with Mobil and BP being the other competitors.
Caltex and Ampol said they saw big cost-savings from the deal, allowing them
better to compete in Australia's downstream oil industry where returns have
been extremely low recently.
They calculated that there could be a ADollars 500m addition to shareholder
value 'in the long-term' - although they acknowledged that this figure
incorporated asset sale proceeds as well as bottom-line cost savings.
They said about a quarter of the combined operations' workforce, or about
700 jobs, would be shed. It will have two refineries at Kurnell, in New
South Wales, and Lytton, in Queensland.
Under the deal, there will be a ADollars 150m 'value adjustment' in favour
of Pioneer - which Mr John Schubert, managing director, described as
'essentially a cash payment' - to reflect the difference in earnings of the
two businesses. Pioneer expects to book an abnormal profit of ADollars 200m
in its 1994/95 accounts as a result of the deal.
Inter-company loans to the merged group's operations will be refinanced
externally, a move which Mr Schubert said could cut Pioneer's balance sheet
debt to ADollars 110m from about ADollars 850m.
A pro forma balance sheet for the merged business, as at end-June, shows net
debt standing at ADollars 1.24bn, and a net debt to equity ratio of 109 per
cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

941215

