FT942-14369

FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (15): Traffic booms again - Route
profile of the North Atlantic


   By DANIEL GREEN


The North Atlantic has been the crucible of competition in business aviation
for years. But now innovation may be bumping the glass ceiling of capacity
constraints at the European end of the journeys.
Passenger traffic between the US and Europe is once more at record levels
now that the recession triggered by the Gulf War is history, while
businesses, especially in North America, recover from economic recession.
US Department of Transportation figures indicate that more than 32m
passengers flew between the US and Europe during 1993. The figure in 1991,
with demand crushed by the Gulf War, was barely over 25m. The UK remains the
most favoured point of departure of arrival, with more passengers than the
next two countries, Germany and France, put together.
Such a rise in traffic inevitably tests the limits to capacity. In the past,
the pressure has been borne more or less equally by airports on both sides
of the Atlantic. This time the pressure is on Europe rather than the US.
The rise in the strength of the US dollar has stimulated US airlines and
residents to travel. But increasingly they want to fly just to the main
cities at the European end of the journey, such as London's Heathrow, Paris
Charles de Gaulle and Frankfurt.
Many of Europe's regional cities and smaller airports are suffering.
American Airlines, for example, is withdrawing from Berlin. The expected
boom in business travel to what is planned to be the new capital city failed
to materialise. It has also abandoned Stansted, London's third airport.
'We lost Dollars 1m a month for 10 months at Stansted. It's a Pounds 400m
white elephant. Nobody knows about it,' says Mr Hans Mirka, senior vice
president of international routes at American. By contrast, the US end of
the journey is seeing an increase in the number of cities served by non-stop
flights from Europe.
The main factor appears to be that big airports close to economic centres
are increasingly used as 'gateways' to the rest of Europe. They are hubs for
European airlines whose dense fan of spokes can take the incoming passenger
to almost any city on the continent. European airlines tend to have one main
hub, while US carriers have several.
These spokes that radiate from the hub are carrying a significant proportion
of transatlantic traffic. Between a quarter and a third of all transatlantic
passengers intend to fly beyond their first stop, says Mr Charles Gurassa,
British Airways' general manager for the Americas.
Some airlines even specifically sell services to their capitals as the best
air route to third points. Austrian Airlines is carving itself a niche as a
gateway to the once-communist countries of eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union. It has constructed a timetable that allows passengers coming
in on the overnight flight from the US to connect quickly to their onward
flights.
While the trend in Europe seems to be to reduce the number of gateways, the
reverse is happening in the US. The development of transatlantic airline
partnerships means that European airlines seek to plug into large domestic
US services. Historically, these have developed at many cities, not just the
traditional international gateways of New York, Washington, Chicago and Los
Angeles.
Relationships such as that announced last week between Delta and Virgin
Atlantic, and older ones between British Airways and USAir, KLM and
Northwest Airlines, are developing rapidly. Transatlantic passengers can
find themselves flying to a number of new non-stop destinations this year.
KLM flies non-stop to Minneapolis and Boston, where Northwest has its hubs,
while BA flies to Pittsburgh, Charlotte and Baltimore where its partner,
USAir, has domestic hubs. The changes have stimulated a response from US
carriers without main European partners. American Airlines may have given up
on Stansted and Berlin, but it has introduced services from Europe to
Nashville and Philadelphia.
These tie-ups are an essential part of offering onward flights on either
side of the Atlantic. 'The transatlantic service is an advertisement for the
short haul,' says BA's Mr Gurassa. They also allow the partners to offer a
range of fringe benefits such as frequent flyer programmes whose points can
be collected and redeemed on either network.
Mr Ron Speirs, Reed Travel Group's vice president of airline databases and
industry affairs, says that passengers who are transferring to flights with
partner airlines get 'higher priority in the case of delays and the option
to use partner's lounges and facilities. Other tangible benefits include the
interchangeability of frequent flyer miles between airline marketing
partners.'
Less tangible to passengers are the benefits of code-sharing. This is when a
single letter and number code identifies a service between two points with a
change from one carrier to the other. This helps joint marketing of the
service for the airlines, but apart from the co-ordination of timetables, it
provides little advantage to passengers and may result in their flying on an
airline other than the one they were expecting.
Such is the importance of this kind of interlinking of networks that it
becomes a central plank of the planning of corporate deals. Lufthansa, the
Germany carrier, and United Airlines of the US are planning to share routes
and offer 100 code-shared services. Unfortunately, the plan has been delayed
by the wrangles between the US and Germany over the bilateral aviation
agreement between them.
They, and other airlines which have yet to find partners, may have little
time yet to prepare themselves for the competitive onslaught from those that
already have partners. By the summer, just about every airline will have
refurbished business class service and passengers will find it harder to
distinguish between them on the number of channels the inflight
entertainment has or on the quality of their airport lounges.
Nor will they be able to look for huge rises in capacity to offer them a yet
greater range of departure times. After the rapid growth of the last two
years, American, for one, says it will not make a net increase in capacity
on North Atlantic routes at all this summer.
Instead, the battle will be over convenience, rapid connection times and
delayed free travel. On current trends it will be easier to fly into the new
US hubs than into the increasingly overcrowded European centres.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940420

