FT942-16276

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (16): Cross-border ventures
expanding - The embrace of free trade has forced the continent's companies
to think regionally


   By DAMIAN FRASER and DAVID PILLING


Latin America's rehabilitation in the international capital markets has been
accompanied by a growing interest in the region by companies from the
industrialised world. Faced with mature markets at home and the potential
for fast growth in the developing world, they are looking overseas.
The trend has been reflected in gradually rising flows of foreign direct
investment into the region. It has also been accompanied by a less-noticed
but growing tendency of companies from within the region to seek investments
in countries elsewhere in Latin America.
It is Latin America's embrace of free trade that has forced the continent's
companies to think regionally. A decade ago they rarely considered investing
outside their own borders. Generally less productive than their
international competitors, and with a captive and profitable market at home,
there was never any need.
Now, they have to compete against the world's most efficient producers to
survive. For many, this has meant forming joint ventures with international
rivals, or expanding into nearby regional markets by buying up competitors.
Access to cheaper financing has given regional companies the possibility of
launching bids and buying stakes that would have been impossible a few years
ago. Government regulations that prohibited inward and outward foreign
investment have been scrapped, opening new opportunities to Latin and other
foreign investors.
Companies from Mexico and Chile, the countries that began the continent's
pro-market economic reforms a decade ago, have led the way. Many Chilean
companies reckon they are too small to survive in the global market place
and have thus expanded into Peru and Argentina.
Mexican businesses have the financial muscle to grow and find new markets,
and believe that by so doing they will benefit from economies of scale.
The trend was started by Vitro, Mexico's dominant glass company. Back in
1989 it spent some Dollars 900m (including debt) on acquiring Anchor Glass,
a US rival.
The acquisition turned Vitro into one of the world's largest glass
companies, better able, in the opinion of its managers, to fend off
competitors in the domestic market.
Since then scores of other Mexican companies have followed Vitro's lead.
Synkro, a Mexican textile company, last December paid Dollars 233m for
Kayser-Roth, a US textile producer; Dina, a bus and truck assembler, earlier
this year paid in equity more than Dollars 336m for the US Motor Coach
Industries International, making it the largest bus producer in the
Americas; Mr Bernardo Dominguez, the head of DSC, a privately owned tourism
to construction outfit, paid with partners Dollars 708m for Westin hotels in
February.
Cementos Mexicanos, the cement giant, and Televisa, the media giant, have
targeted both North and Latin America as growth areas for the company. Cemex
has taken the decision as part of its strategy of becoming a global cement
company, and Televisa largely because of synergies it sees between different
Spanish-speaking markets.
In positioning itself as the Spanish language's dominant media company,
Televisa has taken significant stakes in Univision, the US Spanish-language
network, TGV, a Chilean network, Compania Peruana de Radio Difusion, a
Peruvian television network, and has a joint venture in Argentina.
Televisa reckons such stakes will enable it to make higher profits from
broadcasting its highly successful television programmes, that have long
dominated Spanish-speaking Latin America. Televisa is now expanding cable
television in the region, suggesting it has further to go.
Apart from an important acquisition in Spain, Cemex several years ago bought
cement companies in the south of the US, and recently purchased cement
companies in Jamaica and the Bahamas. It also has a joint venture with the
Cuban state producer. Last March it paid an estimated Dollars 300m for a
controlling stake in Venezuela's largest cement producer.
Cemex believes that Latin America is the natural area of expansion for the
company, given the similarities in culture and language with Mexico, and
prospects for high economic growth.
It is now being followed by Mexico's largest construction companies, Tribasa
and ICA, which believe they can bring to other Latin American countries the
skills that enabled them to build Mexico's toll roads, and other high
profile infrastructure projects.
Aeromexico, one of Mexico's two main airlines, believes, like Cemex, that in
the long run it can only survive if it expands internationally, and that the
natural competitive advantage it enjoys is in Latin America. Thus February
last year it bought with Peruvian partners a controlling stake in Aeroperu,
and is using the Peruvian carrier's routes in the continent to expand in the
region.
The growing expansion of Mexican companies is being aided by the government,
which has been pushing for free trade agreements between Mexico and other
Latin American countries, such as those signed with Chile and Costa Rica.
These agreements are expected to expand bilateral investment, and make
businessmen more aware of complementary circumstances between their markets.
Chile's most adventurous cross-border investors have so far been energy
companies. The trend began in earnest in 1992, when Chilectra, Chile's
biggest electricity distributor, paid Dollars 102m as leader of a consortium
that bought 51 per cent of formerly state-run Edesur, a Buenos Aires
electric utility.
That year saw two other energy groups lured by Argentine privatisations.
Endesa, Chile's biggest utility, spent Dollars 90m on a Buenos Aires power
generator while a rival consortium, led by electricity generator Chilgener,
paid Dollars 92m for a majority stake in Central Puerto, also in the
Argentine capital.
Last year, Chilgener was flexing its transAndean muscles again, investing
Dollars 90m in a three-way consortium that bought 59 per cent of
hydro-electric plant Piedra del Aguila in central Argentina.
Energy companies have not been alone in finding Chile's market of 13m people
too small. Santa Carolina, the supermarket group, last April took over a
Peruvian chain, while Chilean pension funds (AFPs) - including Santa Maria,
Habitat and Provida - have participated in the establishment of a Peruvian
private pension fund system to the tune of some Dollars 30m.
In 1992, Dos en Uno, the sweet maker, built a plant in Argentina for Dollars
12m and conglomerate CMPC chose the same location for its Dollars 14m nappy
factory. Lord Cochrane, Chile's biggest printer, has set up a printing press
in Buenos Aires in association with Argentina's Atlantida, and one in Brazil
with Sao Paulo publisher O'Globo.
Chile's more ambitious companies, long used to competing in the deregulated
domestic market, are proving themselves ever more willing to apply those
skills in new, potentially highly profitable, Latin American turf. Central
Bank figures for approved foreign investments - which underestimate real
outward capital flows - have leapt from only Dollars 10m in 1988 to more
than Dollars 400m last year.
Argentina, with an economy more than three times the size of Chile's, has
been by far the biggest attraction, accounting for an estimated 65-70 per
cent of investments. Peru, which has one of the most ambitious privatisation
programmes in Latin America, comes in second, with other investments in
Bolivia, Columbia, Mexico and Panama. The shoemaker Dolphin has even
invested Dollars 2.3m to begin production in Cuba.
Chilean companies have proved themselves adept at raising finance abroad for
foreign ventures. Masisa last year mustered Dollars 58m in the US by placing
American Depositary Receipts in New York. Much of that was injected into a
Dollars 100m fibre-board plant in Argentina.
Chilean pension funds, now marshalling funds of Dollars 16bn, are also about
to become more involved in Latin American businesses. Recent capital markets
reform allows them gradually to expand investments abroad to 12 per cent of
their assets.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

940411

