FT944-11131

FT  08 NOV 94 / Sony to create 259 jobs on Merseyside


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


Sony Electronic Publishing is to open a base in Liverpool as its European
centre for the design and development of computer and video games, creating
259 jobs.
It is forecasting world sales for its products of more than Dollars 300m
(Pounds 182.90m) in 1995-96.
Sony acquired its Merseyside base last year, when it bought Psygnosis, a
Liverpool games software house, for an undisclosed sum. The new jobs more
than double the 235 that came with Psygnosis. Other Sony jobs may be moved
north from the south-east.
The company's main product - the Lemmings computer game - has sold several
million units worldwide. Other games include Shadow of the Beast, Ecstatica,
Novastorm and Mickey Mouse.
The company will occupy a building in Wavertree Technology Park which has
been empty for more than a year. Sony said the building's availability for
long leasing was crucial to its choice of the UK. It is also negotiating to
expand on adjacent land.
Mr Ian Hetherington, joint managing director, said: 'This is an emerging
technology and must be the largest growth sector in the world at the moment.
If we can pull some of that into Sony - and we can - 259 new jobs will only
be the tip of the iceberg.'
The development was fought over by inward investment agencies in France,
Ireland, Germany and the Netherlands. But in industrial development terms,
government help has been small compared with the Pounds 58m which helped
entice Samsung to the north-east last month. The site already had Pounds
4.3m of derelict grant.
Of new money, Pounds 1.75m is regional selective assistance from the
Department of Trade and Industry, almost matched with Pounds 1.7m from the
European Union. A further Pounds 625,000 will come from Merseyside Training
and Enterprise Council.
Merseyside scored over other European locations partly because of north-west
England's educational infrastructure, and the prospect of EU funds for
expansion. This helped overcome Sony's criticisms of poor motorway links
into Liverpool city centre.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941108

