FT942-12296

FT  30 APR 94 / OECD members agree action to curb bribery of foreign
officials


   By DAVID BUCHAN and GEORGE GRAHAM


   PARIS, WASHINGTON


The world's main exporters yesterday agreed action to curb bribery of
foreign government officials through a voluntary code of conduct to be
adopted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development at the
end of May.
The OECD's 24 members have agreed a list of recommended measures, such as
making bribes illegal and removing their tax deductibility, which they would
try to implement, said Mr Mark Pieth, a Swiss official who chairs the
organisation's working group on illicit payments. He said it had not been
possible to agree a legally binding anti-bribery convention, as the United
Nations had tried to do in the late 1970s.
Mr Pieth described the OECD recommendation as 'soft law' which would not
oblige member governments to adopt the whole menu of anti-bribery measures.
But governments would exercise 'peer pressure' on each other by holding
periodic reviews to examine what measures individual countries had taken.
The accord ends over four years of negotiations, instigated by the US, which
is the only OECD country to flatly outlaw bribery in its Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act.
US officials yesterday welcomed the recommendation, which they said was
considerably sharper than earlier drafts. 'We've shifted from the notion
that countries would consider taking steps to the notion that countries have
committed themselves to taking steps,' a senior State Department official
said.
'I don't think there's much doubt that the problem is measured in billions
of dollars annually for US companies,' the official added.
Other OECD partners have had greater reservations than the US about the
'extra-territorial' aspect of applying any bribery ban to business
activities on foreign soil.
Mr Pieth said the OECD code of conduct covered illicit payments to
officials, but not to private businessmen, in foreign countries. He also
conceded that corruption was hard to define.
'Inviting a foreign official to dinner hardly constitutes corruption, but
offering him a gift can.'
Mr Pieth said the new OECD anti-bribery code would draw on the experience of
the organisation's Financial Action Task Force whose role has been to crack
down on the laundering of drug and criminal money while respecting the
differences in member countries' banking systems and laws.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940430

