FT942-14491

FT  20 APR 94 / Leading Article: Russia's CIS


Russia has waited 2 1/2 years, but its patience is being rewarded. Its
surrounding peoples, many of them long accustomed to its domination, are now
willing to trade a diminution of their new-found independence for what they
hope will prove a less rigorous economic regime.
At the summit of the Commonwealth of Independent States last Friday, Russia
considerably advanced what it sees as its interests. All the CIS states are
now in the economic union, though terms vary. All have agreed to work
towards a customs union. Most have agreed that Russian troops can guard
their external borders.
We have not returned to Soviet days. The meetings are not mere shows of
unanimity: the leaderships of Kazakhstan and Ukraine have substantial
differences with Russia, and say so - if less forcefully than they once did.
But it has become fashionable for the Russian political class to refer
contemptuously to the 'romantic period' after the fall of the Soviet Union,
when Russians and others believed a rapid transition to democracy and market
economics would save them all.
Yet it is not romantic to believe that Russia will not thrive while it
remains both imperially-minded and authoritarian. It is also not romantic to
argue that Russia cannot afford to support economies in worse shape than it
own; that it courts still greater violence by intervening in every
surrounding theatre of war; and that it should show its determination to
become a normal state by encouraging the formation of healthy statehood in
its weaker neighbours.
The romanticism lies, instead, in the return to an undefined but strongly
felt 'great power' status, increasingly peddled in Russia. As the dwindling
band of democrats has stressed, the re-emergence of imperial Russia would
vitiate its fragile new political institutions and break the back of any
rational financial policy. That Russia is an important state is in no doubt:
that it has large interests is beyond question; but that it should respect
the sovereignty of its neighbours is a sine qua non of both its and everyone
else's security.
The decisions of the CIS member states on Friday were not yet to
reconstitute the Soviet Union. Even the closest union agreed so far, between
Russia and Belarus, may not reach that point. In any case, creation of
rational economic links among countries seriously engaged in reform would be
highly desirable. A judgment needs to be formed on whether the current
development of the CIS offers such economic links or rather a collective
effort to evade the need for reform.
Russia's behaviour towards its so-called 'near abroad' has again become a
central issue in defining the country's relations with the west. In response
the west will need to draw lines, on the scale of economic assistance and in
terms of its military and diplomatic posture. These are now difficult, but
inescapable judgments.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940420

