FT941-3366

FT  16 MAR 94 / International Company News: IBM chief expects a gradual
recovery


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


Mr Lou Gerstner, chairman and chief executive of International Business
Machines, sees no quick fix for the computer company's financial woes. In
the annual report to shareholders, Mr Gerstner says that IBM will recover
'over time'.
'It won't all happen overnight, but we are making significant progress,' Mr
Gerstner says in a letter addressed to 'Dear Fellow Investor'. He
acknowledges, however, that 'you wouldn't know it from looking at the
financial results for the year (1993).'
IBM earlier reported net losses for 1993 of Dollars 8.1bn on revenues of
Dollars 62.7bn. In 1992 the company recorded a Dollars 5bn loss on sales of
Dollars 64.5bn.
Mr Gerstner charges that the company 'failed to keep pace with significant
change in the industry'. It 'has been too bureaucratic and too preoccupied
with our own view of the world. We have been way too slow getting new things
to the market,' he states.
'We believe we can fix these problems because they are caused by us and not
factors outside our doors,' says Mr Gerstner, directly contradicting past
statements by senior IBM managers who blamed IBM's problems on economic
pressures and market turmoil.
Mr Gerstner, who last July stated that 'the last thing IBM needs right now
is a vision,' now believes that 'strategy is particularly important for
IBM'. He is expected to begin to reveal those strategies at an analysts
meeting later this month.
IBM's plans, announced last July, to reduce its workforce by 35,000 by the
end of 1995, are unchanged. 'Based on current business conditions, we think
that's about the right number,' Mr Gerstner says.
Financial data revealed for the first time in the annual report point to
IBM's mainframe computers as the crux of its problems. Revenue from
mainframe computer hardware declined 27.6 per cent last year, to Dollars
10bn, while personal computer sales increased 23.3 per cent to Dollars
9.7bn.
The company's data storage products division reported a precipitous 18.2 per
cent revenue decline to Dollars 5.1bn, while services revenues rose 32 per
cent to Dollars 9.7bn.
The report also shows a sharp decline in European sales over the past year,
with sales in the US and Asia Pacific regions increasing slightly.
Having outstripped the US for the previous two years, European revenues fell
about 13 per cent to Dollars 21bn last year, from almost Dollars 24bn in
1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

940316

