FT941-5646

FT  05 MAR 94 / Clinton to lose staunch ally in Congress


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


President Bill Clinton is to lose one of his staunchest supporters in
Congress with the retirement of Senator George Mitchell, leader of the
Senate Democratic majority.
Mr Mitchell was due to make a televised announcement last night in his home
state of Maine that he would not stand in November's election, and would
leave the Senate when his term expires next January.
'I can say that he is one of the finest, ablest people I have ever known in
any kind of work,' Mr Clinton said yesterday, adding that Mr Mitchell would
be 'very difficult to replace'.
A former judge, Mr Mitchell was elected as majority leader in 1988 and set
about besting his Maine neighbour, Republican President George Bush, on
taxes, nominations and foreign policy.
When Mr Clinton took office, Mr Mitchell was instrumental in winning votes
on the budget, the North American Free Trade Agreement and legislation to
provide for mandatory leave in case of family illness.
Although Senator Wendell Ford of Kentucky is currently second in command of
the Senate Democrats, the way could be open for one of the younger
generation of Democrats to move up to the leader's job. Senator John Breaux
of Louisiana, Senator Thomas Daschle of South Dakota and Senator John Kerry
of Massachusetts are possible candidates.
Besides beheading the Democratic leadership in Congress, Mr Mitchell's
retirement also threatens the party's 56-44 majority in the Senate, which
was already expected to erode in November's elections. He would have won in
a landslide, but without him Republican Congresswoman Olympia Snowe is the
likely front-runner in Maine.
Mr Mitchell had been widely reported to be interested in becoming
commissioner of baseball, but he said in his announcement last night that he
had no job lined up.
Democratic officials said he was in good health and had simply grown tired
of the job.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940305

