FT943-12718

FT  23 JUL 94 / Court fails to answer Mercury's bitterness: A decision which
will affect utilities and regulators


   By ANDREW ADONIS


The refusal by the Court of Appeal yesterday to interfere in the dispute
between Mercury and Oftel, the telecommunications regulator, will not only
affect Mercury. It has ramifications for wider telecoms competition in the
UK and for the relationship of utility regulators with the courts.
Mercury has long been aggrieved by what it regards as excessive prices it
pays British Telecommunications for delivering its long-distance calls to
their final destination across the local BT network.
This discontent has turned to bitterness in the face of recent large cuts in
BT prices and fast-growing competition from new operators licensed since the
abolition in 1991 of the BT/Mercury duopoly.
Although BT carries 85 per cent of all phone calls by value, the new
competitors could harm Mercury more than BT because their target is the
corporate market, which is Mercury's main source of revenue.
Mercury's complaints are complex but boil down to two issues.
It believes that the so-called 'access deficit contributions' (ADCs) - which
it pays to compensate BT for losses it makes on its local network  - are a
tax on competition.
It also challenges the current basis for interconnection payments.
Mercury says that a capacity-based system - under which competitors would
pay BT mostly for peak-rate capacity, not individual calls - would be fairer
than the current per-call system.
The court case concerned the latter issue, capacity-based charging.
Unless Mercury can persuade the House of Lords to overturn the Court of
Appeal's decision it will have to return to Oftel to secure a change.
Oftel says, however, that Mercury has provided it with no more than a
sketchy outline of the new system it wants, and industry analysts are
sceptical that a capacity-based system could be made to work in practice.
In the process, however, Mercury has raised important questions about the
role of the courts in supervising utility regulators.
Mr Don Cruickshank, director-general of Oftel, deprecates the idea of the
courts playing an integral role in the regulatory process, arguing that it
would bring all the evils of the US telecoms industry 'where no-one -
regulators or industry - knows what is or isn't allowed'.
The verdict the Court of Appeal has delivered is an ambiguous one.
In dismissing Mercury's case without allowing it to rehearse the detailed
points at issue the court refused to involve itself and refrained from
setting a precedent for other companies or organisations  - particularly in
the environmental field - disgruntled with a regulator.
However, the judges made comments which might encourage Mercury and others
to try their luck in future.
One of the three judges ruled that Mercury had made out a case worth a
judicial hearing. And one of the judges in the majority said he was 'not
persuaded' by Mr Cruickshank's basic argument that the courts should not
interfere in Oftel's interpretation of the issues at stake, although he
dismissed Mercury's case for other reasons.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940723

