FT941-3581

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (22): In place of collective
bargaining - An important debate has begun in the US over the rights of
employees / Industrial relations


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


Rights at Work: Employment Relations in the Post-union Era
by Richard Edwards
The Brookings Institution, Pounds 20.95
265 pages
The New American Workplace: Transforming Work Systems in the
United States
by Eileen Appelbaum and Rosemary Batt
Obtainable from ILR Press, Ithaca, New York, Dollars 40.00 hardback,
Dollars 18.25 paperback
278 pages
The American workplace is being transformed at a rapid pace under the impact
of global market pressures. Companies are cutting costs and improving their
competitiveness at a time when collective bargaining and private-sector
trade unionism face the prospect of virtual extinction now that only 12 per
cent of workers are organised.
As a result, an important debate has begun in the US over the future of
employee rights. As Richard Edwards asks: 'How can the employer's need for
flexibility in his operations be reconciled with workers' legitimate
aspirations for basic protections and fair dealing at work?' Present trends
suggest that the US is returning to the adversarial labour-management
relations that characterised much of the pre-New Deal workplace. The demand
for labour flexibility and reinforcement of the employment-at-will doctrine
may be understandable among employers who fear their position is being
undermined by free trade and deregulation on global markets.
But, as Edwards argues in his thoughtful book, autocratic management has
severe limitations when market pressures require companies to create and
retain 'highly motivated, loyal, hardworking employees'.
Is it really credible for companies to try to build up trust and security
with their employees, but also demand an unquestioned power to hire and fire
them?
The author suggests that collective bargaining is no longer a realistic
option in dealing with that conundrum, because 'unions today represent far
too few workers to serve as the centerpiece for workers' rights.' Apparently
'collective bargaining can no longer be regarded as the core institution for
a new regime of workers' rights'.
Nor does Edwards pin much faith in the statutory provision of workplace
rights as an alternative, arguing that there are severe limits on the
state's ability to legislate, and that legal regulation can be 'clumsy,
expensive and highly ineffective'.
Instead, he argues for the legal codification of what he calls 'enterprise
rights', the detailed guides provided by companies for their workers
individually that spell out their terms and conditions of employment.
The author believes employers must find a mutual interest with their workers
to ensure 'an effective, accepted and responsible system of industrial
governance'. Unless they recognise this, he argues, they must expect workers
to press hard for new federal government regulations to extend their
individual workplace rights to protect themselves against arbitrary
management.
By making 'employee handbooks legally enforceable', with access to
independent arbitration, Edwards believes he can create 'a new common
ground' where 'legitimate aspirations' contribute positively to 'employers'
competitive needs'.
But is this realistic? Edwards himself admits: 'Perhaps a majority of
American employers offer virtually no enterprise rights at all.' Such
so-called rights, where they do exist, are unilaterally provided by
companies so they can easily be abrogated when or if necessary.
It is hard to see why companies should agree to have their own employee
guides made legally enforceable, because it would restrain their unilateral
right to manage. Perhaps Edwards should have looked at ways of helping to
renew trade unionism as the answer to the genuine problem of workplace
rights.
Eileen Appelbaum and Rosemary Batt suggest in their highly informative
survey that corporate America - contrary to its adversarial image - may be
pragmatic enough to adapt to workplace change through co-operation rather
than conflict.
Certainly they found a surprisingly large number of US companies willing to
experiment with progressive forms of workplace organisation (total quality
management; just-in-time production; joint teamwork and the rest) than might
have been expected.
The authors estimate that a quarter to a third of firms 'have made
significant changes on how workers are managed' with serious quality-at-work
programmes. But their book also pinpoints 'obstacles to change' in the
American system, notably the 'lack of an institutional infrastructure'
ensuring that organisational innovation is 'overly dependent on the
personalities and commitments of key individuals.'
Moreover the 'ideological opposition' to job-security regulation makes it
'difficult for transformed firms, which rely on mutual trust, to honour
commitments they have made to employment security during periods of
recession.'
The authors point to successful employer-union partnerships (at Rank Xerox
with the Clothing and Textile Workers, and the Saturn project between
General Motors and the United Autoworkers for example) to suggest that
organised labour is not as anachronistic as many human-resource pundits
suggest.
Indeed, the implied but unfashionable conclusion from both books is that
collective bargaining and union workplace representation may not be such
obsolete concepts after all.
Perhaps American employers faced with the tidal force of global change
should question their instinctive dislike of trade unions. By sharing
responsibility in achieving growth and profitability with their workers
through collective representation, companies in many sectors may find
themselves better equipped to prosper on world markets than those that do
not.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

940315

