FT942-12255

FT  30 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: C&G takeover threatens diversity and
mutuality


   From Ms ELIZABETH MAYER


Sir, How far should the ideal of mutuality be protected? This is the
critical question in the proposed takeover by Lloyds Bank of the Cheltenham
& Gloucester Building Society.
Your report ('Lloyds' High Court hurdle', April 26) of the legal obstacles
in the way of the takeover draws attention to the commission's view that
payments to existing members can only be made to those persons who have been
members for at least two years.
One of the aims of the two-year qualification period is to strengthen the
position of a mutual society. In such an organisation, the assets of the
society are owned by the members themselves. On a takeover, there is a
one-off opportunity to release the value of those assets. The ideal of
mutuality requires that only those who have been members for a period of
time should share in this release. If the take-over of the C&G by Lloyds
succeeds, this ideal will have been damaged.
Ultimately, do we want diversity in the institutions which provide borrowing
facilities to the general public? If so, the mutuals have a vital part to
play. They bring a different perspective to the market and a wide degree of
choice.
The government is currently reviewing the position of building society
mergers and acquisitions. One reason why building societies are vulnerable
to being taken over is the limits that are imposed on their ability to raise
funds in the wholesale market. Part of the review should cover the question
of whether these limits should be revised or removed. If the playing field
between banks and building societies were levelled, many more societies
would be in a stronger position to resist the pressures for take-over and
the ideal of mutuality could be preserved.
Without a successful review, the ideal of mutuality will be lost and
competition sacrificed.
Elizabeth Mayer,
Fox Williams, solicitors,
City Gate House,
39-43 Finsbury Square,
London EC2A 1UU.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940430

