FT944-2482

FT  16 DEC 94 / Turbo-prop safety fears put off the passengers


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


   NEW YORK


Short-hop flights on small commuter aircraft are big business in the US:
there are more than 12,500 a day. But many passengers dislike the
propellor-powered aircraft typically used on these flights - and may be even
less keen to use them after this week's fatal accident in North Carolina.
On Tuesday evening a turbo-prop BAe Jetstream Super 31 on an American Eagle
commuter flight crashed into a wood on its final approach into
Raleigh-Durham International Airport, killing 15 of the 20 passengers. The
cause is not yet known.
The accident came less than two months after another American Eagle
turbo-prop, an ATR-72, went down while waiting to land at Chicago's O'Hare
International Airport, killing all 68 on board. Ice on the wings is the
suspected cause.
The accidents themselves would have been enough to make some passengers
jittery about flying by turbo-prop aircraft. But last month, they were given
another reason to feel nervous when the International Airline Passengers
Association, a Washington-based consumer organisation, said people should
fly by propellor-driven aircraft only in good weather during daylight hours
to minimise the chance of accidents.
Further anxiety was caused last weekend when the Federal Aviation
Administration banned the ATR-72 and ATR-42 turbo-prop aircraft from flying
in icy conditions, causing widespread flight cancellations in the
north-eastern US.
Turbo-prop aircraft are disliked by many passengers because they tend to be
slower, noisier and more cramped than jets. But their use is growing in the
US because they provide the most economical means of picking up small
numbers of passengers from local communities and feeding them into
longer-distance flights at regional hubs.
As big airlines face increasing competition from low-cost carriers, they are
replacing jets with turbo-props on some routes. Earlier this year, for
example, American Airlines replaced all its jet services in Cincinnati with
turbo-prop flights.
To some extent, the safety fears associated with turbo-prop aircraft are
justified. Statistics show that, on US domestic flights, regional airlines
suffered 0.11 fatal accidents per 100,000 flights last year - more than
three times the rate of 0.029 suffered by the big carriers.
Some of the reasons cited for the difference include less rigorous training
standards for pilots of small aircraft, less sophisticated avionics gear,
less effective de-icing gear, and vulnerability to bad weather because small
aircraft tend to fly at lower altitudes.
However, the Regional Airline Association, a US industry body, says the
safety fears are overdone. Excluding Alaska, where operating conditions are
particularly difficult, it says that the accident rate for regional airlines
falls to 0.037 fatal accidents per 100,000 flights - not that much higher
than the figure for big carriers.
Still, Ms Deborah McElroy, the association's vice president, says it would
be naive to believe that the safety concerns are not having some effect on
passenger numbers. 'You read in the papers that some people are driving
rather than taking a turbo-prop aircraft, which is ironic since it's nearly
100 times safer to use a regional airline than it is to make the same trip
by car.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941216

