FT944-14625

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (2): Part of the
script is already written - Budget Countdown, Constraints on the Chancellor
/ The limitations start with last year's budget, when Mr Clarke said he
planned to sort out the problem of public borrowing once and for all


   By PHILIP GAWITH


When the chancellor sits down to draft his budget speech next month, he will
not enjoy the luxury of starting with a clean sheet of paper.
The state of the economy, the political fortunes of the government, and the
potential sanctions of financial markets, are just some of the constraints
he faces.
But insofar as Mr Kenneth Clarke discovers that his text is already
partially written, he will have little difficulty in recognising his own
hand. The main constraints on the chancellor are self-imposed.
These start with last year's budget. Justifying significant tax increases -
some, like limitations on mortgage interest tax relief, and married couples'
allowances, as well as higher VAT on fuel, have still to take effect in full
 -and cuts in public spending, Mr Clarke said that he planned to 'sort out
the problem of public borrowing once and for all.' He said these measures
would 'eliminate government borrowing entirely by the end of the decade' and
'establish sound public finances into the next century'.
The priority afforded this matter was understandable. At the time, he was
confronted by a public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) of Pounds 50bn,
or 8 per cent of gross domestic product - way above the 3 per cent benchmark
generally considered prudent.
With cuts in public spending, and higher taxes, Mr Clarke was able to cut
the estimated PSBR to Pounds 38bn in 1994-95. This was subsequently revised
down to Pounds 36bn in the summer forecast, and private sector economists
are even more bullish, predicting a Pounds 30-34bn outturn. This is the
result of higher than forecast economic growth buoying tax revenues, and
allowing reduced social security spending, as more people take jobs.
While this favourable trend in public finances might have been thought to
offer Mr Clarke more room for manoeuvre, he has made it fairly clear that,
at least in the short term, his focus is more narrow. He has said that, even
if the PSBR is undershooting, 4.5 per cent of GDP is still too large for tax
cuts to be considered. Economists reckon that Mr Clarke will probably only
consider tax cuts when the PSBR is down to the Pounds 25bn, or 2-3 per cent
of GDP, level.
Even more telling, arguably, was Mr Clarke's comment last month, at the time
of the rise in UK interest rates, that it was 'hopelessly premature' to
think in terms of tax cuts.
For the time being, cutting the PSBR - the government sees it falling to
just Pounds 2bn by 1988-89 - matters more than easing the burden on
taxpayers.
Mr Jeremy Hawkins, chief economist at the Bank of America in London,
comments: 'He has clearly gone out of his way to put the UK fiscal position
on a sound footing. He is saddled with very aggressive PSBR targets. The
PSBR, to this particular government, at this particular stage in the cycle,
is sacrosanct.'
The conclusion, says Mr Geoffrey Dicks, chief UK economist at NatWest
Markets, is that 'we can only expect a neutral budget overall'.
Clearly, the views Mr Clarke has articulated are the product of briefings
and forecasts from Treasury economists. But whether he is objectively
constrained, in the manner he believes, is more of a moot point. Mr Dicks
comments: 'There is a chance that, in two months time, the UK economy will
be a little weaker than the current Treasury forecast.' He argues that the
current forecast of 3 per cent growth in consumption expenditure, both this
year and next, looks to be on the high side.
'If he hadn't boxed himself in on the tax side, he could have taken the view
that he could go easier on taxes,' said Mr Dicks. 'If anything is to give,
it will probably be in the form of lower interest rates than the market is
currently predicting.'
Mr Chris Dillow, UK economist at Nomura in London, comments: 'The
constraints are largely ideological, not objective. I don't think the state
of public-sector finances is a problem for the government. I expect that it
will come lighter much quicker than the government thinks.'
Mr Dillow's argument is based on the view that private-sector investment can
be expected to rise quite fast, while a squeeze on corporate profits will
result in falling private-sector savings. Given, as a matter of economic
identity, that savings in an economy must equal investment, Mr Dillow argues
that these developments in the private sector are likely to lead to a
reduction in the public-sector deficit.
Another constraint on the chancellor is the 'leave well alone' argument.
Most economists agree that, whether by accident or design, the UK is
presently enjoying a particularly well balanced economic recovery. In 1993
the consumer pulled the economy out of recession. In 1994, however, the
engine of growth has been more the rise in exports, on the back of
sterling's devaluation after the 1992 exit from the ERM, and a pick-up in
European demand.
'We are moving away from the Reaganomics of tight money and loose fiscal
policy that always benefits the consumer,' says Mr Dicks. 'Now, for the
first time since 1985, we have a virtuous combination of exports leading the
recovery and investment going ahead of consumption.' This is a situation
which Mr Clarke may well decide to leave alone.
If past commitments and the present benign nature of the economic recovery
represent two constraints on the chancellor, politics constitutes a third.
Mr Robin Aspinall, strategist at brokers Panmure Gordon, comments: 'What he
most wants to do is win the election next time. His priority will be to do
as much as he can to achieve tax cuts later.' Mr Hawkins, of Bank of
America, adds: 'There is no real reason to rock the boat on an economy that
is well placed for an election in, say, 1996.'
The corollary of gratification later is delayed gratification now. So far as
the politics goes, however, the picture is more complicated. For with the
government so far behind in the polls, it may be that Mr Clarke is tempted
to take some steps to lay some sort of groundwork to boost its popularity.
Insofar as he is tempted down this road, however, he will be likely to keep
a wary eye on the capital markets. Mr Hawkins comments: 'It is important to
produce a budget that impresses the capital markets. At the moment they are
focusing on big-deficit countries, and this means a weak currency, and
higher interest rates.'
While the UK has a large deficit, the trend is clearly in the right
direction, and the recent strength of sterling suggests a degree of market
affirmation. Mr Clarke will be unlikely to jeopardise this recently gained
credibility, of which sterling's strength is a symptom, with any fiscal
heroics in the budget.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941021

