FT942-15465

FT  15 APR 94 / Brighter outlook for third world: World Bank projection


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The World Bank is projecting a much brighter economic outlook for developing
countries over the next decade, despite prospects of slower growth in the
industrialised nations.
'The international economic environment is likely to be more favourable for
developing countries as a whole during the 1990s than it has been in the
last 20 years,' said Mr Michael Bruno, chief economist at the
Washington-based development institution.
'Developing countries are projected to grow at a rate of 4.8 per cent per
annum during the coming decade, considerably higher than the 3 per cent per
annum recorded during the 1980s,' Mr Bruno said.
Although growth in the industrialised countries has in the past had a large
spillover effect on the rest of the world, the World Bank says in its annual
assessment of global economic prospects, published yesterday, that the
modest growth rates of 2.5 to 3 per cent likely in Europe, North America and
Japan over the next decade need not hold back the developing nations.
Mr Bruno said lower real interest rates, higher flows of private capital
into the developing countries, fast growing world trade and a stabilisation
of real commodity prices should create a more favourable environment for the
developing countries.
He warned, however, that generally strong growth could disguise severe
disparities between regions and countries: while east Asia would probably
continue to fare well, even modest improvements in growth rates were still
likely to leave more people in poverty in sub-Saharan Africa.
East Asia's growth over the next decade is likely to be less spectacular
than in the past, because the region will encounter infrastructural
bottlenecks and environmental constraints. Nevertheless, growth rates in the
region are likely to average more than 7 per cent a year.
South Asia already improved its economic performance in the 1980s, and
steady growth rates of around 5.3 per cent a year are projected for the next
10 years, while growth in Latin America and the Caribbean could accelerate
to 3.4 per cent a year.
Sub-Saharan Africa has an opportunity for modest acceleration of growth
rates to 3.9 per cent a year, especially if the continent's civil wars
abate. Nevertheless, the World Bank concludes, 'limited stock of capital
equipment, infrastructure and human capital preclude any sharp improvement
in living standards'.
Mr Bruno said that much of the downside risk for the developing countries
came from the possibility that the industrialised countries would falter in
their efforts to tackle their budget deficits and to undertake supply side
reforms, causing higher interest rates, lower growth and protectionist
pressures.
Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries, 1994. World Bank,
1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940415

