FT942-12514

FT  29 APR 94 / Farmers reap home-baked benefits


   By ALISON MAITLAND


It is only 9.30am and Mrs Chris Welch has already baked 72 cakes. As a
Hertfordshire farmer's wife, rising early and working hard comes naturally.
But when she set up her bakery business to save the farm from decline, it
meant a 2am start each day.
'I go to bed at 8pm,' she said. 'The children come and say good-night to
me.'
It was one of several sacrifices the Welch family made in building up the
bakery business from an annual turnover of a few hundred pounds to a
'six-figure sum' in five years.
Farmers are diversifying into everything from ostriches to steam railways,
bed and breakfast to corporate entertaining, and the trend is growing.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the agriculture minister, yesterday urged more farmers
to consider new businesses as a way of boosting their income and relieving
rural unemployment. Nearly 80,000 farm-based jobs were already reliant on
non-farming activities. She said diversifying could ease some of the
problems associated with fundamental change in the industry.
The agriculture ministry last year abolished the farm-diversification grant
scheme, under which Pounds 8m was paid to 1,500 farmers. It said the scheme
had 'put diversification on the map'.
Farm-based accommodation accounts for Pounds 70m of farm output in England
and Wales and benefits the rural economy to the tune of Pounds 115m, Mrs
Shephard said yesterday.
Mrs Welch and her husband Ian, who benefited from a Pounds 3,250 grant in
1991, decided to diversify when expansion of their arable farm appeared
doomed by the approaching clampdown on overproduction in the 1992 reform of
the European Union's common agricultural policy.
'Our business didn't look as though it was going any further,' said Mr
Welch. 'We were looking for something which wasn't going to be governed by
Common Market policy.'
In fact, the reforms have so far been a boon to most arable farmers and the
Welches are now farming more land under contract. But at the time there
seemed an urgent need for a new outlet.
They knew from neighbours with farm shops that there was a market for
home-produced cakes and pies 'like Mum used to make', so they deliberately
set out to retain the farming image. 'To be successful you've got to be
unique,' said Mr Welch. 'We don't try and compete with Mr Tesco or even Mr
Kipling.'
The Bury Farm Bakery, outside Royston, now produces more than 1,500
home-made cakes and pies a week and employs eight women part-time. The
customers are mainly farm shops within a 25-mile radius of the bakery. But
just over a year ago the Welches won a contract to supply Neal's Yard - the
wholefood chain based in London's Covent Garden - and output soared.
The bakery has moved into a 100 sq m stable building that has just been
refurbished at a cost of Pounds 45,000.
Mr Welch's recipe for successful diversification is a dedicated staff and
good advisers, keeping overheads low - deliveries started 'out of the back
of an estate car' - and insisting on cash on delivery.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940429

