FT943-972

FT  27 SEP 94 / Skills training 'pays off for employees'


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


Training for work pays off - at least for the employees who take advantage
of it. One of the biggest studies of the link between training and earnings
has found an 'impressive' differential of between 6 per cent and 14 per cent
for each step up the skill ladder.
The study, by Mr Michael White of the Policy Studies Institute, found that
even one month of initial training was worth an average 6 per cent addition
to pay. A vocational qualification was worth 7 per cent.
The study, based on the Economic and Social Research Council's Social Change
and Economic Life Database, looked at more than 2,000 people in comparable
jobs.
People who acquired skills from personal study, rather than from their
employers, received an even higher 9 per cent advantage, as did people who
had been retrained to work on new technology.
Mr White found that there was no gain for employees if an employer trained
them without aiming for higher skill levels, or tried to increase skill
without formal training.
The study concentrated on continuing, rather than initial, training and took
account of possible distortions.
Mr White said the results might be undermined if benefits were coming from
being in a big, strong, successful organisation. But he added: 'Although
larger firms are more likely to have training policies in place . . . the
size of the firm has no bearing on the earnings differentials for training.'
The findings will be useful ammunition for the training lobby and the
training and enterprise councils, which are trying to promote in-company
training.
It will not, however, prevent the continuing scepticism about the value of
large-scale spending on training the unemployed.
A Department of Employment survey at the end of the 1980s found that nearly
three out of four vacancies being filled could have been filled by people
straight off the unemployment register.
The fact that they were not suggested that employer prejudice rather than
lack of skills was the biggest barrier to getting most of the unemployed
back to work.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940927

