FT944-6019

FT  01 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Mazda clinches deal on Fiesta


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


Ford and Mazda have reached agreement in principle for Ford to supply its
European-built Fiesta small car to Mazda for sale through the Japanese
group's European dealer network. The deal is a breakthrough for Mazda, which
is the last of the leading Japanese carmakers to secure a European
production source.
Ford said yesterday that production of the Mazda-badged version of the
Fiesta would begin in about 12 months with an output of around 25,000 a
year.
The cars will be produced at one of Ford's three Fiesta assembly plants in
Europe but Ford said it had not yet been decided which one would be
selected. The plants are at Dagenham, near London, at Cologne in Germany and
at Valencia in Spain.
The current Fiesta, which was launched in 1989, is due to be replaced in the
second half of next year with an extensively modernised range. This will
include a new engine, code-named Sigma, developed in co-operation with
Yamaha of Japan. The engines will be built at the Valencia plant.
Mazda, which is 24.5 per cent owned by Ford, will receive a version of the
updated Fiesta with slightly differentiated exterior and interior styling.
Ford faces a complex task of allocating future Fiesta-based production
between the three European plants because of an ambitious new product
programme.
This includes the launch of the modernised mainstream Fiesta range, the
addition of a new coupe and the introduction of a range of smaller cars
derived from the Fiesta but designed to compete with rivals such as the Fiat
Cinquecento in the mini segment of the European market.
The deal for Ford cars to be sold under a Mazda badge in Europe is a
reversal of the two groups' long-established arrangement in Asia, where some
Mazda cars such as the Mazda 626 and the Mazda 323/Familia are sold
respectively as the Ford Telstar and the Ford Laser. In the US Mazda is to
sell a version of the Ford Ranger pickup.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

941201

