FT943-13123

FT  21 JUL 94 / Brussels set to back state aid for ailing Air France


   By EMMA TUCKER and JOHN RIDDING


   BRUSSELS, PARIS


The French government is likely to win European Commission approval next
week to grant Air France, the lossmaking national carrier, a capital
injection of FFr20bn (Pounds 2.36bn) in return for relatively mild
concessions.
The state aid package, expected to be approved by the Commission on
Wednesday, will provide a welcome boost to Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's
unpopular government.
However, it is expected to provoke protests and legal action from the UK
government and non-subsidised European Union airlines such as British
Airways and the Dutch carrier KLM.
A Brussels decision to allow the aid to be paid will be seen as a test case
in EU efforts to liberalise the air transport market, and the politically
sensitive issue of state aid.
The conditions attached to the rescue package were discussed yesterday ahead
of next Wednesday's vote at which it needs the support of nine of the 17
commissioners. The political balance appears to be in its favour.
In spite of a softer line recently adopted by the UK towards Europe, the
case is likely to set Mr John Major's government on another collision course
with Brussels. It has indicated it will take the commission to the European
Court of Justice if the aid is approved. 'We do not believe that the aid is
compatible withthe Treaty of Rome,' the UK Department of Transport said
yesterday. 'If it is authorised it will distort competition within the
European Union.'
But the commission is likely to argue that the conditions are tough enough
to justify the so-called 'one-time last-time' capital injection to the
ailing airline. The conditions include:
All of the aid must go only to Air France. Air Inter, a subsidiary of Air
France must become a holding company, at arm's length from the main
operation.
The restructuring of the company should be followed by privatisation. Air
France must sell the hotel chain Meridien, a move which is already on the
cards.
BA is likely to protest that while the conditions stipulate that Air France
must not increase the size of its fleet, there is nothing to prevent the
carrier leasing aircraft from other airlines. Another main grievance is that
Air France has not divested itself of other assets such as property and
stakes in other airlines as much as it could.
Air France said it expects the first tranche of FFr10bn as soon as Brussels
gives the go-ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940721

