FT941-12840

FT  28 JAN 94 / Broad mass bears the cost of breaks for the wealthy: Philip
Coggan, in the first of a series on the tax base, analyses the effect of
shelters


   By PHILIP COGGAN


Taxpayers face a hefty bill in 1994-95. Mr Kenneth Clarke imposed rises of
Pounds 1.68bn in his November Budget on top of the Pounds 6.73bn set in
train by Mr Norman Lamont, his predecessor as Chancellor.
But the need for this increase may partly stem from the government's
generosity in offering tax breaks in the late 1980s and early 1990s -
measures at odds with its philosophy, most vigorously pursued by Lord
Lawson, of 'lower taxes and fewer breaks'.
Shelters introduced since the Conservatives returned to power in 1979
include the Business Expansion Scheme, the Personal Equity Plan (Pep) and
the Tax Exempt Special Savings Account (Tessa). Long-standing shelters such
as pension funds have been relatively unscathed.
The effect of the tax shelters in any one financial year may be small. But
their cumulative effect is substantial and the economic benefits have been
questionable. Lost revenue from Tessas is about Pounds 500m according to the
Inland Revenue. Anecdotal evidence suggests that Tessas have merely allowed
those with building society deposits to transfer them into a tax-free form.
Peps were introduced in 1986 by the then Mr Nigel Lawson to encourage
savings in equities. They were initially unpopular and cumbersome but a
series of reforms and the fall in interest rates has led to a sharp increase
in popularity, with unit trust groups recording record Pep sales in 1993.
Again, the cost in an individual year is small - Pounds 150m in 1993-94
according to the Inland Revenue and Pounds 300m to date.
But the nature of an equity-based tax shelter is that it will grow sharply
over time. In the 1992-93 tax year almost Pounds 3.5bn was invested in Peps,
bringing the overall total up to Pounds 9.9bn. Judging by the fast growth in
unit trust Pep sales the amount invested in Peps in 1993-94 may be Pounds
5.3bn. If that continues until the tax year 1999/2000, and if the return on
equities continues at the historical average of 12 per cent, the cost to the
Revenue in lost tax on dividend income alone in 1999/2000 could be almost
Pounds 1bn a year. That figure does not account for lost capital gains tax
revenues.
The economic benefits of Peps are harder to judge. Money is undoubtedly
being attracted into the equity market from new investors, who had
previously stuck with building societies.
This may provide new sources of funds for British industry. But the main
beneficiaries have undoubtedly been the wealthy, who have been able to
transfer existing portfolios into Pep form. A couple who have been putting
the maximum in a Pep each year could have accumulated a portfolio of Pounds
100,000 by now.
The Business Expansion Scheme is now abolished. But in its last year there
was a flood of money as investors sought to take advantage of a generous tax
relief. According to Allenbridge, a BES advice service, the amount raised in
1993-94 was more than Pounds 1.1bn. Since the vast majority of this money
came from top-rate taxpayers, the cost in lost tax revenue will probably be
about Pounds 400m, making the cost of the BES over its life to about Pounds
1.7bn.
So the BES, Peps and Tessas have had an overall cost of Pounds 2.5bn and
have mainly involved a transfer of wealth from the broad mass of taxpayers
to the better off.
Other changes may also have eroded tax revenues, although with more obvious
justification. Independent taxation of married women was generally hailed as
a much needed reform of an antiquated and unfair system. In practice it has
prompted many middle-class households to shift savings from husband to wife,
enabling the wives to take advantage of their annual tax-free Pounds 3,445
personal allowance.
The shift was accompanied by the abolition of composite rate tax, making it
relatively easy to receive a tax-free return from a bank or building society
account. Even assuming that their husbands are only 25 per cent taxpayers,
that represents a tax loss of Pounds 860 a year for every couple who adjust
their savings. The Inland Revenue has no overall estimate of the costs of
this change, although some of it is being recouped by the running down of
the married couple's allowance.
The tax privileges of pension funds are the biggest single tax break, with
the cost of relief in 1993-94 about Pounds 9bn, according to the Treasury.
This is offset to some extent as private and corporate pensions save the
government from having to provide a far more generous state pension.
In addition, the favourable tax regime for pensions influences the amount
saved under it. If pensions did not have those advantages people might save
less.
The current system allows tax relief on contributions, and money within a
fund to roll up tax free. The final pension is taxed.
Labour had one shot at exploiting the tax loopholes issue in November, but
if the tax debate continues to gain momentum the subject could resurface.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940128

