FT944-5836

FT  01 DEC 94 / International Bonds: PepsiCo returns after six years amid
flood of issuance


   By RICHARD LAPPER


A flood of eurobonds lit up dealers' screens yesterday with issuance in a
variety of currencies, maturities and structures.
Activity in the short-dated dollar sector was especially strong, with a
highlight being the return of PepsiCo to the market after an absence of more
than six years.
Strong demand from Europe for short-dated US dollar paper after recent rises
in interest rates, perceptions of a strengthening dollar, as well as
end-of-year concerns to complete funding programmes and what one syndicate
manager termed 'league table-itis' were among explanations offered.
In addition, with further rises in short-term US rates expected, a number of
dealers pointed to improved arbitrage opportunities for issuers seeking to
swap liabilities from fixed-rate into floating-rate dollars.
'Fundamentally, investors think it's a good time to buy short dollars and
people in the swap markets fear rates will go higher,' said Mr Denis
Kelleher, syndicate manager with Daiwa Europe.
'The pipeline has been open for some time on the arbitrage front,' said
another dealer.
'What people have realised is that US rates are going to go up. Short-dated
dollar deals are de rigueur at the moment,' said another trader.
PepsiCo's issue of Dollars 250m of three-year bonds - which carried a spread
over the equivalent US Treasury of 24 basis points - followed an issue by
Walt Disney earlier this week and is to some extent part of a trend as the
credit quality of US corporates improves.
Syndicate managers at Morgan Stanley, which brought the issue, said US
companies could cut borrowing costs by between 5 and 10 basis points by
turning to the euromarkets and many were keen to diversify their borrowing
sources.
The issue was the first of a new Dollars 2bn euro medium-term note (EMTN)
programme for PepsiCo.
Another large deal in the dollar sector was a Dollars 350m three-year issue
by Carco Auto Loan Master Trust, a financing subsidiary of Chrysler, the US
motor company. The issue, backed by loans issued by motor dealers, carried a
spread of 37 basis points over the equivalent US Treasury, and was brought
by CSFB and Salomon Brothers. The yield spread widened marginally when the
bonds were were freed to trade.
Swiss Bank Corporation brought another asset-backed transaction - a Dollars
150m floating-rate note issued by Crystal Castle Euro-Finance, a special
purpose company which will purchase trade receivables from Italy's Cremonini
Group, an integrated food company. The issue was guaranteed by Financial
Security Assurance, the US insurer.
CEZ Finance, the Czech state-owned electricity company, made its expected
debut with a Dollars 150m five-year issue. The deal - the first by an east
European corporate - met a positive response, with the yield spread over the
equivalent US Treasury tightening from 110 to 108 when the bonds were freed
to trade.
JP Morgan, which led the deal, said spreads on two other outstanding Czech
issues - by the Czech National Bank and the City of Prague - have both
narrowed since their launch.
Distribution of CEZ's paper, which is rated BBB- with a positive outlook,
was broadly-based with 35 per cent placed in Asia, 15 per cent in the US and
50 per cent in Europe.
Elsewhere, both Ireland and Argentina tapped the yen sector. Merrill Lynch
International brought a 10-year Y30bn issue for Ireland and Daiwa Europe
arranged a Y12.5bn five-year issue for Argentina.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

941201

