FT942-12176

FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: First steps for son of BES / A look
at the initial prospectus under its successor


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Investors who are wondering what happened to the 'son of BES', announced in
last November's Budget, need wonder no more. The first company to try to
raise money under the new Enterprise Investment Scheme has just put out its
prospectus.
Altnamara Shipping, a Scottish company, may be familiar to some business
expansion scheme investors, as it was launched through a Business Expansion
Scheme issue, sponsored by Neill Clerk Capital, late last year. However,
that pulled in less than Pounds 500,000. Now the company is trying again
with a share issue to raise up to Pounds 4.7m through the EIS, again
sponsored by Neill Clerk.
Altnamara is the latest in a long line of BES companies set up by its
chairman, Sir Ross Belch. His previous ventures include Ferguson Marine,
which bought Ferguson Shipbuilders from the Kvaerner Group, and Altnacraig
Shipping.
Altnamara has already agreed to buy a 6,000 tonne second-hand dry bulk
carrier, the Radnes, for Dollars 1.96m. The ship will be operated in a
European shipping pool run by Jebsen Wilson, following the example of
Altnacraig, which has three mini-bulk carriers in the same pool. After the
Radnes has been paid for, any extra money raised through the EIS issue will
be used, together with borrowings, to buy and operate further ships.
The reason why it has taken so long for the first EIS issue to emerge is
that although plans for the EIS were announced last November, the details
are not final until the Finance Bill, which is still going through
parliament, receives royal assent early next month.
Many of the elements of the BES which were being abused, such as guaranteed
exits, and low-risk residential property schemes, have been stamped out by
the new EIS rules. To qualify for the scheme, an issuer must be a genuine
trading company - so all the university accommodation or repossessed
property schemes which sprang up in the last stages of the BES are excluded.
Individuals can invest up to Pounds 100,000 a year in EIS issues, an
increase from the annual BES limit of Pounds 40,000. Companies are allowed
to raise up to Pounds 1m a year through the EIS, unless they are shipping
companies, in which case the limit is Pounds 5m a year.
BES offered investors up-front tax relief up to the higher rate tax band of
40 per cent; EIS is less generous, offering only 20 per cent up-front tax
relief. However, EIS losses can be offset against income or capital gains
tax, whereas BES made no allowance for losses. A further change is that
investors can become directors of EIS companies without losing their tax
relief.
The Budget also introduced a new tax break by which investors can delay
capital gains tax liability by rolling-over gains into unquoted trading
companies. Altnamara is also encouraging investors to use this opportunity.
But investors should probably be wary of rushing to throw their money into
the first few EIS issues with as much enthusiasm as they showed in the last
days of BES. David Harris, an independent financial adviser with Chantrey
Financial Services, says he is reserving judgment on EIS for the moment.
'We are reverting at this stage to where the BES came from, in that there is
a real industrial risk involved. The history of the early BESs, and also the
commercial BESs, can hardly be described as a good one,' Harris says. 'And
the likelihood is that with any new undertaking such as this, you are going
to have teething problems.
'It does strike me that for the level of commercial risk you are asking
people to take, 20 per cent tax relief is probably not going to be adequate
to encourage them.'
Harris believes that the Pounds 1m limit for EIS issues by most companies
will mean that most of the sponsors who were churning out BES issues during
1992-93 - firms such as Johnson Fry, Neill Clerk, and Close Brothers - will
not find it worthwhile getting involved to the same extent in the EIS.
This may mean that companies decide to go it alone, and there will be less
of a filtering process to exclude the ones with little chance of survival.
So investors will have to be even more cautious.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940430

