FT943-13036

FT  21 JUL 94 / George backs interest rate rises to contain inflation


   By PETER NORMAN


Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, favours a pre-emptive rise
in interest rates if the rate of economic growth quickens to the point of
threatening price stability one to two years ahead.
According to the minutes of his June 8 monetary meeting with Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, the governor argued that early action - 'before any
pick-up in inflation had become established, and before it came through into
the price figures' - would be 'the best chance of sustaining the expansion
and avoiding the need for more severe restraint later on'.
But the minutes, published yesterday, show that Mr George was not advising
an immediate rise in interest rates.
Mr Clarke and Mr George agreed that a change in rates was not appropriate.
Mr Clarke said there was agreement on the aims and conduct of policy. The
main issue was how to sustain growth with low inflation.
'If inflationary pressures picked up, interest rates might have to be raised
at some point in the future,' the minutes record Mr Clarke as saying.
'However, at the moment inflation pressures remained under control.' The
minutes explain how Mr George came to warn in his Mansion House speech on
June 15 that the next move in interest rates would be upwards. Although the
governor - like the chancellor - said present economic circumstances were
very favourable, he singled out three developments which 'needed to be
watched very closely over the next two to three months'. These were:
The rate of monetary growth, and particularly narrow money or M0, which
consists mainly of notes and coins in circulation;
Expectations about future inflation;
Cost increases, particularly increases in labour costs.
Mr George said the three-month growth rate in M0 - which turned out to be an
annualised, seasonally adjusted 8.1 per cent in June - was 'uncomfortably
high' and he would be looking for it to decline in the months ahead.
The minutes prompted some City economists to predict an early rise in UK
bank base rates from their current 5.25 per cent level.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940721

