FT941-12861

FT  28 JAN 94 / Japanese urged to back reform


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's prime minister, yesterday passionately
appealed for public support for his plans to reform the electoral and
political system.
'We must show the world that Japan has become a mature democracy whose
people are able to make wise decision,' he told a meeting of 100 politicians
and academics.
The public would lose confidence in party politics and Japan would lose the
international community's trust if the reform bills failed, Mr Hosokawa
warned. 'We can no longer hope that economic stimulus measures can succeed
without realising political reform,' he added.
He urged Mr Yohei Kono, president of the opposition Liberal Democratic
party, to meet him in a final attempt at a compromise on the plan which was
voted down in the upper house of parliament last week.
Mr Hosokawa asked voters to 'express your feelings through actions' and
telephone or fax Diet members.
The Japanese leader has staked his job on winning agreement to scrap Japan's
unique multi-seat constituency system and to curb corporate political
funding, both factors in recent corruption scandals.
Mr Hosokawa hinted yesterday that he would, after all resign if his four
political reform bills fail to reach parliamentary agreement by their
Saturday deadline. 'I would not insist on the post of prime minister if I
could not deliver on my promise. . . to realise political reform,' he said.
The seven-party coalition appears divided on strategy as these statements
contradicted a senior government official who earlier insisted Mr Hosokawa
and his cabinet would stay. According to an opinion poll by JNN television
news yesterday, Mr Hosokawa's support rating fell from 63.4 per cent at the
end of last year to 54.8 per cent in the days before the upper house vote.
A joint panel of the upper and lower houses of parliament met yesterday to
examine the latest compromise plan offered by the coalition. The LDP agreed
to study it with a view to reconvening in the evening but LDP officials said
they did not want to accept Mr Hosokawa's invitation to a summit meeting
while the panel talks were continuing.
Failure to get agreement in the panel makes it more likely Mr Hosokawa will
call a snap vote on the plans in the lower house today, his final chance. He
has little chance of winning such a vote, but the move would further split
the LDP.
Meanwhile, speculation is growing that public prosecutors are considering
the arrest of three former cabinet ministers on suspicion of accepting
bribes. These would be the first national figures to be detained in a
widening inquiry into bribes for contracts in the construction industry.
Legally, politicians can plead immunity while parliament is in session, but
it will be in recess on Sunday, the one day between the closure of the
present session and the opening of the next.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940128

