FT942-15982

FT  13 APR 94 / Politics makes Fininvest a public business: A conflict of
interest for owner of Italy's second biggest private company as he prepares
to govern


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


Close associates of Mr Silvio Berlusconi say the Italian media magnate has
become so taken by his new political role he is willing to turn his back on
his Fininvest business empire.
But even if Mr Berlusconi is infatuated with politics, he has done little to
resolve the serious conflict of interest between his role as a politician
and his ownership of Fininvest, Italy's second largest private company. This
issue is becoming increasingly urgent as he looks set to form the next
government.
During the past week Mr Berlusconi has floated the idea of creating an
American-style 'blind trust' for his stake in Fininvest. But he has given no
details; and neither a blind trust nor other possible solutions to the
potential conflicts of interest would be easy to implement.
Italian law is ill-equipped to cope with the sheer size of the problem.
Fininvest, with a L11,600bn (Pounds 4.8bn) turnover, has interests ranging
from television, advertising, publishing and telecommunications to
retailing, insurance, pensions funds, healthcare and sport.
Legal experts say the US blind instrument would not be easy to adapt to
circumstances in which a company controls activities of public interest,
such as television.
For another thing, the US blind trust envisages an essentially 'caretaker'
management which is not easily compatible with the re-organisation at
Fininvest designed to reduce massive debt in a group barely showing profit.
In 1993 debt totalled L3,800bn, a third of turnover.
Last October Mr Berlusconi appointed Mr Franco Tato from his publishing arm,
Mondadori, as the group's first chief executive. Since Mr Berlusconi
formally entered politics in January, Mr Tato has, in effect, been in
charge. But in the terms of the US blind administration, Mr Tato would not
be able to make the kind of strategic choices Fininvest needs: he has to
decide whether Fininvest should remain a conglomerate or concentrate on its
core media business.
The setting up of a satisfactory blind trust is complicated by the secretive
tax shelter nature of the Berlusconi family's ownership structure of
Fininvest and the fact that it is not a quoted company.
According to Fininvest officials, Mr Berlusconi and his family own 51 per
cent of the company. The remainder is held on their behalf through two trust
companies, Servizio Italia and Saf, set up by BNL, the big state commercial
bank.
Mr Berlusconi has never revealed the precise ownership split between his own
stake and that of the rest of his family, but he is understood to exercise
full control.
Another means of distancing Mr Berlusconi from the conflict of interest
would be to place his stake in Fininvest into a special foundation in favour
of his five children, the two eldest of whom are already on the board of the
group. Though attractive, this solution risks creating big tax liabilities
under existing company law.
The other mooted solution involves divestiture of Fininvest assets,
especially those most likely to clash with Mr Berlusconi's role in
government - such as television. Divestiture, however, would be neither
quick nor simple.
For instance, the value of Fininvest's three commercial television channels,
which account for 45 per cent of the national audience, depends on how the
new government and parliament choose to review the 1990 legal distribution
of state and commercial networks.
If Fininvest were obliged to divest one channel, the value of that channel
would be hard to gauge since all three channels currently rely on the same
transmission facilities and enjoy a common library of film stock.
Unless Mr Berlusconi were forced into a 'fire sale', divestiture of all or
part would take considerable time. Fininvest would want to hold out for the
best price; while any big asset sale would involve unravelling the group's
complex debt and fiscal structure.
For instance, Fininvest managers have been trying to find suitable
purchasers for the Standa stores chain for more than a year to reduce the
heavy burden of the group's debt.
Mr Berlusconi, who bought Standa in 1988, spent almost L1,000bn on the deal
and subsequent investments. Standa, itself a loss-maker with a current book
value written down to L500bn, has been sweetened by the inclusion of other
retailing interests, including Euromercato, and is now believed to be worth
L1,300bn.
Talks with Germany's Karlstadt and Carrefour of France have so far failed to
produce a deal.
It is not hard to see why Mr Berlusconi favours a blind trust: Fininvest
would be retained more or less intact. But for a blind trust to have the
minimum of credibility, the operation would require transparency from what
has been one of the most opaque groups in the Italian private sector.
Whatever Mr Berlusconi decides, government policies are likely to cross
Fininvest interests at every turn. The company, for instance, would benefit
from any liberalisation of the state-controlled telecommunications regime,
in particular access to telephone lines for television image transmission or
new laws favouring cable and pay-TV; Fininvest's publishing interests would
benefit from the ending of the newspaper/magazines distribution monopoly
through kiosks; Fininvest's insurance business would benefit from Mr
Berlusconi's plans to accelerate the introduction of private pension funds.
Mr Berlusconi risks having to explain continually that he or his family are
not beneficiaries of government policy. And if he fails to distance himself
satisfactorily from Fininvest, he will play into the hands of those who have
claimed all along that he entered politics to protect his business
interests.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940413

