FT942-15369

FT  15 APR 94 / Personal View: Breaking the spiral of corruption


   By LAURENCE COCKCROFT


Transnational bribery in pursuit of arms deals, large construction projects
and even consultancy contracts is a growing phenomenon in the global
economy. In the UK there has been the furore triggered by allegations about
the Pergau Dam affair. Rather less attention, though, was paid in 1993 to
the 'Foxley' case, in which an official in the Ministry of Defence was found
guilty of having accepted Pounds 1.5m in bribes (in 1984) from armaments
companies in Italy, Germany and Norway.
In Europe until the 1990s indirect or direct corruption of officials and
politicians in the south by companies in the north was considered a part of
the 'cultural norm' of the south.
Some companies avoided the phenomenon by insisting on a 'no bribes' internal
code of conduct; multilateral development institutions chose to believe that
the bidding procedures they required client countries in the south to use
were foolproof.
Such attitudes are bolstered throughout the European Union by provision for
all transnational bribes to be tax deductible when shown as necessary
expenditure for the generation of business, and by the legal doctrine of
'extra territoriality', by which national citizens cannot be pursued for
paying bribes in other countries. Yet, nationally, nearly all EU member
states have made bribery (both of public officials and between companies) a
criminal activity for most of this century. In contrast, the US passed tough
legislation placing transnational bribery on the same criminal footing as
domestic bribery in 1977.
This double-think in the EU (and Japan) is no longer tenable. First, the
global market regulated by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
requires a convergence of ethical and business standards if its 'fair trade'
assumptions are to be sustained.
Second, the 1993 impeachments of the presidents of Venezuela and Brazil and
the political crises of Japan and Italy have shown the potentially
disastrous effect of widespread corruption on political and economic
stability.
Third, the growth of multi-party democracies in former one-party states has
placed the issue high on the political agenda in many countries of the south
and the 'east'. Finally, the link between corruption and non-development,
particularly in Africa, is no longer contes-table.
What can be done? The key, as with drugs trafficking, is to recognise
business bribery as an international crime. Transnational bribers could then
be pursued either in the courts of their home country, or in the courts of
the country where the briber sought to influence decision making, or in a
third country where the bribe may have been paid. International conventions
 -as with the 1993 Council of Europe convention on money laundering - are
designed to ensure the possibility of global action and such a convention
was prepared by a sub-committee of the Economic and Social Council of the UN
in 1979, but never submitted to the General Assembly. It should be revived.
More immediately, OECD governments should support tough measures in the
current OECD working party on illicit practices which will meet later this
month to make a series of recommendations to ministers of finance. The EU
members of the OECD, strengthened by the judicial provisions of the
Maastricht treaty, could move rapidly to legislate against transnational
bribery within the EU and negotiate mutual agreements with other countries.
The leaders of the Group of Seven leading industrialised countries, meeting
in June, could pledge their commitment to a UN and/or Gatt convention.
Multilateral and bilateral aid officials could standardise a global code of
conduct for aid contractors.
All of these measures, or a combination of some of them, would make it
easier for reform-minded political leaders to take an effective stand. There
is currently an assumption that no large deal can be completed in many
countries of the south without a bribe being paid. This assumption can only
be broken with the co-operation of the north, which reform-minded leaders in
the south are actively seeking.
Such co-operation is achievable, and at no cost in aid terms. In the medium
term it would increase world gross domestic product by reducing the cost of
many large investment projects by up to 25 per cent, without reducing the
net return to international contractors. It would also be a significant step
in the development of a global business ethic, a vital concomitant to a
positive global business environment.
The author is a board member of Transparency International, the Berlin-based
anti-corruption organisation

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940415

