FT944-5926

FT  01 DEC 94 / Letters to the Editor: Criticisms of British Gas directors'
salaries unjustified and ignorant of new contract terms


   From The Chairman of British Gas


Sir, Much has been written recently about executive directors' salary
increases at British Gas, focusing principally on Cedric Brown, our chief
executive. Most of the commentary, either by the press itself or by others
reported by the press, has been critical and emotive. This criticism has
been unjustified and largely fuelled by misconception.
Cedric Brown did not determine his pay package; it was decided by the
remuneration committee of the board composed solely of non-executive
directors. Earlier this year the committee undertook a major reappraisal of
the British Gas pay structure for the executive board. This reappraisal led
to the following changes for executive directors.
Three-year rolling contracts were terminated and replaced by two-year
contracts. An annual bonus plan, which would have paid handsomely this year,
was scrapped. This decision was based on the committee's view that annual
bonuses for executive directors in British Gas's current circumstances were
now inappropriate, as well as some scepticism on the effectiveness of such
bonuses in general.
The remuneration committee also decided to terminate at the year-end British
Gas's executive share option scheme, which has many years to run before
expiring. A new, long-term, share-based incentive scheme has been designed
as a replacement. This new scheme includes performance criteria based on the
total return enjoyed by shareholders over time. Some of the executive
directors also received one-off significant salary increases to bring their
annual cash compensation to the median of a large sample of UK plcs.
These changes represent a complex set of trade-offs, but the remuneration
committee believes that the shareholders' interests have been served without
diminishing management's opportunity to earn more money if British Gas
performs.
Cedric Brown's increase was the most dramatic; however, as chief executive
he was the most underpaid. This was evidenced by the arrival of our new
financial director on the board at a salary higher than Cedric's before
these changes. Cedric Brown's current salary still places him well below the
cash compensation earned by most executives holding comparable jobs in
British industry, and below that of some chief executives leading smaller,
less complicated and less challenging businesses.
Contrary to assumptions in the press, British Gas is not a cosy monopoly
earning easy profits and high returns. Large parts of our revenue base are
now unregulated and open to competition. This is true not only in part of
our gas trading activities but in the whole of our service and retail
businesses.
We have an exploration and production business competing here and abroad
with all the world-class energy companies. It, too, operates outside the
regulatory net and it could qualify as a 'Footsie' company in its own right.
We are also deploying considerable resources overseas to exploit our skills
in gas transmission, distribution and power generation in a number of
developing countries where these skills are highly valued.
Lastly, we are engaged in one of the largest corporate restructuring
programmes ever undertaken in the UK, all designed to reduce dramatically
our costs by more than Pounds 600m per annum.
Any knowledgeable observer must surely realise that Cedric Brown's task in
leading British Gas is hardly easy sailing.
It is ludicrous to assume that the market pay for an executive can be best
validated by his changing jobs. This view is often expressed by questions
such as 'if he is underpaid why doesn't he leave?' or 'why hasn't he been
poached?' If this view drives pay decisions, executive mercenaries will do
well, but talented executives, whose experience is industry specific or who
value loyalty to their employers, will be put at a disadvantage. This would
surely be a perverse outcome of the process of determining pay.
It is hard to understand how continuing to pay Cedric Brown unfairly would
benefit anyone. It would be a hollow gesture to those British Gas employees
who have lost or will lose their jobs. What counts for them is the generous
and sympathetic redundancy terms on offer by British Gas, which so many have
already taken up.
Gas consumers have enjoyed a 20 per cent reduction in the real price of this
fuel since privatisation in 1986 (excluding VAT). An enviable record when
compared to other utilities. Moreover, following the current rebalancing
designed to create more cost-reflective pricing, gas consumers can look
forward to further price reductions through the effect of the regulatory
tariff and eventually the creation of full competition in the domestic
market.
Shareholders have nothing to gain by paying Cedric Brown less than he
deserves. The financial consequences of his success or failure will dwarf
these events. It is his performance that counts. The board has decided that
he is the right man to lead British Gas and we fully support him. The
shareholders must rely on that decision. If they believe that the board,
particularly the non-executives, are too cosy with management and
undemanding or that they lack diligence, they are wrong. There can be no
question that our non-executive directors are independent and men and women
of high integrity.
These pay decisions were made earlier this year and in the normal course of
events they would have been fully disclosed in the annual report. The
relevant information was always available for examination by any
shareholder. The timing has been described as 'insensitive'. It is hard to
visualise a 'sensitive' time for this emotive subject.
That Cedric Brown and his family have been the victims of an unjustified and
ill-informed volley of attacks is a matter for considerable regret.
Richard V Giordano,
chairman,
British Gas,
Rivermill House,
152 Grosvenor Road,
London SW1V 3JL

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941201

