FT944-6147

FT  30 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Singer sets up 55% offshoot to buy Carnegie


   By PETER JOHN and CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


   LONDON, STOCKHOLM


Singer & Friedlander, the merchant bank, is setting up a new Swedish
subsidiary, Sifrig, to takeover over Carnegie, the international broker
owned by Nordbanken of Sweden.
Singer will hold 55 per cent of Sifrig with the balance owned by Carnegie
staff. Through Sifrig it will pay Pounds 45m for its share in the company
and as Singer & Friedlander Group it will give an additional Pounds 8.5m,
payable over nine years, for the name and goodwill. It is not buying
Carnegie's Swedish and Norwegian bonds business.
Mr Sven-Ake Johansson, Nordbanken's deputy chief executive, said the bank
would receive a total payment of SKr1.23bn (Pounds 104m). 'The kind of
international stockbroking business in which Carnegie specialises is not a
core business for us,' he stated.
Singer is raising Pounds 49m to fund the investment. It intends to make a
Pounds 29m placing of 15-year convertible stock to qualifying shareholders
with an open offer on the basis of Pounds 3 nominal for 19 ordinary. The
stock carries an 8.5 per cent coupon convertible at 112.9 shares for each
Pounds 100 of stock.
It has also taken out a Pounds 20m multicurrency bank loan. The financing
and placing will be carried out by Singer's broker, BZW.
Mr John Hodson, Singer's chief executive, said: 'This is a continuation of
the policy we have been building up of taking controlling stakes in key
businesses which we think will be earnings enhancing.'
The group already has a majority stake in Collins Stewart, the broking
house, and sizeable stakes in Associated Nursing Services, Edgar Hamilton,
the Lloyd's of London broker, and People's Phone, a provider of mobile phone
services.
Carnegie Fondkommission was established in 1932 in Stockholm to provide
stockbroking to Swedish investors. It has 400 staff and offices throughout
Europe and the US. It was acquired by Nordbanken in 1988.
It made operating profits of Pounds 20m in the first half, although the
figures were inflated by exceptionally high trading volumes in the first
quarter.

The Financial Times


London Page 52

941130

