FT941-5612

FT  05 MAR 94 / Hedges hog the limelight


   By SARA WEBB and TRACY CORRIGAN


Hedge funds have been widely seen as one of the causes of volatility in the
financial markets. Here is a guide.
What are hedge funds and who manages them?
They are pools of money aggressively managed by highly paid specialists, and
are usually highly leveraged. This means they use borrowed money in addition
to their capital and specialised instruments such as futures to increase
their exposure to the markets, thus magnifying potential rewards or losses.
The hedge fund industry is by no means homogeneous. Originally, funds were
meant to be 'hedged' - in other words, protected against adverse market
movements. However, the term is often used now as a blanket description for
leveraged funds which move in and out of the world's equity, bond, currency
and commodity markets several times a day.
There are hundreds of hedge funds, mostly managed in the US, where many
sophisticated trading techniques were developed. Investors are usually of
the 'high net worth' variety - individuals who can put a minimum of Dollars
1m into a fund. The headline-grabbers tend to be big funds such as George
Soros's Quantum Fund, which has an estimated Dollars 10bn under management,
Steinhardt Management, run by Michael Steinhardt, and Julian Robertson's
Tiger Management. But there are also scores of relatively small funds with
Dollars 2m or less under management.
Successful funds with a track record of generating average returns of more
than 30 per cent a year have encouraged investors to jump on the bandwagon,
prompting new funds to mushroom. But these investments can be risky, and
result in heavy losses.
Why are the funds in the news?
Last year, some funds made gains of as much as 70 per cent, having
positioned themselves for the rally in government bond markets and the
effective breakdown of Europe's exchange rate mechanism.
But, this year, the funds have been wrong-footed by sharp and unexpected
market movements: the Japanese government bond market fell heavily in
January; the yen appreciated against the US dollar in February following the
collapse in US-Japanese trade talks; and the snail-like pace of interest
rate easing by the Bundesbank caused the prolonged rally in the European
government bond markets to stall.
Heavy losses were exacerbated by the highly leveraged nature of the funds.
To halt losses, some funds started selling, which depressed prices in the
bond markets. Further sales were made to finance positions in the futures
markets, where additional payments have to be made when prices fall sharply.
Why are banks keen to do business with hedge funds?
It is lucrative business: many hedge funds trade in large amounts, trade
often, and trade across a whole gamut of products including cash, futures,
options and other financial instruments.
What strategies do they employ?
Some fund managers track computer charts showing market movements, basing
investments on expectations of small technical shifts. Others follow their
hunches and bet on the direction of currency and bond markets based on broad
economic analysis.
Do hedge funds pose a risk to the world's financial system?
At the moment they are everybody's favourite whipping boy. True, they pour
in or pull out vast sums which can rock the markets. But banks have also
been heavy sellers recently. Central banks and other regulators have long
been concerned about market volatility and the potential threat posed by
leveraged financial instruments to the financial system. They are also
concerned that banks, which lend to hedge funds, could be hit if funds go
under.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940305

