FT942-12220

FT  30 APR 94 / International Company News: Mediobanca to widen ownership


   By ANDREW HILL


   MILAN


Mediobanca, the Milan merchant bank, yesterday answered its many critics by
launching a rights issue to raise more than L1,500bn (Dollars 937m) and
broaden its ownership to include ordinary and professional investors in
Italy and abroad.
The offer is structured to dilute the 50 per cent holding of Mediobanca's
traditional long-term shareholders - Banca Commerciale Italiana, Credito
Italiano and Banca di Roma, and a group of corporate investors - to about
40.6 per cent.
The bank has come under fierce attack in the past fortnight from
politicians, small shareholders and executives of IRI, the Italian state
holding company, for building up a dangerous dominant position at the centre
of Italian business.
In particular, the bank stands accused of installing its allies on the
boards of the newly-privatised banks, Banca Commerciale Italiana and Credito
Italiano, to the detriment of small shareholders.
Early next week, executives from BCI and Credito Italiano will meet
officials from Consob, the Italian stock market watchdog, to discuss the
conduct of those banks' shareholder meetings at which new directors were
elected.
If shareholders approve the rights issue at their annual meeting in
mid-June, the bank intends to issue 100m new shares, with warrants attached
entitling holders to a further 10m shares. The shares will be issued at a
price of at least L15,000 per share, on the basis of one new
share-and-warrant for every four already held. But existing shareholders
will be limited to 1,000 new shares, and the outstanding stock will be
offered to individual investors in Italy and to foreign and Italian
professionals.
The capital-raising exercise, to be co-ordinated by Mediobanca and S. G.
Warburg, comes only eight months after a L1,020bn rights issue, the proceeds
of which helped pay for cash calls by companies in Mediobanca's investment
portfolio.
The bank also reported yesterday that gross profits decreased to L326.6bn
before tax, depreciation and provisions, in the six months to December 31,
compared with L350.7bn in the equivalent period of 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940430

