FT942-14763

FT  19 APR 94 / Arts: An erratic Crusade / Our critic finds a Middle Eastern
argument in Stratford, E15


   By IAN SHUTTLEWORTH


David Vine once breathlessly intoned, 'Here we are in the holy city of
Jerusalem - a Mecca for tourists.' The knotty relationships of the region's
three main religions form both the immediate focus and the deeper background
of Paul Sirett's erratic play.
A minibus en route to Jerusalem breaks down, conveniently forcing a clutch
of character stereotypes to endure one another's company for 90 minutes. It
is not unlike a country house thriller, with Jenny Tiramani's looming rocky
outcrop serving as the smoking room, and Middle Eastern history standing in
for the bludgeoned corpse.
The range of suspects is as broad as one might expect: a lippy, upwardly
mobile Aussie woman with paranoid, bigoted Pom-born bank executive husband;
a whingeing, would-be 'radical' actor and his long-suffering art historian
girlfriend; a female crusty, and a New Age 'Rasta'; and Mahmood, the driver,
whose occasional flashbacks intimate something nasty in his personal
woodshed.
Israeli-Palestinian and Christian-Moslem tensions in the party's immediate
circumstances are maladroitly paralleled with the crusades of the 12th
century. Crass guy ropes are thrown out in the form of contrived passionate
outbursts and, of all things, a heated exchange about Islamic ceramics. At
one point a dream sequence consisting of a Mummers' play about Saladin and
King Richard is superimposed with slide projections of the Intifada - a
juxtaposition which conveys nothing except that whatever is going on in the
area has been doing so for a very long time.
Burt Caesar and Kate Lonergan get a raw deal as Rasta Barry and neo-hippy
Fran, theoretically open to ideas but mired in the vague generalities of
virtually every hackneyed line they utter. The norm of intelligent decency
is encapsulated in Moslem art historian Ayesha but Tara King's performance
is overwrought, crippling the character's function as a focus of audience
sympathy and identification.
Director Jeff Teare is understandably uninspired by Sirett's script, with
its inability to do more than nod at the magnitude of political and
historical issues. Improbably, the play's closing movement reveals Mahmood
as a personification of Christian-Jewish-Islamic entanglement, presiding
over a debate as to which of the party should be symbolically executed.
The characters' final exit on foot to seek help merely begs the question why
they did not buzz off an hour and a half earlier. Sirett has written a 90
minute shrug of bewilderment with the message, 'Golly - complex, isn't it?'
I think we knew that already, thanks.
Theatre Royal, Stratford East until May 7 (081 534 0310)

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940419

