FT941-5506

FT  05 MAR 94 / Arts: Lisbon takes up the laurels - Antony Thorncroft on
plans for a populist capital of culture


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


European Capital of Culture is a pass-the-parcel game in which each year a
different city gets the title, and a little European Union cash, and
encourages the world to come and unwrap it.
Some years the world yawns - it was pointless giving the accolade to Paris
and Madrid, who largely ignored the event. Some years it has a real impact.
Glasgow, the UK's choice in 1991, has retained its unlikely reputation as an
artistic power-house, and in 1993 Antwerp attracted 10m visitors to its
vigorous programme of culture as a global band-aid.
This year Lisbon gets the laurels, although, as always, some poison ivy has
crept in. These events have a ritual: great local pride and excitement,
ambitious plans, and then a nasty wrangle about who picks up the bill for
the party, which in this case is estimated at over Pounds 30m.
In Lisbon the socialist mayor has come up with his contribution but the
conservative government is still blustering. The delays have caused
cancellations - of a production of Carmen and a planned exhibition by
Portugal's most celebrated contemporary artist, the London based Paula Rego.
But once this inevitable wrangling by politicians is accepted Lisbon has
much going for it.
It is the right size; it has enough, but not excessive, cultural heritage to
promote; it is an individualistic, friendly, place. Also, being European
Capital of Culture will help Lisbon, stuck on the Western extremity of the
continent and historically looking out to the ocean, shift temporarily to
the centre of the action. For almost 500 years the mainstream has passed it
by. Being Cultural Capital will not change that, but at least it makes the
locals think it might.
Naturally Lisbon is exploiting the title to undertake some necessary
renovation. Surprise, surprise, the docks area needs regeneration; the
picturesque Seventh Hill sector of crumbling 18th and 19th century mansions
is being converted into a cultural ghetto; museums are being spruced up; and
the main concert hall, the Coliseu, has been transformed into a cross
between the Albert Hall and a circus ring.
It was in the Coliseu that the year was officially launched last Saturday.
The event set the mood for Lisbon 94. As the grandees, all fur coats and
small cigars, jammed the tiny street, scores of clowns from theatre group 'O
Bando' hurled abuse at them from balconies and windows. Lisbon's culture
will have a vigorous populist ring, with massive coverage given to fado (an
exhibition, scholarly books, definitive recordings) and to cinema, including
the best 100 European films ever, shown over 100 days.
But if the opening concert was the signal for the locals to flock to the all
night bars and firework displays, it also showed that Lisbon looks to other
Europeans for cultural back up. The soloist on Saturday was Portuguese, the
pianist Pedro Burmester with a sensitive performance of Beethoven's' Emperor
concerto, but the orchestra was the LSO under Solti.
During the year the LPO, the Concertgebouw, the Munich Philharmonic and the
Czech Philharmonic will be among the visiting musicians, and Merce
Cunningham and Pina Bausch among the imported dance troupes. Even the
Portuguese admit that their operatic tradition is diminuendo. This can have
a positive side, as they will see for the first time productions of Peter
Grimes, Medee, and The Makropoulos Case, among other operas.
If the performing arts offer curiosities rather than mega events, visually
Lisbon is on a high. This is the city of ornate Manuelist architecture, and
the domestic tile, the azulejo, which glorifies so many buildings. Lisbon
intends the city to be an artifact in its own right, the setting in which
the restored museums present shows to attract the globally curious. The idea
is to start with the traditional and end with the contemporary, fusing them
in May with what looks like a stunning idea, an exhibition built around a
major work by Hieronymus Bosch 'The Temptations of St Anthony', and
revealing how it influenced the surrealist movement.
This week the programme got off to a significant start with an exhibition of
Angolan art. Here sculpture marries mythology through the rarest objects
brought back in the 19th century by missionaries and merchants from the
former Portuguese colony. It is the most spectacular gathering of the
heritage from this part of Africa assembled. The religious power of the
masks and carvings, which hardly disguise their sacrificial force, is as
great as their artistic imagination. They are more mysterious and foreign
than the passive images from further north in Africa which inspired Picasso.
In September comes 'The Day After Tomorrow', where the leading Portuguese
artists will hang alongside their international contemporaries. It offers an
excellent opportunity to distinguish the particular Portuguese character,
more serious, more reserved, than their Mediterranean neighbours.
In the 16th century the avant-garde came to Lisbon to be on hand when the
ships battled back with the first trawl of the wealth of Africa, Brazil,
India, China and Japan. The hope is that they will return in 1994. European
Capitals of Culture ideally fulfil two ambitions. They should draw in the
culturally inclined from overseas, who like their travel to contain some
spiritual discovery. They should also help the locals to find out more about
their community, past and present.
In most cases it leads to a great deal of noise signifying very little.
Lisbon has the advantage that any investment in the arts will make up for
years of indifference. It also has clear ideas about its domestic ambitions.
It wants the people to re-discover the Tagus, the river which was the source
of its prosperity and its pride, and it wants its idiosyncratic heritage to
be better known at home. The discriminating foreigner will make the trip
this year, but the real gain will be the laying of foundations which offer
the chance of a national renaissance. This will be built not only around the
restored buildings, but also in the comprehensive recordings of its music
from the 13th century onwards onwards, and in its literature.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

940305

