FT942-15338

FT  15 APR 94 / UK Company News: Holiday Inn's budget hotel chain heads for
Europe


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


Holiday Inn, the hotel chain owned by Bass, the brewery and leisure group,
plans to extend its budget hotel chain, Holiday Inn Express, to Europe.
The company said it hoped to open more than 100 Holiday Inn Express hotels
over the next five years, mainly in Germany, central Europe, the UK, Spain
and France. The target customer is the 'budget-conscious' business and
leisure traveller.
In the UK, the hotels will compete with chains like Travelodge, which is
owned by Forte. In France and Germany they will be pitted against the Ibis
Hotel chain owned by the Accor group of France.
Most of the hotels will be located along motorways and on secondary sites
near main cities, rather than in city centres. Rooms will cost an average
Dollars 55 (Pounds 38) a night, including breakfast - considerably less than
the prices charged at standard Holiday Inns or at the more expensive Holiday
Inn Crown Plaza hotels.
Holiday Inn Express hotels were launched in the US in 1990, and plans to
extend them to Asia were announced in late 1993.
Mr Bryant Langton, Holiday Inn chairman, said: 'Given the success of this
product around the world, I see no reason why we here in Europe could not
have more than 100 Holiday Inn Express hotels in the next five years.'
As with other Holiday Inn hotels, the emphasis will be on franchising rather
than outright ownership by Holiday Inn. Some will be purpose-built as
Holiday Inn Express hotels, while others will be existing hotels that join
the Holiday Inn organisation.
The investment cost to the developer is expected to range between Dollars
45,000 and Dollars 50,000 per room, about half the outlay for the upmarket
Holiday Inn Crown Plaza hotels, whose prime city-centre locations mean
higher land prices.
The company has already signed agreements covering the opening of 20 hotels
in Poland and one in Germany, with talks on four other German sites
currently underway.
The first German hotel will open in Cottbus, a city located between Berlin
and Dresden, in the spring of 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940415

