FT942-12533

FT  29 APR 94 / Names get Dollars 500m finance aid


   By RICHARD LAPPER


Lloyd's of London is putting the final touches to a new financing facility
designed to help relieve potential cash-flow problems of the syndicates that
underwrite business, and take pressure off hard-pressed Names, the
individuals whose assets support the market.
The facility will initially make Dollars 500m (Pounds 340m) - and possibly
up to Dollars 1bn - available to syndicates, including those no longer
accepting premiums, from the end of September, it is hoped. The funds will
be secured against acceptable reinsurance recoveries on paid claims.
The money for the scheme is to be raised from a combination of bank debt and
five-year to seven-year bond issues.
A number of financial institutions are involved but have 'requested
anonymity until the final structure has been agreed', according to a Lloyd's
market circular. The institutions would provide funding initially for three
years.
Lloyd's said the scheme was similar to factoring, where invoices are
discounted. 'You are getting money up front for reinsurance recoveries which
take some time to emerge,' it said.
The initiative should make it less necessary for hard-pressed syndicates to
make cash calls from Names in order to meet medium-term financing needs. In
turn this should relieve pressure on the central fund, which pays claims
when Names are unable to meet their obligations. Lloyd's disclosed this week
in its latest annual report that more than two-thirds of the central fund
had been 'earmarked' to meet Names' unpaid obligations by the end of last
year. Earmarkings had risen from Pounds 354.9m at the end of 1992 to Pounds
661.6m at the end of 1993.
Pressure on the central fund is expected to increase this year after Lloyd's
announces its latest results for 1991 - in line with its three-year
accounting system.
Losses are expected to amount to more than Pounds 2bn, bringing cumulative
losses since 1988 to more than Pounds 7bn.
Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive, is understood to have played a central
role in the initiative, but Lloyd's has delegated responsibility for
administering and managing the programme to Reinsurance Finance Management
(RFM), a company jointly owned by Trinity Square Services and the Randall
Group, two insurance services companies.
A new special purpose vehicle will be set up to receive the finance, acquire
the debts and receive reinsurance settlements. RFM, Lloyd's, and the
institutions will all sit on the supervisory board.
The money will be made available in US dollars, sterling and Canadian
dollars. Lloyd's said that the amount offered would depend on the quality of
underlying reinsurance recoverables due. Costs would compare favourably to
those available on the market.
The scheme will have no impact on syndicates' relationships with brokers.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940429

