FT942-15475

FT  15 APR 94 / Albania rattles a diplomatic sabre at Greece: Tirane fears
Athens has intentions on its territory


   By KERIN HOPE


Sheep-rustlers, cigarette smugglers and illegal immigrants have no
difficulty evading Greek paratroopers guarding the mountainous border with
Albania.
They participate in a flourishing black market in goods and services,
tolerated by authorities on both sides of the frontier despite political
hostility between Athens and Tirane. But the killing of two Albanian
soldiers at a training centre for recruits outside Gjirokaster on Monday
raises fears that Greek rightwingers may be exploiting official laxity to
undermine the socialist government's efforts to im-prove relations with
Albania.
Mr Karolos Papoulias, Greek foreign minister, yesterday denied Albania's
claim that the attack was carried out by Greek soldiers.
Proposing a meeting with Mr Alfred Serreqi, his Albanian counterpart, to
discuss the incident, Mr Papoulias said Greece wants 'normal, co-operative
relations with Albania,' but not at the cost of discrimination against the
ethnic Greek minority in southern Albania. Albania accepted the Greek
proposal for talks.
The presence of the Greek minority in what Greeks call North Ipiros, however
diminished by massive emigration to Greece over the past three years, gives
the Albanian government some leverage in an awkward relationship with its
neighbour. Albania fears that Greece still has territorial designs on North
Ipiros, briefly occupied by Greek troops in the first world war.
Though successive Greek governments have repeated that existing borders in
the Balkans must be respected, a nationalist faction in the conservative
opposition New Democracy party speaks openly of the need to 'maintain the
Greekness' of southern Albania.
A claim of responsibility for Monday's attack by the North Ipiros Liberation
Front, last heard of as a right-wing resistance group during the German
occupation of Greece during the second world war, is causing the socialist
government concern.
The strength of the Albanian government's reaction, expelling the Greek
consul in Gjirokaster, asking the UN Security Council to condemn Greece and
calling for a European Commission inquiry, underlined the anxiety felt in
Tirane.
The attack followed reports that Tirane was encouraging Albanians from the
north of the country to settle in the south, left uncultivated since the
exodus of ethnic Greeks across the border.
At least half the estimated 200,000 Albanians working illegally in Greece
claim ethnic Greek origins, entitling them to residence permits and eventual
citizenship. As a result, dozens of villages in southern Albania are
populated by a few elderly people and school-age children. However, the size
of the ethnic Greek minority is disputed. The official Greek estimate is
200,000, while the Albanian government figure is less than 100,000.
Ethnic Greek communities claim frequent human rights violations, with
Albanian authorities restricting Greek participation in privatisation of
small businesses and curtailing teaching of Greek in schools.
The situation in Gjirokaster has been tense since last summer, when violent
demonstrations followed the expulsion of a Greek Orthodox priest accused of
distributing nationalist propaganda. Greece retaliated by expelling some
20,000 Albanian migrant workers.
Mr Papoulias, who did much to improve ties with Albania's communist
government in the 1980s, has been trying again, this time with President
Sali Berisha's Democratic party. One Greek official said yesterday that
implementing his policy of closer co-operation with Albania on border
security, customs controls and work permits for Albanian workers is 'now a
necessity.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940415

