FT942-12789

FT  28 APR 94 / South Africa Votes: Election judge prepares for not proven
verdict


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN and MARK SUZMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


Shortly before South Africa went to the polls, the man responsible for the
administration of the elections and for giving a verdict on their
acceptability made a quip that could become prophetic.
What, Mr Justice Johann Kriegler, head of the Independent Electoral
Commission, was asked, were his hopes and fears about the historic ballot?
'I hope that it will go well,' he shot back, 'and I fear that it won't' -
prompting laughter in which he joined.
Last night, the 62-year-old judge, a highly regarded and long-serving member
of South Africa's appellate division, was at the heart of a crisis which, if
unresolved, could see that fear realised.
It was not surprising that organisational problems would accompany the
massive exercise, which involves more than 200,000 officials and 9,000
polling stations. But the critical issue, which will not readily be
resolved, involves the validity of ballots which failed to have stickers
attached carrying the name and logo of the Inkatha Freedom party, a late
convert to the poll, and photograph of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, its
leader.
The contradictions and confusion surrounding the acceptability of votes cast
using such ballots must to a great extent be laid at the feet of a man whose
legal skills at times appear to have deserted him.
Yet his credentials for the task are impressive. No observer doubts his
impartiality, having acted during a distinguished career at the bar for
clients across the political spectrum, from the Rev Beyers Naude, the
radical cleric who was in the forefront of Afrikaner resistance to
apartheid, to the extreme right-wing AWB.
He took up the position of head of the country's Independent Electoral
Commission last December, bringing to press conferences the persona of a
slightly tetchy judge dealing with impertinent young barristers. But above
all he has projected what seems to be an overriding determination to
conclude that the election will be substantially free and fair.
Speaking in Brussels earlier this year he said: 'Should we come, heaven
forbid, to the conclusion that we cannot so certify (the elections
substantially free and fair) our country will be plunged into disaster.
Self-evidently that is the result we will strain to avoid with all we can
muster.'
Yesterday his suggestion that disputed papers could have what he called a
'lesser value' in comparison to accepted votes produced widespread
confusion. Determining this value, was, he said by way of explanation, 'a
quantity thing, a distribution thing, a percentage thing, a general pattern
thing . . . one will have to look at the thing from various angles to see
what it does add up to.'
In addition to sorting out the problems in balloting, Judge Kriegler will
have to say whether the final outcome is free and fair.
If, as still seemed likely yesterday, he decides it is, some political
parties may use his own convoluted words to dispute his pronouncement.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940428

