FT944-14376

FT  24 OCT 94 / Confrontation looming for Scharping over PDS


   By MICHAEL LINDEMANN


The opposition Social Democratic party (SPD) may be heading for another
confrontation over the vexed question of co-operation with the former East
German communists, now called the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS).
The national party leadership rejected comments by Mr Harald Ringstorff, the
SPD leader in the north-eastern German state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, that
he had been given permission to talk with the PDS.
'We don't know where Ringstorff has got this idea from,' said an SPD
spokeswoman in Bonn.
The looming showdown will be a key test for Mr Rudolf Scharping, the SPD
national leader who has repeatedly said that his party will not work with
the PDS, which many of Germany's established parties have called
'undemocratic'.
Mr Ringstorff has been pushing for talks with the PDS even though many SPD
party members in Mecklenburg favoured a grand coalition with the Christian
Democratic Union (CDU), Chancellor Helmut Kohl's party.
However, there are signs that the mood in the Mecklenburg SPD may be
changing after the 29-strong party council endorsed further talks with the
PDS at a special meeting on Saturday.
The SPD in Mecklenburg may seek to copy the sort of co-operation which
exists between the party and the PDS in the neighbouring state of
Saxony-Anhalt, where in June the PDS for the first time had a hand in the
shaping of a state government.
There is no formal coalition between the parties, but the PDS has so far
'tolerated' a minority government run by the SPD and the Greens. The fact
that the SPD might be working alone with the PDS in Mecklenburg has made its
position all the more controversial.
However, it remains difficult to see how Mr Ringstorff will be able to pull
off any sort of co-operation with the PDS.
In the central state of Thuringia, the CDU and the SPD have said they will
today begin coalition talks even though the result of last Sunday's election
was exactly the same as in Mecklenburg: the CDU as biggest party alongside
the SPD and the PDS.
SPD party headquarters in Bonn suggested Mr Ringstorff's talk of
co-operation with the PDS was designed to strengthen his hand when it came
to eventual negotiations with the CDU.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941024

