FT944-10927

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (21): Sweet fruits of sufficiency - Farmers
adapt their fields to the export market


   By JIMMY BURNS


In the shadow of the Himalayan foothills near the Punjab city of Chandigarh,
Mr Malvinder Singh, a civil construction engineer turned agriculture
entrepreneur, is putting his expertise in air-conditioned buildings to new
uses.
With the help of Dutch know-how and measuring equipment, as well as an
abundance of cheap and enthusiastic female labour (Punjabi women consider
themselves less religiously constrained than women in other parts of India),
Mr Malvinder has converted 26 acres of low yielding agricultural land into a
mushroom processing enterprise.
The plant, built at the relatively low cost of Rs235m, started up in August
and is expected to produce 30,000 kilos of button mushrooms a day within a
year. Mr Singh's Dutch agrofoods company hopes to tap a potentially
lucrative market both in Delhi and abroad.
Some 50km further south off the main road to Delhi, in the midst of tropical
countryside near the town of Zirakpur, Mr Gurdial Singh (no relation), a
retired government officer, has invested his savings in a smallholding. From
his rows of Dutch bulbs, he is reaping a rich harvest in gladiolis, a
high-value crop being exported to the Middle East and Europe.
Mushroom farming and horticulture are just two examples of the increasing
diverse use to which Indian agricultural land is being put - a diversity
that accounts for the agricultural sector becoming a target for both foreign
and domestic investment and an aggressive government backed export drive.
The post-independence green revolution of the 1960s and 1970s emphasised
land reform, mechanisation and the wide-scale use of fertilisers and
pesticides to increase the yield of traditional crops. The aim was to
achieve self-sufficiency, banishing the threat of famine forever.
Today in India a new green revolution is under way aimed at maximising the
use of agricultural surpluses. The aim is to ensure that India's vast and
growing population continues to feed itself while boosting foreign exchange
earnings.
The Ministry of Agriculture boasts a phenomenal growth of food grains output
as perhaps the most outstanding achievement of India's economic performance
since independence.
The production of food grains has gone up from 51 tons in 1950-51 to a
record high of 182 tons in 1993-94, resulting in a marked increase in per
capita availability.
Agrobusiness is at the cutting edge of the latest green revolution. Given
that India is coming close to the limit of extensive cultivation,
agrobusiness is providing a new means of increasing productivity and
generating employment.
Compared with other sectors of Indian industry, employment generation in
food processing industries is today the largest per unit of investment.
Agrobusiness currently accounts for 52 per cent of total industrial
investment, employs 19 per cent of industrial labour (1.5m) and contributes
13.5 per cent of total industrial output.
With 4.2m hectares of irrigated and fertile land in which cropping intensity
is 18 per cent, the Punjab region has become strident in promoting
agrobusiness industries. A government agency, the Punjab Agro Industrial
Corporation, is actively pushing for enterprises which can produce processed
foods from French fries and chips to tomato puree, ketchup and wines.
Mr Narinder Singh Barak, the corporation's director, believes traditional
entrepreneurial skills combined with good climatic conditions have turned
agrobusiness into the backbone of the local economy.
'Now is the time to shift from wheat production to high value agricultural
production which can ensure higher returns for our farmers and earn us much
needed foreign exchange. Agrobusiness has become our top priority,' he says.
Nationwide, India's food processing industries have attracted more than
Rs300bn of domestic and foreign investment in the last two years, more than
any other sector except energy.
Government figures show that the installed capacity of the fruit and
vegetables processing sector has risen 25 per cent in the past three years,
while production has grown 100 per cent in the period. Exports of processed
fruit and vegetables have increased from Rs17.2bn to Rs47.1bn in three
years, a rise of about 70 per cent.
Mr Dhara Bir Sadharvall, a director of India's Agricultural and Processed
Food Products Authority, is optimistic about the government's economic
programme. 'Liberalisation is proving very good in the agricultural sector.
Everybody and anybody is now free to export anything he likes,' he says.
He concedes, however, that exports potential is being held back by transport
and storage problems. It is estimated that over 20 per cent of India's
agricultural produce goes to waste because of a lack of adequate storage
facilities, inadequate refrigeration, and poor roads.
Glossy handouts from the authority aim to convince the world that Indian
products can compete in price and quality in Middle East export markets.
However, the claim was undermined this month when officials predicted that
their efforts would suffer a setback as a result of the plague scare.
India was forced to postpone its onion harvest in the western regions where
the plague outbreak was first identified. Subsequently exporters were faced
with a blanket suspension of all food trade with the Middle East, which
accounts for 70 per cent of India agricultural exports.
There is little evidence that plague-infected produce has been exported, but
a damaging climate of suspicion among potential customers has been created.
Because food products destined for export were dumped on the domestic
market, some farmers have suffered losses.
Of more concern to economists such as Mr Ridley Nelson, head of the World
Bank's agricultural unit in Delhi, is that the government's liberalisation
programme has not removed the plethora of regulations that still riddle the
agricultural sector domestically.
The World Bank is listened to carefully by the Indian government which is
anxious to obtain development aid funding. The bank is considering extending
Dollars 100m of credits to help agricultural improvements in the Uttar
Pradesh region.
The bank recently submitted to the government the result of an extensive
research into the workings of various laws which hamper efforts at improving
commerce and investment. These include the Essential Commodity Act which
provides central and state government officials with wide-ranging powers to
intervene in the production, supply and distribution of essential
commodities.
Under the Act the powers of officials extend to the issuing of licences to
producers and distributors, the fixing of prices, the regulation of
inter-state trade, and the prohibition of financial transactions deemed
detrimental to the public interest.
The Act was promulgated in 1955, at a time of wide-scale shortages in food
grains and black marketing and rampant hoarding and profiteering. Mr Nelson
believes that it has long outlived its relevance.
Another legacy from the past which Mr Nelson would like to see tackled is
the Land Ceiling Act which is based on the principle that 'he who works the
land owns it' and so restricts farms ownership to smallholdings.
Given India's population pressures, a blanket removal of the ceiling and the
restoration of larger estates would be potentially explosive. But Mr Nelson
shares the view of some Indian entrepreneurs that the government should
extend exemption categories to agroprocessing and horticulture.
Free market economists remain critical of the government's regime of
subsidies on financial and environmental grounds. The World Bank holds that
Indian farmers would be better served if resources were diverted from
subsidies to much-needed infrastructure improvement as well as the
introduction of modern techniques for less wasteful use of water supply.
As they have done for centuries, in 1994 India's farmers still hold their
breath prior to the monsoon and thank the gods if rainfall is abundant.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

941108

