FT942-16248

FT  12 APR 94 / Swedes enshrine right to know in their EU deal


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   STOCKHOLM


Amid all the wrangles over voting rights, fishing rights and farm subsidies
in the European Union's enlargement negotiations last month, a declaration
by Sweden attached to its accession accord with Brussels passed almost
unnoticed.
It asserted Sweden's right to continue to exercise a deeply entrenched
policy of open government and freedom of information.
Such is the importance attached in Sweden to the principle of open
government that Stockholm felt it necessary to include the declaration in
its EU accession documents to reassure voters worried that joining the EU
might erode citizens' right of access to state-held information.
The most celebrated example is the right all Swedes have to read the
official correspondence of the prime minister - without delay.
'Actually, the way it works it is possible sometimes for a reporter to see
some non-urgent letters before the minister,' says Mr Goran Schader, a
senior official at the justice ministry.
Public officials are explicitly given the right to leak information as part
of their rights to the freedom of expression. Early this year, most of the
details of the 1994-95 budget were published in the national newspapers
several days before Mrs Anne Wibble, the finance minister, presented them to
parliament.
The country's first freedom of the press legislation was enacted in 1766.
The current freedom of the press law which enshrines the principle of open
government was passed in 1949 and is part of the written constitution.
All ministries and local authorities are obliged to keep a register of
completed documents which citizens can freely peruse and have access to,
like a public library.
There are, however, seven areas where the state may withhold information,
ranging from state security, through currency policy and individual privacy
to the protection of animals and plants, with restrictions up to 20 years.
Swedish officials and politicians of all parties boast that the policy of
open government has ensured a virtual lack of public corruption. 'It makes
everyone aware that they are operating in the public eye,' says Mr Schader.
'It encourages efficiency and the fair treatment of every case.'
Some Swedes feel access is too open, especially information about private
individuals that can be obtained by fellow citizens. Details of individual
income taxes are publicly available, for example. There is also a campaign
to make the possession of child pornography a crime.
In case European leaders may fret that their confidential musings in EU
council meetings might suddenly pop up in publicly-available Swedish
briefing papers, Mr Schader points out that any threat of damage to foreign
relations is a case for restricting information under the secrecy law.
'We have conducted foreign relations for centuries without this being a
problem. I don't think anyone should feel that you can't tell Sweden
something for fear of it suddenly appearing on the front page of the
newspapers.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940412

