FT941-5487

FT  05 MAR 94 / The thin red line stands firm: Dominic Lawson praises the
one British institution that is above ridicule


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


At the turn of the year I published a somewhat callous article suggesting
that our ailing national institutions needed the threat that has ever hung
over companies in the private sector. That figure of nemesis is the
liquidator, brought in by the banks when the business concerned is beyond
salvation.
Among the customers for institutional euthanasia was Lloyd's of London. It
would be better for all involved - except perhaps those drawing salaries for
running it into the ground - if the whole market was wound up in an orderly
fashion. The Football Association, the Test and County Cricket Board and the
Jockey Club were also on the list of candidates for humane killing. There
are those who would add the monarchy to this rota of once-great British
institutions which have outlived their usefulness and which we should not
strive officiously to keep alive.
After this article was published the titular head of one of these bodies - I
do not mean Her Majesty the Queen - got in touch with me. Could I name, he
asked me, any British institution which had not fallen victim to ridicule
from the press and the public? The point of his question, I think, was to
suggest that it was not so much that the institutions were all rotten, but
that there was a general mood of fin-de-siecle cynicism which had been
targeted indiscriminately at all public bodies.
But there is one British institution which has survived this attack. Indeed,
I suspect that its reputation is as high as it has ever been. I refer to the
army, or, more properly, the armed forces.
I am incapable of being in the company of a British soldier, active or
retired, without feeling some slight sense of inferiority, in that he is a
member of a profession which is above reproach. I am aware that journalism
is perhaps not the highest calling that a man can achieve, but I do not feel
the same sense of moral inadequacy when introduced to a doctor, an
accountant, a lawyer or indeed any other member of our great professions.
Perhaps all men feel the way I do. From our earliest childhood we are
brought up to believe that there can be nothing more masculine than to be a
soldier. All other business is effete by comparison, so naturally we feel
slightly less of a man in the company of one who is paid to take up arms in
the service of his country.
There is more to it than that. The great virtue of the armed forces as an
institution is that - outside Northern Ireland - we do not encounter them in
our day-to-day lives. They are all but invisible, doing their job in a way
that does not intrude on our prejudices or our fantasies. They live in
barracks, not among us, abroad even when they are at home.
In so far as we are aware of them, we can hardly avoid noticing that they
seem to be better than their international counterparts, something which
scarcely seems to be the case with our other public bodies.
While General Sir Michael Rose could perhaps be expected to feature
glowingly in the British press, there does seem to be an international
appreciation that it has taken a British soldier to raise the morale of the
United Nations forces in Bosnia, and to instil some sense of coherent
military strategy into its operations.
There is, I believe, one overriding reason why the British Army is so good.
It is ruthless with itself, as ruthless as any private company. It is
continually culling from its ranks those men and officers who do not match
the highest standards. That process will intensify as a result of the
government's proposed cutbacks in the armed forces, but the constant
pressure on men to resign their commissions if they cannot see their way to
steady and merited promotion is very much the army's own style.
So when you read of Major James Hewitt's ungentlemanly conduct in selling
his story of friendship with the Princess of Wales to the Daily Express, do
not think less of the British Army. Just think how wise it was to have
spotted a wrong 'un and given him early redundancy. What a discriminating
institution.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator

The Financial Times


London Page XXVI

940305

