FT944-2970

FT  15 DEC 94 / Personal View: The looking glass view of Europe


   By DAVID WILLIAMSON


Almost everything that happens in the European Union is public knowledge
within an hour or two. The European Commission in Brussels is one of the
most open public services in the world and we all like it that way. It is
therefore surprising to find that, recently, some commentators seem to see
Europe not through the looking glass but through the distorting mirror. This
applies particularly to what 'Brussels' is alleged to be imposing on the
European citizen.
A few facts. First, all significant decisions in the EU, with the exception
of those relating to competition (for example state aids) are taken not by
bureaucrats but by UK ministers and their colleagues in the Council of
Ministers. The Commission proposes, the Council and the parliament decide.
Recent Treaty changes have increased the parliament's control over the
Commission. This is a genuinely democratic system.
The budget in the EU is fixed by the Council and the parliament. About 97.5
per cent of public expenditure in the EU is national expenditure by the
member states. The Community budget represents about 2.5 per cent. It is
subject to fixed limits on all main types of expenditure. That is why last
year the Commission kept about 1,000 posts vacant because there was no
money. When we underspend the budget, there is usually silence in the media.
In 1994 we shall underspend the budget on agriculture by about Pounds 2.7bn.
Second, the European Commission is a lean machine. We could have taken a
different, centralising approach and established a huge bureaucracy in
Brussels to administer directly all grants and schemes. I am glad that this
approach was not followed. There are many million national civil servants in
the member states but less than 15,000 officials on the operating budget of
the European Commission (about one fifth are required because we work in
nine languages).
It follows that, although the Commission has the final responsibility for
the execution of the budget, most of the operations, probably about 80 per
cent, are in fact carried out in the member states. De facto, surveillance
and control are shared between the member states and the Commission. Not
many people seem to know, however, that when the accounts are settled each
year the Commission disallows - that is, does not charge to the European
taxpayer - irregular payments. For 1989 accounts we disallowed Pounds 630m,
for 1990 accounts Pounds 770m and we expect to disallow a further
substantial sum for 1991.
The Audit Court has recently criticised some elements of financial
administration in the Commission. I will place a small bet that most
commentators have not read the 484 pages of the report, nor the Commission's
replies. I state emphatically that the Commission has no dispute with the
Audit Court. It is the court's duty to seek to improve financial management
and ours to respond. Where we think that it is right, we shall act and the
member states should do so too.
However, this has also been the open season for wild statements about fraud
in the Union. What we do know is that the effort against fraud and the rate
of detection have increased, both the European parliament and the Commission
giving this a high priority. What we do not know is whether fraud has
increased or decreased, although it is very likely that it is decreasing
because of the measures taken. In any event many of the figures quoted have
no basis in fact.
Finally, back to basics. It seems to be the time to emphasise that the
European Union:
has been the centrepiece of UK foreign and economic policy for very good
reasons since this community of friendly, democratic states has increased
prosperity for its member states while strictly respecting their national
diversity;
has certain competences strictly defined by the Treaty, which cannot be
changed except by unanimity;
has sharply reduced its legislative action, the volume of proposals put to
the Council and parliament having fallen like a stone since 1990 to a very
low level now;
is the world's biggest trader, providing the largest market for British
goods (Britain exports more to the Netherlands and Belgium than to the US);
is in a period of soundly-based growth, likely to outpace the US and Japan
in 1995 and 1996, though more action is needed on jobs;
has been a real force for liberalising western Europe for the free movement
of goods, services and capital to the benefit of the consumer and of
business, the internal market sweeping away tons of national red tape and
bureaucracy.
This is the picture in the looking glass.
The author is secretary-general of the European Commission

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941215

