FT941-13051

FT  27 JAN 94 / On the planet of the unholy allies: Robert Graham examines
the realignment of Italy's political parties as they prepare for a general
election


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


The spectacle of Italy preparing for its general election resembles
interlocking galaxies: politicians and parties are like planets orbiting
each other with nothing to halt them.
The poll on March 27 will mark a watershed in the country's political
development. A new electoral formula will introduce the principle of a
first-past-the-post system and voters will choose from a plethora of
recycled or new parties.
At this stage the outcome is unpredictable. Most political parties are short
of funds, poorly organised and without any clear idea of where their votes
are likely to come from - let alone the policies on which such votes might
be sought.
The latest addition to the field is Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate. He
has chosen to ignore advice to refrain from direct politics and has decided
to offer himself as the white knight for people 'of goodwill' to rally round
and prevent Italy being run by a left-wing government.
While no one will hazard a bet on the likely winner, or winners, at least
one result of the election can be predicted. Italy will introduce a system
that encourages parties to alternate in power. This is a turning point in
political culture.
Until now Italy has been unique among western European democracies for its
political immobility. Christian Democrat-dominated coalitions have backed
each of Italy's 52 postwar governments. This lack of a genuine alternative
to the parties in government has been a crucial ingredient behind the spread
of corruption that has provoked the collapse of the old political system.
The poll is being held a mere 23 months after the last general election. But
the early dissolution of parliament was an inevitable consequence of the
discredit heaped on the traditional parties by two years of non-stop
scandals. With one in six deputies under investigation, parliament had
little moral claim to represent the people.
Local elections last June and November, using new electoral laws,
demonstrated that the composition of parliament was out of balance with
popular sentiment. The four parties that provided the notional majority for
the technocratic government of Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi had come to account
for well under 20 per cent of the popular vote.
Despite efforts by die-hards among the Christian Democrats and Socialists to
prolong the life of parliament, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro had no
alternative but to announce a dissolution.
Since the announcement on January 16, events have moved fast, dictated by
the former Communist Party of the Democratic Left (PDS). It is way ahead,
both by virtue of its organisation and because Mr Achille Occhetto, its
leader, has grasped the need to forge alliances under the new system, where
75 per cent of the seats are to be covered by majority voting.
Some 18 parties will be contending for a share of power. None, on current
estimates, is capable of mustering more than 18-20 per cent of the vote, and
most will win considerably less. The victor will, therefore, inevitably have
to be a coalition of parties which will be formed in advance of the
elections - a break with tradition.
The PDS has arranged an effective 'progressive alliance' of candidates. It
is composed of the Sicily-based clean government movement, the Network, the
Greens, some radical Catholics, former Republicans grouped under the
reformist movement, Democratic Alliance, and on occasions the rump of the
Communist party, Reconstructed Communism.
The PDS has placed at the disposal of these groupings its considerable
nationwide organisation, the best in Italy and inherited from the Communist
party. In return, it has acquired the de facto right to act as the leader of
the alliance. On the latest projections, this group is capable of winning at
least 40 per cent of the vote.
Being thus organised while everyone else is either disorganised or
squabbling over the nature of alliances, the PDS has dictated an important
part of the battleground.
The campaign will be fought on whether Italy should have a government
dominated by a party that is the heir to the Communists. This is certainly
going to be Mr Berlusconi's chosen area of battle.
It will be up to the PDS to demonstrate that the party has evolved towards
an acceptable form of social democracy, embracing the broad lines of a
market economy, complete with privatisation and reduced state spending. The
fact that the PDS ended up as a key supporter of the Ciampi government's
1994 austerity budget in parliament has yet to be appreciated by the
electorate.
The success of the PDS will depend in good measure on how united or split
the other parties are. The greater the number of other parties and alliances
in the field, the better the PDS's chance of winning. The greatest number of
groupings is fighting for the centre ground, to occupy the hole left by the
40 per cent of the voters traditionally accounted for by the Christian
Democrats and their allies.
Mr Berlusconi's entry yesterday adds a 'Ross Perot' factor to the equation.
He risks splitting the centre vote, rather than acting as a coagulant as he
pretends. He is an inexperienced politician and has been publicly warned to
stay out of politics by every leading political figure.
His movement, Forza Italia (literally, the footballer's exhortation 'Come
on, Italy') is well organised, rich, controversially backed by his
television stations and slick on public relations; but it cannot hide Mr
Berlusconi's manifest vanity nor the thinness of his political ideas. He is
also likely to become the biggest single target for media hate and
investigation, particularly as his business rivals finance a big slice of
the newspaper industry and support opposing parties. A 'Stop Berlusconi'
campaign is thus likely to be a significant feature of the elections.
Forza Italia will be most threatening if Mr Berlusconi makes an alliance
with the neo-fascist MSI, which last week sought to gain greater
respectability by rebaptising itself the National Alliance. The MSI
performed strongly in the centre and south in last year's local elections,
and is one of the fastest-growing parties.
Mr Berlusconi probably would have never been able to enter politics had not
the Christian Democrats' authority been eroded. The party, founded in 1942,
has been obliged to adopt a new identity with almost indecent haste to
revive its fortunes. Last weekend it became the Popular Party (PP), drawing
inspiration from the similarly named party of the 1920s that was the
forebear of the modern Christian Democrats.
The PP is still led by the chisel-faced Mr Mino Martinazzoli, the former
Christian Democrat leader. It looks no different from its predecessor and
espouses the same woolly platform of 'Catholic values'. The only difference
is that the political dinosaurs like former Premier Giulio Andreotti have
been excluded. Some 10 per cent of the outgoing Christian Democrat deputies
have formed a breakaway party - the Centre Christian Democrats.
Mr Martinazzoli's natural ally is Mr Mario Segni, the referendum leader and
breakaway Christian Democrat. Mr Segni is not an easy partner and for the
moment has opted for a deal with the populist Northern League of Mr Umberto
Bossi. The latter could prove a useful marriage of convenience with the
league delivering a sizeable slice of the vote in the north, and Mr Segni
picking up the vote in the centre in the south.
At this stage all the potential alliances look at best opportunistic. With
the exception of the PDS alliance, none augurs well for forming a credible,
cohesive government.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940127

