FT942-14881

FT  18 APR 94 / Ozawa, the shogun confined to shadows: The personalities
sharing Japan's search for a new prime minister


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


Mr Ichiro Ozawa could not be called one of Japan's more folksy politicians.
But on a morning variety show, Mr Ozawa tried to reach out to an audience of
middle-aged housewives, revealing that he loves showbiz gossip, takes care
of budgies in his spare time and, although like any husband he has lied to
his wife a few times, as a politician he has always told the truth.
His congenial manner and wide smiles, however, have failed to convince
residents of Nagatacho, Tokyo's political district, who have been watching
Mr Ozawa and his backroom manoeuvrings over the creation of the next
government. To them he is no ordinary Japanese husband, but the shadow
shogun - the backroom fixer of Japanese politics.
Immediately following Mr Morihiro Hosokawa's resignation as premier, the
coalition looked likely to split along its two ideological lines: the right,
including Mr Ozawa's Japan Renewal party, and the Buddhist-backed Komeito,
or Clean Government, party; and the left, consisting of the New Harbinger
party, Socialist Democratic party and the Democratic Socialists.
Mr Ozawa had initially considered cutting off the coalition's left, and
filling the gap by teaming up with Mr Michio Watanabe, a Liberal Democratic
party elder and a former foreign minister. Mr Watanabe is close to Mr Ozawa
in his beliefs, asserting that Japan should take on a more active role in
international affairs.
However, the situation has boiled down to a battle for numbers. Once it
become apparent that Mr Watanabe could not bring enough followers from the
LDP, and Mr Masayoshi Takemura of the NHP was trying to join the coalition's
left with LDP liberals, Mr Ozawa quickly changed his course.
Although a self-proclaimed reformer of Japanese politics, Mr Ozawa has had
to resort to tactics nurtured under Mr Kakuei Tanaka, Mr Noboru Takeshita,
and Mr Shin Kanemaru, the former powerbrokers of the LDP. 'Mr Ozawa knows
too well that political power only lies in numbers,' says Mr Takao
Toshikawa, editor of Tokyo Insideline.
But during the TV appearance in front of housewives, Mr Ozawa denied wanting
to become prime minister. As much as he would like to stand at the helm, Mr
Ozawa realises he must remain the shadow shogun. He knows that, once he
steps into political limelight, his days of power and 'money' politics
alongside Mr Takeshita and Mr Kanemaru will come back to haunt him.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940418

