FT943-13086

FT  21 JUL 94 / World Trade News: Du Pont seeks growth in India by joint
ventures


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA


   NEW DELHI


Du Pont, the US chemicals company, is holding talks with Indian partners to
set up five separate ventures in core sectors such as agrochemicals,
engineering polymers, pigments, automotive safety products and nylon and
Teflon.
Du Pont plans to expand into the Indian market through its subsidiaries and
branded products, a departure from its current emphasis on selling advanced
technology to Indian companies such as Reliance, India's largest private
sector company.
Du Pont Far East, through which the US conglomerate operates in India, has
two Indian joint venture partners, the Delhi-based Thapar group and the
Madras-based TVS group.
It may collaborate with both in engineering polymers for the power and
telecom industries, white pigments, nylon for tyres, and tyre-dipping
facilities, Tynex nylon for toothbrushes and health-care products,
agrochemicals for crop protection, and polyester for textiles and imaging
films.
The subsidiary will entrust the marketing of its nylon products to the
Thapar group, its joint venture partner for a nylon plant in Goa. Several
new projects are also being discussed with the TVS group, which is producing
Tynex bristles for toothbrushes.
The company is exploring the possibility of setting up wholly owned
subsidiaries, and would prefer to hold a majority stake and operational
control. 'But we will go ahead even without a dominant equity-holding, if we
find the right partner,' a spokesman said.
The multinational is negotiating with Reliance to manufacture Dacron, a
specialised polyester staple fibre (PSF). The Indian petrochemicals
conglomerate hopes to become one of Asia's top five PSF producers in Asia
after its new plant at Hazira in Gujarat goes into production by late 1995.
Analysts expect the Indian PSF market to grow by 20 per cent by 1997,
because of cotton and viscose price increases.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940721

