FT941-5666

FT  05 MAR 94 / Berlusconi football club in probe


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


Milan magistrates are investigating alleged undeclared transfer fees paid by
the cup-winning AC Milan football club, owned by media magnate and aspiring
politician Mr Silvio Berlusconi.
Their investigations centre on the 1992 transfer from Turin to AC Milan of
the highest paid Italian footballer, Gigi Lentini. Lentini was questioned
this week about his transfer payment publicly, said to be at least L22bn
(Pounds 8.91m), and allegations from his old Turin club that up to L6.5bn
was not declared.
The transfer of Lentini is already under investigation by Turin magistrates
who last year arrested the former Turin chairman, Mr Gian Mauro Borsano, on
charges of accepting alleged illicit payments over player transfers.
However, the involvement of Milan magistrates has taken the case a stage
further and focuses the spotlight on the activities of AC Milan itself.
According to well-publicised leaks from Milan magistrates, Mr Borsano is
alleged to have confessed to receiving L6.5bn from AC Milan to facilitate
Lentini's transfer. Of this, L5bn, he alleged, came from a Liechtenstein
bank. He is also said to have confessed to illicitly pledging Turin club
shares with its AC Milan competitor for three months as a guarantee that
Lentini would be transferred.
Mr Adriano Galliani, AC Milan director, has brushed aside the investigation.
In a separate development Turin magistrates have arrested two French
citizens, Mr Roger Flamant and Mr Maurice Bansay, respectively chairman and
managing director of the French retail group Trema, on corruption charges
related to the development of a huge shopping mall, Le Gru.
This is believed to be the first time foreign nationals have been arrested
in Italy during corruption investigations.
The Trema group has developed the Le Gru complex in a 60/40 venture with
Euromercato, part of the Standa group controlled by Mr Berlusconi's
Fininvest empire. The two French executives are alleged to have paid about
L1.5bn to political parties to help obtain the licence for the project.
Although both had previously offered to co-operate with the magistrates,
they were arrested following suspicions they were tampering with the
inquiry.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940305

