FT944-6035

FT  01 DEC 94 / Summit push in Aids war: Paris talks seek 'more unanimous'
attack


   By Our Foreign Staff


Political leaders from 42 countries will today meet in Paris at an Aids
summit to pledge their moral and financial solidarity to combat the HIV
virus that afflicts at least 17m people around the globe.
Although it is the highest-level gathering convened on the issue, the
presence of only a few heads of government testifies to the discomfort
politicians retain over a disease that has sex and drugs as its two main
means of transmission.
Mrs Simone Veil, the French health minister, said France had, in partnership
with the World Health Organisation, sponsored the summit to galvanise
politicians as well as medical experts into a 'more resolute, more
sustained, more unanimous' attack on the disease, identified nearly 15 years
ago and still spreading fast.
The French organisers say the summit is not just a 'consciousness-raising'
exercise but also an effort to put new resources into the battle against
Aids, particularly in developing countries. At present, only 8 per cent of
the money devoted to combating Aids is spent in developing countries where
92 per cent of those affected live. However, some of the much larger amount
spent in developed countries goes on research into treatments or cures that
would be of general benefit - if they were made affordable.
The 42 countries participating in the summit are represented by a mix of
prime ministers (mostly from Africa), health ministers and other officials.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, United Nations secretary-general, is also due to
attend. They are to issue a declaration expressing solidarity in the Aids
battle, stressing the rights of individuals afflicted by Aids or the HIV
virus, committing themselves to better prevention and safety procedures in
blood transfusions, and promising more resources.
The draft declaration recognises that the disease 'is hindering social and
economic development' and calls for 'national and international partnerships
between the public and private sectors, in order to accelerate the
development of prevention and treatment technologies . . . and to provide
for the measures needed to ensure their accessibility in developing
countries'.
Mrs Veil said the annual international Aids conference held in Yokohama in
August this year showed that Aids was spreading to virtually all categories
of the population and that the search for a cure was going to be 'a long
haul'. France is to provide FFr100m (Pounds 11.9m) next year to help follow
up initiatives taken at the summit, in addition to its regular budget for
research into Aids of FFr230m in 1995.
France's sensitivity to the world Aids crisis is heightened by its own
problems. Despite the fact that France's Professor Luc Montagnier pioneered
the discovery of the HIV virus in 1983, France is the worst sufferer in
Europe from Aids, with 32,722 cases reported since the start of the epidemic
and a further 100,000-120,000 thought to have been exposed to HIV. Half
these cases are in the Paris area, where Aids is the chief cause of death
for 20- to 34-year-olds.
One of the main themes of the Paris summit, which will also be addressed by
people living with Aids, is the need for safer procedures in blood
transfusions, an issue the French are well aware of after the infection of
several hundred haemophiliacs by Aids-contaminated blood in the early 1980s.
Two doctors have gone to jail and Mr Laurent Fabius, a former prime
minister, and two of his health ministers have been charged with 'poisoning'
their fellow citizens.
Canada's Mr Jean Chretien will be one of the few western prime ministers
attending the summit. A national commission of inquiry in Canada is
investigating the safety of blood supplies after the infection of hundreds
of blood-transfusion recipients in the mid-1980s.
Some farther-flung countries, such as Brazil, will be represented merely by
their Paris ambassadors. Brazil aims to highlight links between intravenous
drug use and Aids as well as criticise discriminatory laws, such as in
Russia where all visitors are required to be tested.
Japan will field a former foreign minister, Mr Taro Nakayama, who is a
doctor. It placed greater importance in hosting this summer's international
Aids conference, which was opened by Crown Prince Naruhito and Mr Tomiichi
Murayama, prime minister.
The UK is sending Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, who is expected
to announce spending plans on HIV-related services for next year.
Accompanying her will be Mr Nick Partridge, chief executive of the Terrence
Higgins Trust, the leading British Aids charity. Last year she imposed a 65
per cent cut over three years in the trust's grant, but today the ministers'
declaration will stress their support for the activities of non-governmental
organisations in fighting the pandemic.
Reporting by David Buchan in Paris, Gordon Cramb in London, Bernard Simon in
Toronto and Angus Foster in Sao Paulo

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941201

