FT942-15545

FT  14 APR 94 / International Company News: Alcoa pushes on with spaceframes
 -John Griffiths visits the latest car body plant at Soest, near Dortmund


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa) expects to set up at least two more
plants in Europe within the next five years to produce revolutionary
aluminium 'spaceframe' bodies for cars.
It is also prepared to spend Dollars 1bn or more on a partnership with any
carmaker seeking to produce the first high-volume - 100,000 units or more a
year - aluminium-bodied cars, according to Mr David Schlendorf, president of
Alcoa's automotive structures division.
His remarks came as Alcoa yesterday formally opened its plant in Soest,
which supplies the spaceframe bodies to Audi, the Volkswagen group's
upmarket car division. Audi is to use this type of body in the A8 luxury
model to be launched soon.
Alcoa has invested DM140m (Dollars 81m) in the plant, which employs 160
people and has the capacity to make 50,000 to 60,000 bodies a year.
Audi hopes to sell 20,000 A8 cars a year. It is expected to use up the
remainder of Alcoa's Soest capacity with another niche car, to be produced
in slightly higher volumes than the A8 as well as being cheaper, although
Audi executives were giving no details of the project yesterday.
'Five years from now in Europe you'll be seeing at least 10 aluminium
spaceframe-bodied niche cars, to be produced at a rate of up to 20,000 units
a year, either in production or announced by a number of manufacturers,'
said Mr Schlendorf.
Claiming that the motor industry is making an 'inevitable' progression to
aluminium rather than steel bodies, because of its light weight, lower
tooling costs and recyclability, Mr Schlendorf said that before the end of
the decade Alcoa may have installed a satellite production system for
aluminium bodies across Europe. It was likely to consist of one large
components manufacturing site - possibly in Hungary or another low-cost
eastern European country. This would produce the extrusions, castings and
other individual parts of the body. 'We'd then ship these to assembly plants
we set up close to each carmaker,' said Mr Schlendorf.
The low overheads and relatively simple tooling in spaceframe assembly means
that 'we can set up such assembly plants cheaply, and sufficiently quickly
that we wouldn't even need to make an investment until a supply contract
with an individual carmaker had actually been signed'.
The A8, which has started production at Audi's Ingolstadt plant, is itself a
landmark vehicle for the motor and aluminium industries in terms of both its
construction and the volumes in which it is to be built. Honda produces an
all-aluminium luxury sports car, the NSX, but uses conventional pressings
procedures and currently makes only about 1,500 units a year.
While Audi and Volkswagen executives have indicated a belief that all their
output will move to aluminium by relatively early in the next century, Alcoa
expects that it will be in North America that the 'breakthrough' car for the
world aluminium industry, one produced in volumes of at least 100,000 units
a year, will first appear.
Ford is already building and testing a fleet of 40 aluminium-bodied Mercury
Sables. The next generation of the Ford Taurus, scheduled for delivery in
North America late next year, is expected to use a substantial amount of
sheet aluminium but is not itself expected to be the 'breakthrough' car.
Ford is predicting that the use of aluminium by the motor industry will
triple from the current 200lb per car within the next decade, not least
because some significant obstacles to its more widespread use - particularly
aluminium's historic price volatility - are now being overcome.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940414

