FT943-948

FT  27 SEP 94 / Business and the Law: Liable to exposure - Closer legal
scrutiny of derivatives losses


   By DIANA BENTLEY


Recent disclosures by several US public companies that they have suffered
substantial losses through trading in derivatives has resulted in the
announcement of tighter controls by US regulators. It has also led to the
realisation that many of the legal issues which arise from the use of, or
failure to use, derivatives have yet to be tested in the courts.
Why do public companies use derivatives - financial instruments, such as
futures and options? The answer is to manage financial risks associated with
their business. A company can reduce the risk of a rise in the future cost
of borrowing by fixing its borrowing costs by the use of interest futures,
options or swaps. Equally, multinational companies can hedge against foreign
exchange exposure through foreign currency futures and options.
But derivatives are not without their risks, as recent large trading losses
in derivatives in the US illustrate. In May, Air Products and Chemicals, the
US industrial gases group, was the fourth listed US company to take a charge
against its earnings this year as a result of losses on derivatives
contracts bought from Bankers Trust, the New York bank.
The losses suffered by Air Products and the other three companies - Proctor
& Gamble, Mead Corporation, the US paper group, and Gibson Greetings, a
greetings card manufacturer - have raised questions of liability.
On September 13, Gibson Greetings filed suit in the Ohio Federal District
Court seeking damages of Dollars 23m, the amount owing on the derivatives
transactions, and punitive damages of Dollars 50m in respect of transactions
with Bankers Trust.
The action, alleging fraud and deceit, claims the bank 'made false
representations and failed to disclose to Gibson the risk of the extremely
complicated derivative products' sold to Gibson. Bankers Trust denies the
claim.
Depending on the success of the Gibson action, Proctor & Gamble has said it
may follow with an action over its loss this April of Dollars 157m on two
highly leveraged interest rate swaps.
Although the company has not yet started legal proceedings it attributes the
loss to Bankers Trust, arguing that the transactions, based on complex
formulae which multiplied the effect of interest rate increases, were not
usual for the company and were inconsistent with its policies.
The bank denies liability for these losses, saying the transactions were
entered into after much discussion, that it formally recommended to Proctor
& Gamble that the company limit its risk by unwinding all or part of the
transactions when changes in market rates began to affect its position
adversely - advice Proctor & Gamble rejected.
The Bankers Trust action highlights the question of the liability of banks
in providing derivatives services and the level of advice given.
Losses arising from derivatives dealing are an emotive issue, according to
Mr Tim Plews, of City solicitors Clifford Chance. 'Derivatives are somewhat
intangible and large sums can be lost or gained overnight, making losses
particularly unpalatable,' he says
Mr Jonathan Melrose a partner of City lawyers Simmons & Simmons says the
basic premise of UK derivatives regulation is full and frank disclosure,
though financial institutions dealing with professional clients are
permitted to place greater reliance on the client's own judgment.
But lawyers accept that even compliance with standard disclosure
requirements to professional clients may not avoid claims.
Given its sophistication, Proctor & Gamble's assertion that it was relying
on Bankers Trust's advice has been greeted with derision in the US markets.
But the company has not ruled out litigation.
Gibson Greetings alleges it was positively misled. That shows a financial
institution is never out of the firing line, Mr Melrose says. 'Large losses
can concentrate the mind on what action may be available. Clients may try to
argue that they are owed a duty of care or, as with Gibson, allege they were
actively misled,' he adds.
With exotic derivatives questions of liability are more complex, Mr Plews
says. 'There can be a fine line between what it takes to market a product,
especially a new one, which has to be demystified for a customer, and the
giving of advice. To what extent is a bank encouraging reliance on its
explanation before a customer commits to the contract?'
The possibility of shareholder action against companies using derivatives
adds another dimension to the problem. Shareholders may be philosophical
about trading losses in traditional areas of business, says Mr Plews, but
less forgiving about derivative losses. There is certainly more pressure now
on directors to ensure they understand the products the company is dealing
in, says Mr Melrose.
The point is illustrated by a recent Australian decision in which the chief
executive and chairman of AWA Ltd, a public company, was found to have been
negligent in foreign exchange transaction losses because he failed to
establish adequate internal control systems in the foreign exchange
department and properly control the activities of the department head.
The decision by the Commercial Division of the New South Wales Supreme Court
is under appeal, but Mr David Williamson, London partner of Australian law
firm Blake Dawson Waldron says: 'The Australian decision should focus the
minds of directors and professional advisers, such as auditors, on their
potential exposure in this area.'
Directors may find themselves in a quandary over derivatives, according to
Mr Melrose. 'In any company where there is a sophisticated treasury
operation inadequate use of derivatives to hedge may also be open to
question.'
He points to a US case where directors of the LaFontaine Grain Co-operative
were found by the Indiana Court of Appeals to be negligent for not
adequately using derivatives to minimise financial risk.
Directors may in some circumstances be covered by Dirtectors & Officers
Liability insurance, now common in the US and becoming so in the UK. Trading
losses from failure of management may be covered by such insurance, but some
policies exclude failure of investments, in which case losses incurred
through derivatives may not be insured.
UK and US lawyers will watch the US litigation with interest. Apart from the
Hammersmith and Fulham litigation, where the House of Lords ruled local
authorities did not have the powers to enter into swaps contracts, little
legal action has been taken on derivatives in the UK.
Yet, as the recent US action confirms, the use of derivatives is under
increasing legal scrutiny.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940927

