FT943-13075

FT  21 JUL 94 / Major's Reshuffle: Dorrell joins his rival Portillo in
cabinet


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


Mr Stephen Dorrell's elevation to the cabinet was the least surprising
aspect of Mr John Major's ministerial shake-up.
The promotion of the financial secretary to the Treasury to the post of
national heritage secretary confirms his place in the ranks of potential
future leaders of the Tory party.
But Mr Major has been careful not to annoy the fractious right wing of his
party by promoting Mr Dorrell too quickly. He might have hoped for the post
of employment, transport or education secretary rather than the less exalted
role of running arts and the National Lottery.
The 42-year-old MP for Worcester is everything his rightwing colleagues love
to hate. He is unashamedly pro-European, a liberal on social policy and, on
economic policy, a pragmatist rather than an ideologue. With a substantial
personal interest in the future of a family-run clothing company he cares
about manufacturing industry.
He is also one of that ever smaller band of senior Conservatives who can
string together enough sentences to present a case that his party - or at
least his faction - still has a coherent prospectus for governing Britain.
For the centre-left of the Tory party that makes him the ideal rival to Mr
Michael Portillo, the equally youthful torch bearer of the Thatcherites.
Neither could expect to lead the party were Mr Major to stumble before the
next general election. But Labour's choice today of the 41-year-old Mr Tony
Blair as its leader will reinforce their claim on any vacancy after that.
Mr Dorrell is not quite as 'wet' as he used to be. He is a former aide to Mr
Peter Walker (now Lord Walker) and was rebellious thorn in the side of Mrs
Margaret Thatcher's first administration, but has dried out since the days
when he regularly defied the government from the back benches.
Like everyone nowadays in the Tory party - and most in the Labour party - he
believes in the market economy. He is a strong advocate of privatisation and
of the injection of private finance into public-sector infrastructure
projects.
But he also thinks politicians should treat market economics as a means to
an end rather than an end in itself. He remains a liberal on social policy -
particularly in debates about such issues as immigration, the subject of a
number of rebellions in his earlier years.
His rivalry with Mr Portillo has frequently resembled a private war
conducted with little reference to the rest of the government. Mr Dorrell is
still a step or two behind Mr Portillo, but has not too far to catch up.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940721

