FT944-2292

FT  16 DEC 94 / International Company News: Cariplo group plans counter-bid
for Rolo


   By ANDREW HILL


   MILAN


A consortium led by Cariplo, the Milan-based savings bank, last night
announced plans to outbid rival Milanese bank Credito Italiano with a
L3,290bn (Dollars 2bn) offer for 70 per cent of Credito Romagnolo (Rolo) of
Bologna.
The planned counter-bid will involve Cariplo, IMI, the banking and financial
services group privatised earlier this year, and Cassa di Risparmio in
Bologna, another local bank. Cariplo could also enlist the support of other
groups, including Reale Mutua, the Italian insurance company which is a Rolo
shareholder.
The consortium plans to pay L21,500 a share, against the Credit offer of
L20,000, and bid for 70 per cent of Rolo rather than the 65 per cent stake
sought by Credit.
The Cariplo announcement was made after the Italian market closed, but
during lively trading earlier in the day, Rolo's shares rose by 3 per cent
to L18,347, and Credit's shares were up 2.5 per cent at L1,640.
Italian agencies reported that Rolo had received the Cariplo approach 'with
interest', and directors would discuss it at a board meeting tomorrow. The
Rolo board said two weeks ago that it would be up to shareholders to decide
on the merits of the Credit bid.
Cariplo and its allies could launch their bid as early as next week if they
receive the approval of the Bank of Italy and Consob, the stock exchange
watchdog. It would overlap with Credit's offer, which opens on Monday and
will run until January 16.
Cariplo - short for Cassa di Risparmio delle Provincie Lombarde - claims to
be the world's biggest savings bank, and the third biggest bank in Italy,
with total assets last year of more than L150,000bn. In the past few years
it has formed alliances with a series of local savings banks, giving itself
access to about 1,400 branches nationally, half of which it controls
directly.
Like many Italian banks, Cariplo is owned by a charitable foundation.
Adverse market conditions forced it to abandon plans for a flotation on the
Milan stock exchange earlier this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941216

