FT942-12299

FT  30 APR 94 / Fears and scepticism undermine the dollar: Examining the
factors behind the dollar's dramatic slide against the yen


   By MICHAEL PROWSE and WILLIAM DAWKINS


   WASHINGTON, TOKYO


After months of apparent indifference, the US Treasury yesterday showed that
it does, after all, care about the fate of the dollar.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the treasury secretary, said sales of D-Marks and yen by
the Federal Reserve were needed to counter 'disorderly conditions' in
currency markets and to reaffirm 'our previously articulated policy which
recognises that excessive volatility is counterproductive to growth.'
Following the Fed's intervention, the dollar gained ground against both the
yen and D-Mark but many traders remained sceptical that the official action
would make a lasting impression on currency markets.
An immediate cause of the dollar's weakness against the yen was fear that
the new Japanese government would be unable to agree effective measures to
open Japanese markets to imports from the US.
Until the Fed's action many analysts assumed that the Clinton administration
regarded yen appreciation as a useful means of exerting indirect pressure on
the Japanese political establishment. Mr Bentsen's statement, however,
confirms that Y100 is regarded in Washington as floor below which the dollar
preferably should not fall.
The dollar's weakness against the D-Mark and other leading currencies is
harder to understand. The news this week that US economic growth in the
first quarter was only 2.6 per cent at an annual rate, less than expected in
financial markets, might be interpreted as bad for the dollar. If US growth
is decelerating, the pressure on the Fed to raise interest rates to prevent
upward pressure on inflation is presumably reduced.
The trouble with this argument is that few analysts believe the GDP figures
will deter the Fed from tightening policy in coming weeks. Growth in the
first quarter was artificially depressed by an erratic fall in government
spending and severe winter weather; it was also a reaction to growth at an
unsustainable annual rate of 7 per cent in the fourth quarter. The average
rate of growth in the last two quarters combined was nearly 5 per cent at an
annual rate.
Reports on Friday of a sharp rebound in the housing market  - new home sales
rose 11 per cent between February and March  - and a solid increase in
personal incomes last month were a reminder that the economy is still moving
ahead vigorously.
When set against US economic fundamentals, the weakness of the dollar
remains puzzling. The US is growing much faster than other industrial
countries. The Fed has begun to tighten monetary policy after a five-year
phase of relaxation. Germany and Japan, by contrast, have yet to emerge
decisively from recession. And there still seems to be scope for monetary
relaxation in both countries.
However, several medium-term considerations weigh against the dollar. Mr
Bruce Kasman, an economist at J P Morgan, the New York Bank, points out that
the US trade and net foreign asset position is distinctly weak compared with
that of Japan and Germany. Unless the Fed acts more aggressively, US
monetary policy is likely to remain considerably looser than that in
competitor countries.
Politics is also playing a part. The Clinton administration appears to put
less weight on controlling inflation than most other governments. Officials
too often give the impression that they care little about the dollar's
external value: some appear to regard depreciation as helpful because it
improves the short-term outlook for US exporters.
In Japan any sustained yen appreciation would cast an unwelcome shadow over
hopes of an economic recovery, just as the recession appears to be touching
bottom. It would further hit the fragile earnings of Japan's export
dependent manufacturing industry, with consequences throughout the economy.
Poor economic indicators over the past week, including falls in car
production and retail sales for March and a rise in unemployment have
emphasised that any recovery is likely to be tentative. Mr Hirohisa Fujii,
finance minister, warned on Thursday that a strong currency could dampen
recovery hopes.
The fresh burst of currency speculation will increase the pressure on the
Bank of Japan to push down interest rates, which are high in real terms
because of Japan's low inflation. It will also test the central bank's
resolve to intervene to push the yen down against the US currency during the
Golden Week holiday period.
Bank of Japan officials say they are ready to act in the markets over the
next week, despite traders' belief that the central bank is unable to
intervene on national holidays.
Japan's political problems  - a reason for currency weakness in most
countries  - have perversely given the market a reason for pushing the yen
higher. Traders might fear that Mr Tsutomu Hata's minority cabinet will
prove too weak to produce a permanent income tax cut, needed to prime
domestic demand and pull in imports, to present to the US at the Group of
Seven summit in July. There is also general gloom over prospects for a
persuasive package of market opening measures, which made little progress
under the previous government.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940430

