FT942-16274

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (17): Investors are likely
to focus on quality - International Equities


   By SARA WEBB


Latin American companies have attracted substantial sums of money from
specialist emerging market investors during the 1990s, through an assortment
of government privatisations, initial public offerings (IPOs) and secondary
share sales.
Latin American demand for money - raised through such international equity
offerings - is expected to remain strong, but market analysts point to two
likely trends this year.
For a start, international investors may find that the relatively difficult
market conditions experienced in February and March continue, calling a
temporary halt to the stream of new issues as companies await more
favourable conditions. And second, as the various Latin American markets
continue to grow and develop, investors will have to be more discerning
about the quality of companies in which they invest.
The volume of new international equity issues rose sharply last year,
jumping to a total of Dollars 6.05bn in 1993 from Dollars 3.96bn the
previous year, according to figures compiled by Euromoney.
Last year's total figures were boosted by the launch of a very large share
offering from YPF, the Argentine oil and gas company, which provided the
highlight of the Latin American calendar.
The Argentine government sold a 45 per cent stake in YPF in June 1993,
raising a total of Dollars 3bn which included an international tranche of
some Dollars 2.3bn. The deal was heavily subscribed by foreign investors and
helped to lift the total amount raised from Argentine companies via
international share offerings to Dollars 2.72 bn. Mexican companies
completed a total of 25 issues raising Dollars 2.87 bn last year.
This year has started off reasonably strongly with international equity
offerings from Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Chile raising a total of
Dollars 1.23bn. But analysts point out that market conditions have been
extremely choppy. The US Federal Reserve's decision to raise US short-term
interest rates - by 25 basis points on February 4 and by a further quarter
point on March 22 - sparked heavy selling in many of the world financial
markets and left international investors nervous about future trends in the
US, Europe and the various emerging markets.
'Markets are nervous, and the emerging markets will probably feel the global
underwriting pinch even more (than the developed markets),' says Mr Dan
Smaller, emerging market product manager at Lehman Brothers in London. He
believes that as a result, the pace of new issuance from Latin America is
likely to slow down in the near term.
Added to this, the political situation in Mexico has not helped sentiment
either: in the space of the past three months, Mexico has suffered from a
peasant uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, the kidnapping of a
senior banker and the assassination of Mr Luis Donaldo Colosio, presidential
candidate of the governing party.
International investors tended to regard Mexico as the bastion of stability
in Latin America, so these recent developments have come as a severe shock.
Yet analysts still expect to see the country credit rating lifted later this
year from sub-investment to investment grade by the key rating agencies and
are optimistic that economic growth will pick up again in the second half of
the year.
'We still think the markets are fundamentally attractive,' says Mr Richard
Lamb, director of Morgan Grenfell Asset Management which manages pension and
insurance fund money.
There are still plenty of interesting deals waiting on the sidelines for a
suitable moment. Market specialists point out that investors can expect to
see further privatisations of utilities in Argentina, Brazil, Peru and
Venezuela, which are expected to provide 'decent-sized' international
offerings. On the corporate side, there may be more IPOs and secondary
placements, although these may be somewhat smaller in size, according to
Lehman Brother's Mr Smaller.
Mrs Ondine de Villalobos, Latin American equities analyst at Paribas Capital
Markets, expects to see a lot of paper coming out of Argentina. 'By the end
of 1992 - excluding YPF - the government had more or less completed its
privatisation programme. Now, it is expected to sell its remaining minority
stakes - of around 30 per cent - in companies in the gas transportation, gas
distribution and electricity distribution sectors.'
Mexican companies are also expected to pursue more international equity
offerings, either as new companies seek listings or as existing listed
companies return to tap the market again for more money.
The other main development that market specialists expect to see is a 'focus
on quality'. There are plenty of Latin American specialists who claim that
international investors fail to apply the same discerning principles of
investment to the emerging markets that they use for other more developed
markets such as the US or UK.
The more cautious among them stick to the blue chips - such as Telmex, the
Mexican telecom company - because these stocks are very liquid. Others tend
to 'buy a particular market' without really discriminating much between the
individual companies, claims one Latin American specialist.
'This is the year of fundamental valuations and analysis, and investors will
have to be much more selective,' says Mr Smaller.
Part of the problem is the standard of information available. Some investors
complain about the quality of information they receive. Those companies
which have New York Stock Exchange listings must comply with the SEC
regulations in providing financial information. 'The only companies which
give a lot of information are those with ADRs which means that they are
required to (provide the information),' says Mrs de Villalobos.
These tend to be the big blue chips, but on the whole, 'companies need to
give out a lot more information, as this information is not readily
available in annual reports,' says one analyst.
Investors point out that there is plenty of scope for an improvement in the
independent research provided by banks and brokers.
'Banks should provide good research on the company as well as taking a
sectoral approach in Latin America and globally,' says one Latin American
specialist. 'The quality of third party research is generally pretty low,'
says Mr Lamb, but he points out that the US firms are generally taking steps
to beef up their Latin American research departments by hiring staff 'so an
improvement is under way'.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

940411

