FT944-14590

FT  22 OCT 94 / Fayed gave Tories Pounds 250,000 after Harrods takeover


   By ROBERT PESTON and DAVID OWEN


Mr Mohamed Fayed, the Egyptian financier whose allegations about payments to
MPs have thrown the government into disarray, said last night that he had
made personal contributions totalling Pounds 250,000 to the Conservative
party in the mid-1980s.
The contributions were made after he and his two brothers acquired House of
Fraser, which owned Harrods department store in London's Knightsbridge, in
1985.
Following the takeover, the government faced lobbying from the Fayeds'
arch-rival, Mr Tiny Rowland, chief executive of the international group,
Lonrho, that it to should take action against them for alleged misconduct
during the Pounds 615m House of Fraser takeover.
According to Mr Michael Cole, a Harrods director who was speaking for Mr
Fayed, the funds were 'handed personally to Lord McAlpine', who was at the
time the honorary treasurer of the party.
The Conservative party said last night that it had a rule of never
commenting about personal donations, even when the donor himself discloses
payments. Lord McAlpine was unavailable for comment. However, Mr David
Blunkett, the former Labour party chairman, said the disclosure of these
payments was damaging to 'the democratic process'.
There was also mounting pressure last night for the resignation of Mr Neil
Hamilton, the corporate affairs minister named by Mr Fayed earlier this week
as one of two government ministers who had received payments for asking
parliamentary questions.
Though Mr Hamilton has denied the allegations, Mr Alex Carlile, Liberal
Democrat MP for Montgomery, called for an inquiry into Mr Hamilton's stay at
the Ritz, the Paris hotel owned by the Fayeds. He made his request in a
letter to Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith, chairman of the Commons committee on
members' interests.
Mr Hamilton is alleged to have had an all-expenses paid stay at the Ritz. Mr
Carlile wants the committee to decide whether the trip should have been
disclosed in the register of members' interests.
Mr Hamilton's decision to stay in his post has been supported by Downing
Street, following a three-week investigation by Sir Robin Butler, the
cabinet secretary.
Mr Fayed's payments to the Conservative party have never been made public
because personal payments to political parties, unlike corporate ones, do
not have to be disclosed.
Lonrho, which also wanted to buy House of Fraser, alleged that the Fayeds
had not used their own money for the takeover.
Department of Trade and Industry inspectors were appointed in 1987. Their
report, not published till March 1990, concluded that the Fayeds had
'misrepresented . . . their wealth . . . and resources'. In spite of these
criticisms, no action was taken by the DTI to disqualify them as directors
of UK companies.
Nonetheless, Mr Fayed felt betrayed by the British establishment as a result
of the DTI criticisms, which he regarded as unfounded.
An attempt to clear his name through a review of the inspectors' procedures
through the European Court of Human Rights failed last month.
In 1989, Mr Dale Campbell-Savours, Labour MP for Workington, alleged in a
Commons motion that Mr Michael Howard, now home secretary, failed in his
duty to disclose a family connection with Mr Harry Landy, director of a
Lonrho subsidiary, at the time that Mr Howard was a DTI minister with
responsibilities which would have given him an interest in the House of
Fraser affair.
Mr Howard held this position from 1985 to 1987.
Doyen of the lobbyists, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

941022

