FT941-5536

FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Latins make the running


   By BETHAN HUTTON


Latin America is the place for private investors to put their money this
month, if the UK investment trust industry is to be believed: the public
offers for three new Latin American funds open later this month (see details
at end of story).
UK fund managers are only following global investment fashions. The big
money managers who poured funds into Hong Kong and the rest of south-east
Asia last year are now finding those markets too expensive. Their new target
is Latin America.
Arnab Banerji, chief investment officer of Foreign & Colonial Emerging
Markets, is one such manager. He has been transferring money in his general
portfolio from south-east Asia to Latin America for the past four months. F
& C also has a specialist Latin American trust.
The basic argument for investing in Latin America is that most economies in
the region are coming under control, and implementing sensible policies.
Political situations are stabilising and the North American Free Trade
Agreement brings the prospect of improved trade links.
Projected economic growth rates are not as high as south-east Asia - perhaps
5 per cent a year on average, compared with 6 or 7 per cent - but they are
far higher than most of the developed world. The stock markets of the region
have even greater potential as many companies remain under-valued by world
standards.
Many people may still think of Latin America as the basket case of the past
decade or two and are reluctant to entrust their money to the region. But
Banerji says: 'In 1930, Argentina had the fourth highest per capita income
in the world. The country grew at rates which made the Germans envious.' It
has done it once so it can do it again.
Mark Mobius, the highly-regarded strategist behind the Templeton Emerging
Markets trust, is also involved in Templeton's new Latin America trust. His
approach is to look for value.
Global weight of money tends to eliminate value from the markets it hits,
but Mobius remains happy to launch the new fund now.
He believes the flow of money will entice more companies into seeking a
listing, and governments will accelerate their privatisation programmes. But
Mobius is unlikely to be in there fighting for a share of the initial
offers.
'We want to buy when others are despondently selling,' he says. He buys
stocks cheaply on their way down, then sits on them as they rise again.
Templeton's strategy is for the long term, so Mobius is not afraid to stay
in cash until the moment is right to buy.
One question investors may want to ask is: why pick a specialist Latin
American trust rather than a general emerging markets trust?
The general rule is that the more diversified a fund, the less risky it
should be: the performance of a fund with investments in 20 countries will
be hit less hard if one market crashes than a fund which concentrates on
this market alone. So, a regional fund carries a heavier risk than a global
fund which can invest in Latin America when the time looks right but can
shift money around the world if needs be.
People more averse to risk may find a small investment in a general emerging
markets fund is exciting enough for their tastes. But if all your risky
money is in the Far East, you might want to shift a bit to the other side of
the Pacific. And, for gambling types with a little money to spare, now could
be the time to catch the Latin American wave.
Edinburgh Fund Managers: Inca trust. Offer opens March 11, closes March 25.
Minimum investment Pounds 1,000. One warrant for every five shares.
Morgan Grenfell: Latin American Companies trust. Offer opens March 9, closes
March 23. Minimum application Pounds 2,000. One warrant attached to five
shares.
Templeton: Latin America investment trust. Offer dates not fixed but likely
to open March 31, close April 22. Full details are not yet available. An
offer of new shares in the general Templeton Emerging Markets trust also is
imminent.

The Financial Times


London Page V

940305

