FT942-15717

FT  14 APR 94 / IT breakdowns cost Pounds 1.2bn a year


   By ANDREW ADONIS


Four in five organisations in the UK have suffered a breakdown in their
information technology systems during the past two years, according to a
government-sponsored survey published yesterday.
The survey of 850 organisations estimates that the annual cost of such
incidents exceeds Pounds 1.2bn, a 12 percentage point increase on the last
survey two years ago.
Fire is the threat most feared by organisations, but viruses, power failure
and computer failure are the most common problems.
The estimated average immediate cost of an incident was Pounds 9,000. A
quarter of incidents led to serious losses.
Mr Patrick McLoughlin, technology minister, said: 'Information technology
security is becoming a serious issue for almost all organisations and every
organisation using computers is at risk.
'Effective management of security threats can help make organisations more
reliable.'
The report, co-sponsored by the IT company ICL and the National Computing
Centre, an information systems consultancy, highlights contingency planning,
staff training and risk assessment as strategies to reduce the risk of
breakdown and breaches of security.
Virus attacks and theft were found to have risen sharply since the last
survey in 1992, with twice as many organisations reporting such incidents.
Half of all breaches were found to be covered by a contingency plan and
almost half of respondents said that contingency planning - including
back-up systems - had proved highly effective in dealing with incidents.
But fewer than half of respondents had tested their plans regularly.
'In almost all cases where a contingency plan existed, it was felt to have
been at least moderately effective in minimising the effects of the breach
and facilitating recovery,' the report concludes.
The most costly incident was a Pounds 1.2m fraud which was reported by an
insurance company.
The worst cases of flood, power failure and computer failure cost Pounds
200,000 or more.
The most expensive virus outbreak, which infected three large local area
networks and more than 200 personal computers, led to a bill of Pounds
100,000 in immediate costs.
However, organisations were far more likely to make such plans for cases of
computer equipment failure, viruses, sabotage or power failure than for
theft, hacking, flooding, or fraud.
The 1990 Computer Misuse Act has had a significant impact in encouraging
companies to tighten their security measures.
One third of companies claimed to have reviewed their disciplinary measures
in light of the legislation, up from 23 per cent in 1992, with a further 22
per cent indicating their intention to do so.
Larger organisations have proved more willing to carry out such reviews than
smaller organisations. More than half of those employing 1,000 staff or more
had done so.
Organisations using specialised IT security staff or risk analysis were in a
minority.
Barely one-in-seven was found to have a specialist security function, and
only 43 per cent had used formal risk analysis.
A code of practice on information security management was published by the
Department of Trade and Industry last year after consultation with leading
UK companies.
Procedures for systematic checking for viruses, and immediate back-up
facilities for computers and power in the event of breakdowns, are the most
important measures recommended.
Employee training and high corporate standards are also highlighted as
important precautions.
More than half of the organisations which were surveyed gave written
warnings to staff that unauthorised access to computer systems might result
in dismissal.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940414

