FT942-16149

FT  12 APR 94 / Business and the Law: Too shallow a pool - City solicitors
find it hard to qualify as judges


   By ROBERT RICE


Business has become accustomed to the expense of commercial litigation in
the English High Court. Now a survey of City lawyers, in Legal Business
magazine, suggests the overall standard of High Court judges is so poor that
businesses are no longer getting value for their money.
This is not only of concern to leading City law firms and their clients  -
it also threatens to damage London's reputation as a centre for
international litigation. The Commercial Court, which deals with
international trading and commercial disputes, contributes hundreds of
millions of pounds each year to UK invisible earnings.
The current system of drawing High Court judges from the ranks of leading
QCs is held to blame. There are not enough senior barristers of the right
quality prepared to serve on the bench. Many are unwilling to give up
lucrative careers at the commercial Bar for a High Court judge's salary of
Pounds 95,051 a year and the promise of a pension. According to the survey,
eight of the 35 QCs offered High Court judgeships last year said no.
The solution advocated by many lawyers is to widen the pool from which High
Court judges are chosen to include solicitors, and in particular to make use
of the specialist knowledge and expertise of City solicitors in handling
complex commercial litigation.
A report by the City of London Solicitors' Company, the City lawyers'
representative body, published this week endorses that view. It calls for
fundamental changes to the present judicial appointments system to make it
easier for City solicitors to be appointed High Court judges.
What do City solicitors have to offer? Approximately 5,000 practise in the
City - the home of the 11 largest law firms in the UK, which are instructed
by the biggest companies in the country.
The report says the City has a pool of talent with specialised knowledge of
company and commercial law, banking, commercial property and commercial
litigation. City solicitors also have more commercial awareness, thanks to
their contact with business clients, and greater experience in the
management of litigation.
Specialised courts, such as the Commercial Court and the Official Referee's
court, have already cut delays and improved efficiency by adopting a
specialist emphasis, says the report. The speed of resolving a dispute is
quicker with a judge on the bench who is a specialist in the issues being
litigated.
As yet, however, there are no City solicitors sitting as High Court judges.
At the moment, the route for any solicitor to the High Court bench is long
and arduous.
The only realistic path begins with appointment as an assistant recorder for
at least three years. This is a part-time position: assistant recorders sit
for between 20 and 50 days a year. To qualify for appointment, applicants
must have had advocacy rights in the Crown or county courts for at least 10
years. The application process is lengthy and can take three years.
Solicitors then have to sit as recorders for not less than two years, and
probably at least three. This is also a part-time appointment, requiring
them to sit for between 20 and 50 days a year.
After a minimum of two years, they become eligible for the Circuit Bench.
After two years as a Circuit Judge (or 10 years' High Court advocacy rights)
they become eligible for the High Court bench.
Even the fastest moving candidates are unlikely to reach the High Court
bench in less than eight or nine years from application. Solicitors aiming
for the High Court therefore need to apply in their early 40s if they are to
achieve a full-time judicial appointment by the age of 50, and qualify for a
full pension under the new pension arrangements for the judiciary.
The report by the City of London Solicitors' Company says it is hard for any
solicitor to meet the requirements of this system, but it is almost
impossible for City solicitors. Most successful City solicitors expect to
become full partners between 34 and 38. Their early 40s, therefore, are the
time when their careers and their earning potential are likely to be at
their peak.
Most of them have other commitments in the running of their firms at that
stage. Many find it hard enough to squeeze in a holiday, without committing
between 20 and 50 days a year to sitting as an assistant recorder or
recorder.
The current system also ignores partnership pressures. However relaxed a
partnership may be, the cost to any firm of one partner embarking on the
path to full-time judicial appointment in the early 40s is likely to be
prohibitive.
The Solicitors' Company believes several changes are needed:
The system needs to be more flexible, so that solicitors in their early 50s
who are winding down their City practices can offer some of their experience
to the bench at the point in their careers when they are best able to do so.
To achieve this, the system has to allow City solicitors to be appointed
directly to full-time judicial posts. In theory, the report says, there is
no reason why suitably qualified solicitors should not be appointed directly
to the High Court. There is a need for more specialised courts. At present,
judges are not assigned to the courts to which they are best suited, and
cases are not allocated to the judges best suited to hear them. City
solicitors with specialist knowledge should be allocated to courts that deal
with disputes in areas in which they have expertise.
The present system for vetting candidates for the High Court bench, which
places undue reliance on the views of the serving judiciary and senior
members of the Bar, should be abolished and replaced with a Judicial
Appointments Commission, made up of lawyers and lay people.
Although the Law Society has agreed to help the Lord Chancellor's Department
in assessing solicitor candidates for judicial office, the report says it
knows far too little about individual solicitors and their practices for its
opinion to be of much value. An independent vetting procedure is therefore
needed.
The solicitors' company wants judges to be able to return to private
practice after serving on the bench. Abandoning practice has become a
condition of appointment to the bench for no apparent good reason, it says.
Both sides of the profession could benefit if judges returned to practice or
took up academic positions or posts in commerce and industry. This happens
in other common law jurisdictions, such as Canada and Scotland, and could
encourage those reluctant to give up lucrative practices to offer their
services, albeit for a limited time.
The report concludes that, if the Lord Chancellor's Department agrees that
City solicitors have a potentially valuable role to play in the judiciary,
it should make the appropriate changes to the system. It cannot continue to
expect City solicitors to fit in with a system designed primarily to
accommodate members of the Bar.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

940412

