FT944-2688

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (11): Barely making a go
of it - Profile, Navistar


   By LAURIE MORSE


While most North American heavy truck manufacturers are hauling away big
profits this year, enjoying the biggest production surge in the industry's
history, Chicago-based Navistar is barely making a go of it, with its truck
and engine-making operations still mired under burdensome operating costs.
Once carrying the world-class nameplate of International Harvester, the
company changed its name to Navistar when the Harvester logo and its
agricultural equipment operations were sold to the JI Case division of
Tenneco in 1985 as part of a debt-reducing restructuring.
While still North America's top producer of medium trucks, and the number
two producer of heavy trucks and diesel engines, Navistar, one of the few
independent truck makers left in America, has teetered so long on the brink
of solvency that securities analysts still rate the company as a highly
speculative investment.
With its factories operating at nearly 110 per cent of capacity this year,
the company had net income of Dollars 82m on sales of Dollars 5.3bn. This
puny return on sales is an improvement over 1993's loss of Dollars 501m.
However, it pales next to industry competitors such as Freightliner, which
will earn twice the amount that Navistar will earn this year on a fraction
of the sales.
The sale of the International Harvester agricultural machinery division a
decade ago turned into an expensive long-term disaster for Navistar, which
retained pension and healthcare obligations for those who retired from the
spun-off unit.
At one point Navistar was supporting three retired persons for each one of
its active workers.
James Cotting, Navistar's chief executive, has spent his 15-year tenure at
the company keeping bankruptcy at bay, gradually reducing Dollars 4bn in
debt and last year landing a union agreement that allows the company to swap
some of its pension obligations for equity.
The deal, which was credited with salvaging the company's future, tripled
the number of Navistar shares outstanding, a dilution that dulled any
budding enthusiasm for the company on Wall Street.
With business conditions strong, and the immediate crisis past, Mr Cotting
announced in October that he would be handing the baton over to John Horne,
currently Navistar's president, in March. A life-long Navistar employee, Mr
Horne is an engineer by training and is steeped in Navistar's operating
side, in contrast to Mr Cotting's financial focus and background.
Mr Horne will be charged with managing a high-cost producer in an industry
facing an imminent downturn, says John Stark, the editor of the
Chicago-based Off-Highway Ledger and a veteran observer of the US truck
industry. 'The question of the moment is how he is going to cope with the
drop in demand for Navistar's products that will begin next year.'
The general outlook is for US heavy truck demand to drop off 10 per cent in
1995 from this year's peak, and experience an even bigger decline in 1996.
'He has about one year to plan for the cyclical downturn,' Mr Stark says.
He suggests Mr Horne will search for a 'white knight' to save the company
from another crisis, although, he says, 'they still have such a heavy debt
load that few people will be interested. He may be forced to go it alone.'
Mr Horne declined to talk about his plans for the company.
Although most cyclical businesses bank profits in a highly profitable year
to cushion the lean times, Navistar, unlike its competitors, is not making
extraordinary profits this year, and so has less to take to the bank.
This will hurt doubly next year, as Ford introduces its new line of heavy
trucks, and other competitors launch new products to challenge Navistar's
medium truck line.
Many of Navistar's troubles stem from having to service debt far above
industry averages.
In an effort to cut costs, the company for the past three years has focused
on negotiating lower-cost single-supplier agreements for its heavy truck
components.
In a flat or declining market, being tied to one supplier can be economical.
However, in highly profitable times, having a single supplier for critical
components can lead to shortages and production bottlenecks, both problems
suffered by Navistar this year.
The single-supplier problem is less noticeable at Navistar's diesel engine
production operations, where Mr Horne has moulded the most successful of the
company's divisions.
Lack of capital has also blocked the company's obvious need to diversify to
temper the cyclical effects of its business, and has forced the company to
defer much-needed manufacturing improvements.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

941216

