FT942-16285

FT  11 APR 94 / Survey of Latin American Finance (8): Investment capital is
scarce - Ecuador


   By RAYMOND COLITT


The government's initiatives to privatise state-owned enterprises, attract
foreign investment and invigorate a fledgling capital market has produced
only mediocre results. Foreign investment has still not increased as
expected, while the securities markets are experiencing considerable
volatile growth.
An economic stabilisation programme and policy reform such as the
liberalisation of investment regulations have improved the general
investment climate in the country. Since President Sixto Duran Ballen took
office 18 months ago, tight fiscal policies brought inflation down from
nearly 60 to 31 per cent, while international reserves have reached the
highest in the country's history.
The January 29 petrol rise closed a budget gap caused by dwindling oil
prices, returning confidence in the government's economic programme.
Interest rates fell slightly and the national currency, the sucre,
stabilised against the dollar.
The government's fiscal discipline is beginning to reap benefits. Besides
reducing inflationary pressure, the government has reached a general
agreement with the IMF over its letter of intent. Its approval would reopen
the possibility of new bilateral government loans, which have largely been
frozen due to Ecuador's moratorium on serving about half of its USDollars
12.7bn foreign debt - the highest per capita debt in Latin America.
'Until the country's external debt is renegotiated, investment capital will
be rather scarce,' said Giovanni Di Mella, general manager of Banco
Consolidado. A USDollars 200m multisector line of credit, granted through
international lending agencies and administered through the National Finance
Corporation, is the principal source of long-term credit open to the private
sector.
Legislation introduced in May 1993 was aimed at stimulating and regulating
the country's dormant securities market. Though the Quito and Guayaquil
stock exchanges have experienced substantial growth in 1993, Ecuador has not
become the new emerging market some had expected.
For one, Ecuadorean firms have not exactly flocked to raise capital stocks
in the market. Ecuadorean companies, often family-owned and closed to public
trading, are reluctant to provide the financial information now required by
law to register in the securities market. Furthermore, both stock exchanges
are only now acquiring basic services such as a clearing house, electronic
transfer, and an internationally-recognised custodian bank.
Yet, above all, international investors have been disillusioned by the slow
and irregular privatisation process, after its grand announcement by the
government, said Arturo Quiroz Riumallo, executive director of the Quito
Securities Market. Poor management in the sale of state shares by the
government has led numerous investors to abandon Ecuador's securities
market, he says.
The total volume of securities traded in Quito and Guayaquil in 1993
equalled USDollars 242m. Until 2000 both buyer and seller of the first issue
of stocks receive a tax credit worth 50 per cent of the nominal value. Still
to go on the block are public shares in a hotel, a shipping company and
cement companies. The total divestiture may amount to USDollars 170m by next
year.
Whether there are bigger fish to be fried in Ecuador will depend on
Congressional approval of specific legislation required to privatise the
telecommunications, electricity and petroleum sectors. With the proper
legislation in place, the first so-called strategic sector company to go on
sale would be the telephone company Emetel, worth about USDollars 1.6bn.
Yet, given the president's lack of popular and Congressional support, the
odds are against a prompt approval.
Meanwhile, a key reform of the financial sector is in the making. The law on
financial institutions to deregulate the financial sector, increase
competition among banks and allow for increased foreign capital inflow,
including mergers with local institutions, will be sent to Congress shortly.
At the same time regulations over banks' offshore operations will be
tightened.
 -----------------------------------------------
MARKET CAPITALISATION (USDOLLARS M)
 -----------------------------------------------
Market                      Nov 1993
 -----------------------------------------------
Argentina                   31,815.8
Brazil*                     95,490.5
Chile                       39,319.2
Colombia                     7,670.7
Mexico                     168,685.2
Peru                         4,578.8
Venezuela                    6,179.5
 -----------------------------------------------
Source: World Bank
 -----------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page III

940411

