FT944-2865

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (11): Quiet revolution under way -
Ambitious privatisation programme in Morocco


   By FRANCIS GHILES


For many international banks and investment funds, the privatisation of the
Societe National d'Investissements (SNI) marked a watershed in Morocco's
ambitious privatisation programme.
The selling of 66.64 per cent of the state's share in the capital of this
holding company, whose interests range from cement to drinks and the
financial sector, netted Dh2.03bn (Pounds 145m). This represents twice the
amount brought in July 1993, when the state sold a 51 per cent stake in the
CIOR cement company to a French subsidiary of the Swiss Holderbank group.
The sale of SNI shares was split three ways: 35 per cent of SNI shares were
sold to Moroccan institutional investors, who cannot sell them for five
years; and 16 per cent to Moroccan and foreign institutional investors. The
remaining 15.64 per cent were floated on the Casablanca stock exchange where
they were over-subscribed eight times.
Critics were many, however. The authorities decided to float 15.64 per cent
of the shares on the Casablanca stock exchange during the first week in
November at Dh300 a share, to encourage institutions to bid a higher price.
SNI shares had been suspended at Dh425 a few days earlier.
Trading resumed before the sale to institutional investors had been
completed. The minimum sale price per share for institutions set by the
commission which overseas privatisation operations was Dh325. Successfull
bidders effectively bought the shares at Dh425.
Furthermore, bankers in London and Casablanca described the back-room
operations of the Banque Populaire, which was the agent, as a 'shambles.'
However, the broad success of the sale means that that the country's
privatisation drive is more or less on track but the quick gains realised by
some private investors smacked of speculation - not the kind of impression
the authorities wish to give if this selling of 'the family silver' is to
find wide acceptance in Morocco.
Privatisation this year has so far brought in USDollars 230m, a figure which
could well increase if the state goes ahead with its proclaimed intention of
selling its 50 per cent stake in Morocco's second largest commercial bank,
Banque Marocaine du Commerce Exterieur. That sale is expected to generate no
less than Pounds 76.5m. This operation is not expected to be completed
before the end of the year: when completed, it will push up the proceeds of
privatisation to twice the Pounds 193m level reached in 1993.
The privatisation programme launched in 1992 is a little late on initial
targets which had suggested that 112 companies worth an estimated Pounds
1.3bn would be privatised by the end of next year. There is no mistaking,
however, the quiet revolution which the sales of shares from state companies
is bringing into a hitherto very cosseted and closed world of banking and
share transactions.
Direct foreign investment in Morocco has risen steadily since 1987 to Pounds
349m last year and is expected to top Pounds 616m this year. Trading on the
Casablanca exchange has already more than doubled so far this year and is
expected to top the Pounds 640m mark by year-end.
The Overall Share Index shows a 28 per cent increase so far this year,
equivalent to last year's rise.
Nonetheless, the stock exchange does boast some very illiquid shares, making
the Moroccan market more attractive for wealthy investors rather than
individuals.
There are three ways to invest in Morocco - through a country fund, which
often includes Morocco and Tunisia, through an Africa or Middle East fund
with weighting in Morocco or through the purchase of individual shares.
Privatisation has encouraged the emergence of investment funds, the first
two of which, Sud-Mediterranee et Maroc Privatisation are worth Pounds 6m
each, were launched early last year by Societe Marseillaise de Credit and
are managed by its Generale de Placement subsidiary, GP Bank.
Three of the largest funds include the Pounds 39m Morocco Fund, which is
jointly owned by ONA, the kingdom's largest private company, and Salomon
Brothers; the Pounds 15m Interfina fund, jointly owned by by three Moroccan
banks, the International Finance Corporation and Spain's Banco Exterior,
Credit Lyonnais Investissement; and BMCE and a fund jointly set up by
Framlington, which is a subsidiary of Credit Commercial de France and Morgan
Stanley Africa Investment Fund.
ONA has further contributed to the modernisation of Morocco's financial
system by a capital increase last year which took the form of the
largest-ever share issue in Morocco, worth Dollars 120m. (Wafa bank earlier
that year raised its capital with the first ever public share issue in
Morocco).
The company also allowed foreign investors to buy into its capital. A third
of its capital is now owned by such well-known names as Morgan Stanley,
Lehman Brothers, Paribas, BSN Danone and Assurances Generales de France. Mr
George Soros bought a 2 per cent stake last April for Dollars 40m.
Last year, ONA was the first Moroccan borrower to raise a euroloan since the
kingdom's debt was rescheduled in 1983. It raised Dollars 30m through
Citibank. A further operation of this kind in the near future is not ruled
out.
Faster progress in liberalising the management of Morocco's financial sector
is being handicapped, however, by three factors. The first is the absence of
money and foreign exchange markets which is affecting both foreign investors
and Moroccan businessmen and bankers.
The second factor is the impossibility of foreign exchange hedging. The
World Bank and the IMF have been pressing the Moroccan government on both
counts for a least two years, but the Banque al Maghrib, the central bank,
appears to be dragging its feet while many Moroccan banks appear comfortably
set in their old-fashioned ways and fearful of change.
For decades, their unwritten contract with the central bank has involved
financing large government deficits in exchange for comfortable margins on
their other business. With an estimated Dollars 500m-Dollars 600m deficit in
government financing written into next year's budget, the banks have plenty
of reasons to continue in their old ways.
More recently, a further element of uncertainty has been introduced. King
Hassan suggested, when he opened parliament last October, that the time
might be ripe for the government of technocrats - headed by the highly
respected minister of foreign affairs, Mr Abdellatif Fillali - which has
been running the country's affairs for 18 months, to give way to a more
political cabinet. Such a government would be based on the alliance of the
old nationalist Istiqlal party and the socialist Union Socialiste des Forces
Populaires.
Doubts already being expressed about the ability, let alone the willingness
of such a government, which public opinion has already nicknamed 'Jurassic
Parc,' to pursue the path of economic reform. Neither party has made public
an economic platform which addresses the problems of modern Morocco and
their leaders more often than not appear caught in an economic time warp.
Many Moroccans believe that politicians alone can do the 'hard sell' which
is essential if the progress made in modernising the economic and financial
sectors are to be consolidated. They also take comfort from King Hassan's
public declarations that there is no going back on the reforms launched a
decade ago.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Morocco's privatisation programme
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Companies already sold (showing sector of operation in brackets) and
the price in millions of Dirhams:
 -Chelco (clothing), Dh10.20m; Cior (cement), Dh943.2m; CTM (transport),
Dh254.65m; CMH (petroleum dist.), Dh100.1m; Dragon Gaz (petroleum
dist.), Dh 0.85m; Mobil Maroc (petroleum dist.), Dh110m; Petrom
(petroleum dist.), Dh145.00m; Shell (petroleum dist.), Dh450m; Snep
(petrochemicals), Dh364.3m; Soders (yeast products), Dh28.6m;
Sofac-credit (consumer loans), Dh129.3m; Total Maroc (petroleum dist.),
Dh300m; seven hotels, Dh204.7m; General Tire (tyre manufacturing),
Dh46m; Societe National d'Investissements, SNI (holding company), Dh
2,030m.
 -Companies currently being sold include: Sonasid (steel), Dh918m; three
sugar plants, Dh306m; six hotels Dh76m; Fertima (fertilisers), Dh204m.
 -BMCE (bank) is expected to be privatised before the end of this year.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Upline Securities
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 45

941215

