FT941-16809

FT  07 JAN 94 / International Company News: Rothmans' Asian plans go up in
smoke - The UK tobacco group's expansion strategy has been scuppered


   By KIERAN COOKE


A few cigarettes are being anxiously smoked in the boardroom of Rothmans
these days.
Last weekend a group of shareholders in Malaysia blocked ambitious plans by
the British tobacco group for an assault on the Chinese and Japanese
cigarette markets.
The move, which is being closely watched by companies considering a regional
structure for their Asian operations, was unexpected.
'It was like a bolt out of the blue,' says Mr Robert Fletcher, director of
public affairs at Rothmans Asia headquarters in Hong Kong. 'Now we have to
go back to the drawing board and consider what other options are open to
us.'
From a corporate point of view, the strategy behind a grand Asia plan
unveiled last February seemed clear enough.
Rothmans, like other tobacco companies, was facing stagnant or declining
sales in most western markets.
Increased access to the market in China, where some 1,700bn cigarettes - or
about a third of total global consumption - are puffed each year, is
considered vital to corporate profitability.
Cigarette consumption in China is going up by about 4 per cent each year,
and increasing affluence is lifting demand for foreign brands. Nevertheless,
sales by overseas companies run at only about 10bn cigarettes per year.
Japan and South Korea are other big markets where Rothmans wants to increase
sales.
The penetration of such markets demands a high level of marketing and
distribution expenditure.
The Rothmans plan called for the merger of Rothmans' locally-quoted units in
Malaysia and Singapore with the conglomerate's north-east Asia operations.
The new company, to be quoted in Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore,
would be 50 per cent-owned by Rothmans International, with the rest split
between shareholders in Malaysia and Singapore.
The merged company would have the necessary financial muscle and marketing
expertise to make an all-out assault on the China and Japan markets.
Manufacturing capacity at factories in Malaysia and Singapore would
complement operations at a joint venture concern recently set up in China.
Everyone, said Rothmans, would benefit in the long term.
Rothmans Singapore gave its full backing to the merger plan, but Rothmans
(Malaysia) was the key to the whole enterprise.
While Rothmans operations in north-east Asia continue to lose money, mainly
because of high marketing expenditures, the Malaysian operation is the jewel
in the Rothmans Asia crown.
Pre-tax profits in the year to March 31 1993 at Rothmans (Malaysia) were
MDollars 347.7m (USDollars 139m), and pre-tax profits for the six months to
September 1993 MDollars 191m. The Malaysian company is also said to be
sitting on cash reserves of more than MDollars 700m.
Although Rothmans International has a 50 per cent stake in Rothmans
(Malaysia), it refrained from exercising voting rights on the merger plan.
More than 90 per cent of the remaining stock in the Malaysian company is
controlled by Permodalan Nasional (PNB), a government investment company,
and Lebaga Tabung Angkatan Tentera, the armed forces pension fund. Both
voted against the merger, saying the plan would have shifted investment out
of Malaysia.
'We decided that the best thing to do was to reject the move, and it's now
up to Rothmans to come up with a deal that will benefit us,' said Mr Abdul
Khalid Ibrahim, chief executive of PNB.
As part of a strategy to give the majority Malay community a greater share
of national wealth, the Malaysian government insists that at least 30 per
cent of shares in listed companies be held by Malays. The merger was also
rejected because it would have diluted Malaysian control over local
operations.
Although Rothmans admits its original plan is dead, it says it still wants
to proceed with some sort of merger. One possible option is a merger
including the Singapore company but excluding the Malaysian operation.
Everything, however, is still very much up in the air.
Opinion in Malaysia is sharply divided about recent events. While some feel
that Rothmans (Malaysia) has struck a blow for local interests against a
foreign multinational, others are not so happy.
Shareholders in Rothmans (Malaysia) have watched the value of their holdings
dive: one day earlier this week Rothmans (Malaysia) shares lost nearly
Dollars 5 on the Kuala Lumpur exchange.
While Rothmans in Singapore has the licence to sell its cigarettes in
Indo-China and elsewhere in Asia (it has recently set up a joint venture in
Burma), Rothmans (Malaysia) is limited to the home market.
Analysts say Rothmans (Malaysia) growth is uncertain in what is a mature
domestic market. Government restrictions on tobacco advertising and
campaigns against smoking could further affect profits.
'Short-term nationalist interests have won out over longer-term regional
objectives,' said one industry analyst. 'In the long term, China is the
market to be in.
'Now Rothmans (Malaysia) has more or less closed itself off from any
regional expansion. In the process it has also brought into question the
future of Rothmans operations in east Asia.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940107

