FT943-753

FT  28 SEP 94 / Fujinami cleared of Recruit bribe charges


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Mr Takao Fujinami, a former chief cabinet secretary and the most prominent
figure to be charged in Japan's Recruit shares-for-favours scandal, was
yesterday cleared of bribery charges.
The Tokyo District Court declared him not guilty of accepting Y20m (Pounds
129,000) and 10,000 shares during the mid-1980s from Recruit Cosmos, a
property developer, in return for political favours.
The affair, in which politicians received shares in Recruit before it was
listed on the stock exchange and the price rose, damaged public trust in the
political establishment.
It became a popular morality tale of the rapid economic growth and rise in
asset prices of the late 1980s.
Mr Fujinami, 61, a close aide to the former Liberal Democratic party prime
minister Mr Yasuhiro Nakasone, was the first politician to be charged over
the Recruit scandal, in 1989.
The court accepted Mr Fujinami's claim that he had received legitimate
political donations, not bribes, from Recruit.
The public prosecutor, who had argued for a 3 1/2 -year prison term and a
fine of Y42.7m, has said he will appeal against the court's verdict.
Once tipped as a potential prime minister, Mr Fujinami was seen as the
scapegoat chosen to take the blame on behalf of the LDP, his former party.
Mr Fujinami's political career was severely damaged, but this will perhaps
prove to have been only a temporary setback, if his acquittal by the court
sticks.
The scandal led to the resignation of an LDP prime minister, Mr Noboru
Takeshita, in 1989, tarnished Mr Nakasone's reputation, and contributed to
the LDP's defeat in last year's general election.
It also fuelled popular demand for political reforms, which are due to
complete their final legislative stage in the parliamentary session starting
at the end of this week.
Senior LDP officials, including Mr Nakasone, said they looked forward to
welcoming Mr Fujinami back to the party. Opposition figures condemned the
acquittal.
Mr Fujinami, who left the LDP to stand as an independent after his
indictment, paid the price for his links with Recruit in last year's
election, when he lost his seat to a strong LDP candidate.
He had maintained that re-election would be proof of voters' trust in his
innocence, a claim vindicated more than a year too late by yesterday's court
decision.
There is one other politician yet to be sentenced among the other 11
defendants in the Recruit scandal. He is Mr Katsuya Ikeda, a former lower
house member of Komeito, the Clean Government party and largest opposition
group. He faces sentencing on December 21. Four others have already received
suspended prison terms.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940928

