FT944-2725

FT  16 DEC 94 / Government Bonds: Short-dated US Treasuries outperform the
long end


   By LISA BRANSTEN and MARTIN BRICE


   NEW YORK, LONDON


The recent trend of yield curve flattening was broken for the second day
yesterday as the short end of the market outperformed the long bond.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down 1/32 at
95 13/16 yielding 7.859 per cent but the two-year note was  1/8 higher at 99
1/2 , yielding 7.509 per cent.
The market reacted quickly to a survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia that showed a decline in the index of December business
activity to 28.9 per cent. It is the second month running that the index has
shown a drop in activity.
That data, combined with low inflation figures released on Wednesday, added
to trader speculation that the Fed would not raise interest rates when its
open market committee meets on December 20. Earlier this week, opinion was
mixed on whether the Fed would boost rates again before the end of the year.
The Philadelphia Fed's survey is especially important because it is an early
indicator of trends for December.
The spread between two-year and 30-year Treasuries widened for the second
consecutive day, reversing a recent trend and causing a steepening of the
yield curve. Economists view flattening of the curve as an indication that
the market expects economic slowing. The curve had flattened steadily since
the Fed raised rates by 75 basis points in November.
UK government bonds were lifted yesterday by a rise in German government
bonds and figures showing a slowdown in UK retail sales growth.
Retail sales volumes were unchanged in November from October and up 2.5 per
cent from November 1993, against a year-on-year rise of 3.0 per cent in
October.
Mr Chris Anthony at Hoare Govett said: 'The sales figures have killed off
any fears of an imminent interest rate rise.' He said investors were likely
to examine closely the CBI survey and PSBR figures due out this morning.
Trading in gilts yesterday was very thin, and dealers pointed to five tap
stocks which were announced on November 28, but have not been sold and still
overhang the market.
Dealers also point to strong resistance to prices rising above a level of
102 3/8 and although yesterday the market touched this ceiling, it bounced
down each time.
The yield spread over German government bonds tightened from 118 to around
115 basis points, and dealers said there may be some switching into bunds at
this level.
The December long gilt future moved up  5/16 to around 102 1/4 in late
trading.
German government bonds edged higher but prices remained within the range of
recent trading levels.
Mr Stefan Schneider at S. G. Warburg in Frankfurt said the movement of bunds
yesterday mimicked US Treasuries. He said: 'I cannot see any major domestic
event shifting sentiment in the bund market.'
Analysts point to next Tuesday's meeting of the Federal Reserve's
policy-making open markets committee as the next event which may have an
effect on bunds, but say that until then trading is likely to stay within
the 89.50 to 89.87 range.
The spread under Treasuries shifted out from 43 basis points to 45 in slow
trading and the March bund futures contract on Liffe rose by 0.03 on the day
to 89.76.
Italian government bonds rose yesterday, in what some analysts attributed to
investors covering their short positions.
Mr Simon Maggs at IBJ said: 'The government will almost certainly fall apart
at some point. The budget will almost certainly go through and then the
market will focus on what will happen in the political situation.'
He said investors were made nervous by yesterday's announcement that the
government was to provide L11,000bn to help repair flood damage, and its
intention to pay for this increased spending by larger taxes had not allayed
investors' fears.
The March bond futures contract on Liffe moved to around 99.49 in late
trading, a rise of 0.81.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

941216

