FT942-15416

FT  15 APR 94 / Liberal Democrats forecast 25% increase in seats


   By ROLAND RUDD


The Liberal Democrats yesterday predicted they could increase their number
of local councillors by a quarter in next month's elections.
Mr Andrew Stunell, political secretary of the Association of Liberal
Democrat Councillors, said the party held about 310 of the seats being
defended in this year's round of elections, and forecast gains of more than
25 per cent.
He told a news conference in London that the party had seen a steady rise in
its town hall power from 864 council seats in 1978 to 4,200.
Although Mr Paddy Ashdown, leader of the party, has resisted making
forecasts, the Liberal Democrats have now made the most specific predictions
of all the big parties.
The Liberal Democrats are forecasting sweeping gains in councils such as
Liverpool, Sheffield, Manchester, Birmingham, and St Helens, and the London
boroughs of Southwark and Lambeth, and are predicting that they will take
overall control of some, such as Colchester in Essex. The party is also
predicting that it will become the main opposition to Labour in the north
and the Tories in the south.
Its manifesto outlines policies to invest in education, make the fight
against crime a main priority, improve public transport and modernise
Britain's political system.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow environment secretary, yesterday accused the
government of a 'desperate and transparent attempt to bribe the electorate
in Westminster and Wandsworth'.
Launching Labour's London campaign, he said central government grants and
other external support accounted for 96 per cent of Westminster City
Council's spending, with the remaining 4 per cent coming from the council
tax.
However, Mr David Curry, local government minister, fiercely denied that
Westminster received money from central government or wrongly benefited from
the grants system.
'There is no way whatsoever in which the government has rigged, distorted,
or disfigured the cash flow so as to direct funds to Wandsworth or
Westminster or any other council,' Mr Curry stressed.
Westminster City Council has been accused by its district auditor of wasting
Pounds 21.25m in manipulating its housing policy to win votes.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940415

