FT941-5672

FT  05 MAR 94 / Malaysia refuses to budge over ban on contracts


   By KIERAN COOKE and ROLAND RUDD


   KUALA LUMPUR, LONDON


Malaysia yesterday refused to reconsider a ban on giving British companies
government contracts.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, said that as long as the
British press continued telling what he considered to be lies, his
government would not alter its position.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office, while disappointed with the Malaysian
decision, said it would not be reacting. Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary,
had decided to let 'the dust settle' before trying to re-establish contacts.
However, ministers were reported to be irritated over the Malaysians'
refusal to lift their ban after the British High Commissioner in Kuala
Lumpur briefed the Foreign Office on Dr Mahathir's reaction. If the ban
continues the government may consider retaliation, although 'we are not at
that point yet', said Mr Hurd.
Downing Street said Mr John Major, the prime minister, continued to believe
the Malaysian move was shortsighted and not 'remotely justified'.
Malaysia announced the ban last week in retaliation for what it said was
'the patronising attitude and innuendoes' contained in British media reports
on Malaysia. In particular the Malaysians attacked a recent report in The
Sunday Times suggesting that a British construction company had discussed
offering a Dollars 50,000 (Pounds 34,000) bribe to Dr Mahathir in the hope
of winning a contract. Dr Mahathir has denied knowing anything about such
payments. 'I am not that cheap in the first place,' he told a news
conference last night.
Mr Andrew Neil, the editor of The Sunday Times, said yesterday: 'I am
disappointed that the Malaysian prime minister has not got off the hook on
which he impaled himself.'
Mr Neil said he had written to The Times to make clear that The Sunday Times
had never accused Dr Mahathir of taking a bribe, in the hope that it would
allow the Malaysians to 'depart from the field with honour'. He said his
paper would continue to investigate stories in Malaysia.
Dr Mahathir said Mr Neil's letter had only added insult to injury.
British companies are likely to lose many millions of pounds' worth of
contracts. The Malaysians have already said British companies will be
excluded from a MDollars 12bn (Pounds 2.95bn) airport project outside Kuala
Lumpur. Trafalgar House, Balfour Beatty, Gammon and G-Mats (part of GEC), in
partnership with Marubeni of Japan, had been assured of much of the work on
the airport.
Some Malaysian businesspeople have privately expressed concern that the
government's move might affect the inward flow of foreign investment and
invite retaliatory action.
Murdoch in Asia, Page 11
The Asian Way, Weekend Page XXVI

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940305

