FT942-15628

FT  14 APR 94 / Leading Article: Unsound deals in Germany


Germany has proved comfortingly resistant to the speculative asset price
inflation of the sort that has plagued economic management in recent years
in Anglo-Saxon countries and Japan. The apparent near-bankruptcy of the
Jurgen Schneider property group, an unquoted company heavily indebted to
banks and to trade creditors, does not prefigure a collapse of the German
property sector.
The group's difficulties, and the disappearance of Mr Jurgen Schneider, do
however provide further evidence of the strains on the corporate and banking
sector in the recessionary aftermath of the 1989-91 unification boom.
Schneider's troubles also raise questions about unsound financing in east
Germany, where some of Mr Schneider's best-known projects are based.
Schneider appears to have become over-exposed in prestige projects in both
east and west Germany. Investment in many building projects east of the Elbe
seems to have been driven more by the provision of generous tax breaks than
by a realistic assessment of the economic outlook. In an election year,
Schneider's misfortunes have political repercussions. Chancellor Helmut Kohl
yesterday voiced worries about the prospect of lay-offs on east and west
German building sites.
There are some parallels with the pre-Christmas difficulties of the
Metallgesellschaft metals group, which had to be bailed out with a DM3.4bn
banking rescue after large losses through ill-supervised oil futures
trading. The leading bank involved in both affairs is the Deutsche Bank.
Damage to banks' balance sheets may be limited by the secured nature of most
of their credits to Schneider. But after two highly-publicised corporate
failures within six months, Germany's largest bank will not be able to avoid
questions about its credit procedures.
Deutsche Bank executives have recently started to limit their activities in
steering the long-term fortunes of German companies through supervisory
board chairmanships. Banks are bound to become more exposed to credit risks
in the advanced stages of a recession. An effort to concentrate energies on
core banking business seems prudent.
As the example of the late Mr Robert Maxwell shows, banks can sometimes be
seriously misled by charismatic figures running groups with entangled
accounting practices. Deutsche and its partner banks seem to have invested
exaggerated trust in Mr Schneider's personal capacities. His operations have
been protected from scrutiny by the low standards of accounting disclosure
to which unquoted German companies are subject.
The Schneider affair may prompt the German authorities to take steps to
clear up shortcomings in the transparency and accountability of privately
held groups. The short-term priority, however, as Mr Kohl indicated
yesterday, is to prevent the setback from disrupting the slow recovery in
east Germany.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940414

