FT943-13145

FT  21 JUL 94 / Survey of Albania (8): Hard lessons in capitalism -
Investors must expect some surprises


   By LAURA SILBER


Mr Selami Xhepa has an awesome task - to promote foreign investment in
Albania on an annual budget of Dollars 32,000. From his office in what was
once the Albania Today exhibition hall he frets that his shoulders are not
broad enough to bear the burden of bringing his country into the future.
'Albanians have a lot to learn after 50 years of isolation from the outside
world, but step-by-step, their mentality will change,' he says. It already
has. Until four years ago, foreign investment was a crime.
Albania now has more than 200 foreign investment projects, ranging from
kiosk cafes to oil exploration in the Adriatic Sea. The European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is financing nearly Dollars 100m worth
of projects, and playing an important role in providing 'comfort' to would
be investors.
The most conspicuous and symbolically important is a new Coca-Cola bottling
plant, just outside Tirana, which will start full operations this month. It
is a joint venture between Aziende Commerciali Industriali Estero; a wholly
owned Italian subsidiary of Coca-Cola, and a state-owned Albanian investment
company, with EBRD financing.
The EBRD is also co-financing construction of the Hotel Dea, by the Austrian
company Rogner and the Slovene firm Smelt, and the renovation of the Hotel
Tirana. Together these should cover the shortage of hotel rooms in the
Albanian capital, as well as enhancing telecommunications and other
technical aid projects.
While foreign equity capital has flowed in - Dollars 80m so far - it is
hardly the deluge that many Albanians were expecting when their country
began to open up in 1991. 'At first, Albanians believed that investors would
run to them with their pockets lined with money,' says Mr Xhepa. Over
Dollars 200m of foreign capital is committed to projects  - Italian
companies accounting for 53 per cent followed by Greek investors with 20 per
cent.
Mr Wei Ding, the Shanghai-born IMF representative in Albania, believes that
Albania's main hope for rapid economic growth is to attract foreign
investment. But he cautions that 'Albania is a small market and the
government has to do more than the neighbouring countries to attract
investors'.
Mr Xhepa agrees. He is only 28 years old and does not believe in overnight
miracles. 'The most important thing is that foreign investments are
guaranteed. Albania has signed agreements with some 15 countries on the
protection of foreign capital,' he adds.
Under new laws, profits can be repatriated freely and Albanians hope that
their comparative advantages will lure foreign investors. 'The cost of
labour is two dollars per hour compared with four in Taiwan,' Mr Xhepa says.
Several large Italian shoe and garment companies have already transferred
assembly operations to Albania from the Far East, saving on both wages and
transport costs.
As rising competition reduces profits from hawking imported goods in the
fast mushrooming sales kiosks all over the country he expects to sees a
re-investment of trading profits into manufacturing and construction
projects, including those linked to foreign financed infrastructure
developments.
Mr Xhepa, 28, is an assistant professor of economics at Tirana University
and speaks Italian and several other foreign languages. But a fairly
widespread knowledge of foreign languages among the young policy makers and
businessmen has not broken down all the barriers thrown up by half a century
spent in a socialist cocoon which spawned suspicion and fear. Xenophobia was
institutionally enforced under Mr Hoxha and his successor, Mr Ramiz Alia,
and unofficial contacts with foreigners were illegal.
Some of these suspicions were reinforced by a flood of carpet baggers who
hit town when the regime collapsed, many of them ethnic Albanians from
neighbouring Kosovo. Mr Bashkim Kopliku, deputy prime minister, says 'many
foreigners came here with the hope that they would find savages who knew
nothing about finance or doing business'.
Mr Kopliku complains that a handful of companies still want what he calls
'more than their fair share of the profit'. But his criticisms of investors
are matched by counter charges from investors who have fallen foul of
officialdom and complain of an ignorant and sometimes corrupt bureaucracy
and absence of clear laws and rules.
Mr Julien Roche is a prominent French businessman, who first started trading
with Albania in 1982 and is now trying to recoup losses which he says were
caused by trying to work strictly to laws when many of his competitors were
operating clandestinely and dealing in contraband goods.
The co-owner of a string of shops and an aviation company, the businessman
is viewed with suspicion partly because he began trading with the former
regime a decade ago. He is now fighting to secure the release of his
Albanian partner from jail, months after a court rescinded his sentence on
appeal.
The outcome of his fight to defend his business interests and his partner by
legal process is being closely watched by diplomats and the foreign business
community.
But suspicion of foreign business has been heightened by several bad
experiences with foreign investors. The worst, almost legendary exploit
happened two years ago when a Kosovar businessman collected tens of millions
of dollars from citizens and Albanian workers abroad to build a
'Sheraton-like' hotel, which was touted as the new land-mark for Tirana's
centre.
With no warning he absconded to Switzerland with all the money, leaving a
deep hole and nothing else. Another investor claimed to be a close relative
of Baron de Rothschild even though he was Chinese. After these incidents
many Albanians are wary about investors pulling out of projects, creating
uncertainty in an environment striving for stability.
On the other hand Albanians suffer from their lack of knowledge about
foreign markets and most businessmen are deeply aware of their lack of
experience after decades under a paranoid regime when only hand-picked
favourites could travel abroad.
'Even now if they can afford to go abroad they often have to wait for months
to get a visa,' says Mr Xhepa, who picked up some of his expertise on a
training course in Verona, Italy.
Unfamiliarity with the outside world sometimes causes hilarious
misunderstandings. A resident European businessman recalls how a senior
government official told him that 'Albania did not need to introduce the
Diner's Card because we already have the Rotary Club.' In the future says Mr
Xhepa, such snags and misunderstandings will be avoided because the rules of
the games are now set. The emphasis has moved from joint ventures with the
state, which were open to abuse, to direct investment or private
partnerships.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940721

