FT941-5705

FT  04 MAR 94 / Markets Report: D-Mark moves lower


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Foreign exchanges took a breather yesterday as a measure of calm returned to
international equity and bond markets following panic selling earlier in the
week, writes Philip Gawith.
Most observers, however, felt that what they were observing was a truce
rather than any sort of a lasting peace. There remains a broad consensus
that markets are not currently focusing on fundamentals.
Attention today will be anxiously concentrated on the release of key US
employment data. It was publication last month of a similar set of data that
prompted market jitters.
Any signs of inflationary pressures will renew speculation of a further
tightening of US monetary policy and lend support to the dollar.
Yesterday the Bundesbank council declined to shift any of its interest rates
at its meeting. Earlier in the week it had lowered its repo rate by three
basis points to 5.97 per cent. The Bank of Spain, however, cut its key money
rate by 50 basis points to 8 per cent.
The dollar declined sharply yesterday afternoon when a White House source
said President Clinton would reinstate the Super 301 executive order
permitting him to impose trade sanctions on Japan. It fell from a high of
Y104.17 to Y103.50 before bouncing back to close in London at Y104.065.
This selling pressure also spread to the D-Mark/dollar rate, with the dollar
falling from DM1.7135 to DM1.7050 before ending at DM1.7088. In New York the
dollar finished at DM1.7110 and Y103.90.
Analysts said the impact of this move would depend on whether Super 301 was
reimposed immediately, or left as a sword hanging over Japan's head. Mr
Gerard Lyons, chief economist at DKB International, commented: 'Whichever
way you look at it, the US is being very aggressive in terms of the
bilateral trade situation. That has only one implication - that the yen will
go stronger.'
Mr Lawrence Summers, undersecretary for International Affairs of the US
Treasury, said yesterday that it was wrong to say the trade war was
escalating. He also said it was premature to discuss the timing of any trade
action under Super 301.
Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS, said the Clinton
administration appeared to believe it crucial to be seen to be dealing
effectively with Japan. If not, this potentially could spill over into
similar troubles with other Far Eastern countries, especially China.
The D-Mark yesterday finished weaker across the board in Europe after news
that the engineering union IG Metall had voted in favour of strike action.
It finished in London at L984 from L990.2 against the Italian lira and at
FFr3.4 from FFr3.408 compared to the French franc.
With the shock of the 20.6 per cent annualised growth in M3 in January still
fresh in mind, and the IG Metall decision widely anticipated, it was hardly
surprising that the Bundesbank council decided to leave its Lombard and
discount rates unchanged. It also made no comment on the terms of its next
securities repurchase (repo) tender.
According to PaineWebber International, the Bundesbank has never changed its
key lending rates at two success-ive meetings. The M3 number and the likely
strike action also provided an inauspicious backdrop for a policy easing.
Yesterday the Bundesbank sought to limit the fallout from M3's rise. Mr
Otmar Issing, chief economist, told the Wall Street Journal that the M3
figure was 'no reason to panic'. He said the three basis-point cut in the
repo rate was a signal of where the Bundesbank was going.
Also following the cautious route was the Bank of France, which left its
intervention rate unchanged at 6.10 per cent at a securities repo, held to
allocate funds for injection into the money market today.
More adventurous was the Bank of Spain, whose rate cut was variously
described as 'brave', 'sensible' and 'very much a surprise'. Mr Keith
Edmonds, chief analyst at IBJ, said the bank had two main reasons for
acting: to stimulate the economy, which is in recession, and calm the bond
markets, which were volatile earlier in the week.
Mr Edmonds said the Spanish authorities had room to reduce interest rates
which, at 8 per cent, were still 2 percentage points above German rates. He
added that this differential was probably sufficient to sustain the value of
the currency. The peseta had been fairly weak recently at the Pta82 level
against the D-Mark, the lowest since mid-January. But it rose after the rate
cut to close in London at Pta81.88, from Pta82.25 on Wednesday.
Sterling yesterday had a quiet day with attention focused on the D-Mark. It
was barely changed against the dollar at Dollars 1.495 and higher against
the D-Mark, finishing at DM2.5546 from DM2.5475.
The Bank of England provided the UK money market with Pounds 270m of
unspecified late assistance, bringing total help for the day to Pounds 529m.
This compared with its latest forecast of an Pounds 800m liquidity shortage,
revised from an earlier Pounds 750m.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

940304

