FT942-15859

FT  13 APR 94 / Midland arm loses senior executives


   By JOHN GAPPER and TRACY CORRIGAN


Midland Global Markets, the treasury and capital markets arm of HSBC
Holdings which played a large part in quadrupling Midland Bank's profits to
Pounds 844m last year, has been hit by the resignation of four senior
executives.
The resignations include those of Mr David Gelber, chief operating officer,
and Mr Vib Baxi, head of money market trading, who is thought to have earned
large sums for the bank through proprietary trading in last year's bull
markets.
Mr Baxi was expected to be one of the City's top bonus earners for 1993, but
in December he was moved from the post of head of global money markets. This
meant he lost control of proprietary trading for the bank, and was instead
given charge of the less prestigious investment book.
The move is believed to have contributed to tension over his bonus, which is
believed to have been among the largest paid by Midland to a trader.
The resignations of the two other executives - Mr Gerry Reynolds, who took
over from Mr Baxi as head of money markets, and Mr Michael Burton, head of
foreign exchange sales - are not thought to be directly connected with Mr
Baxi's.
Mr Gelber resigned about six weeks ago, and the other three men resigned at
Easter. Midland paid its bonuses for 1993 in February, and it is common for
other banks to try to recruit traders after such payments.
Neither Mr Baxi nor Mr Gelber are thought to have started other jobs yet. Mr
Burton has been recruited to a London job with Goldman Sachs, the US
investment bank, while Mr Reynolds is believed to have opted to change
career.
Mr Baxi declined to comment on his resignation yesterday. Mr Gelber, Mr
Burton and Mr Reynolds could not be contacted, while Mr Guy Heald, head of
Midland Global Markets, would not comment.
Midland Bank said it regretted the departures, but the success of its
treasury operation, which employs about 450 people, meant that its trading
executives were a natural target for other banks.
Midland Global Markets acts as the combined treasury for Midland and
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, the two largest subsidiaries of
HSBC Holdings.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

940413

