FT941-4003

FT  14 MAR 94 / Slovaks worry about jobs as political battle rages: The
crisis as Meciar fights for survival after losing a parliamentary vote of
no-confidence


   By PATRICK BLUM


Mr Vladimir Meciar, Slovakia's beleaguered prime minister, begins what is
expected to be a long and bitter battle for his political survival today,
when he hands in his government's resignation.
Mr Meciar, who lost a parliamentary vote of no-confidence on Friday, has
already threatened to close down government by immediately pulling out all
his ministers.
While in theory a new government could be appointed within days, as is
clearly the hope of President Michal Kovac, disagreements within the
opposition and stalling tactics by Mr Meciar and his Movement for a
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) could prolong the crisis.
Parliament must also approve a date for early elections - something it has
not been able to agree on until now. The next general election is not due
before 1996.
Mr Meciar - who is aware of conflicting interests within the opposition,
which ranges from the strongly christian KDH on the right to the reformed
communists in the Party of the Democratic Left (SDL) - has also thrown the
cat among the pigeons by pushing for a general election in June.
This was rejected by parliament as impractical, but the opposition then
failed to muster enough support for its own motion calling for elections in
November. Deputies representing the Hungarian ethnic minority held back
support in the hope of winning concessions for more autonomy.
The SDL will now try again on Wednesday with another motion calling for
elections in September-October, but it is by no means guaranteed it will win
the 90 votes required in the 150-seat parliament. The opposition could
muster only 78 votes in support of its no-confidence motion.
The HZDS has also gathered more than the 350,000 signatures required for a
petition to force a referendum on holding early elections and dismissing
deputies who have switched party. If the petition is accepted as legitimate,
President Kovac must order a referendum within 30 days, but even so
elections are likely to be delayed.
'It could take months before the situation is resolved,' a senior Slovak
official said privately yesterday.
Such political uncertainty could not come at a worse time, with the country
facing serious economic difficulties that may require unpopular measures.
The economy remains deeply in recession, unemployment already at 15 per cent
of the workforce is rising fast, and there may be renewed pressures for a
devaluation.
None of this would make a transitional government very popular.
The problem is compounded by the lack of clear political alternatives.
Opposition to Mr Meciar has been as much over his authoritarian style of
governing as about policies. None of the opposition parties has come up with
a distinct political progamme for government, focusing instead on piecemeal
policies.
Slovakia became independent almost against its own wishes on January 1993,
having to build most of its institutions from scratch.
It was short of qualified personnel, and its politicians had no experience
of running an independent country.
This has made for highly personalised and unpredictable politics, such as
attempts to find a third way between capitalism and socialism, that have
since been abandoned but did not help the country's international image or
encourage foreign investment.
Meanwhile, the past two years' political infighting has alienated an
increasing number of Slovaks. According to recent polls, about half eligible
voters do not intend to vote or do not know what to vote for. Younger voters
are most disaffected, though dissatisfaction is widespread.
'They don't care, they're just interested in power,' says a young biology
student in Bratislava. A taxi driver berates the politicians' constant
wheeling and dealing and has no time for the parliament. 'It's bad for
business,' he says.
Even officials are down-hearted. 'There's a big gap between what the
government thinks and what the people think,' a provincial chief of police
says.
Less than two years after victory in the June 1992 elections, and over a
year after independence, Mr Meciar's popularity has declined to around 15
per cent in opinion polls. The government has been weakened by successive
rows and defections, culminating in the recent damaging public confrontation
with the president.
Independence has not brought the prosperity promised by politicians, though
it is now accepted as irreversible. People are more worried about jobs and
security, but with every new twist in the political crisis, the uncertainty
deepens and prospects of economic recovery become more remote.
'Whatever happens it's going to take time. It's a mess, and its going to get
worse before it gets better,' one diplomat said.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

940314

