FT941-16941

FT  07 JAN 94 / World Trade News: US accuses China of cheating on textiles


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


The US yesterday accused China of massive cheating and trans-shipment of
clothing and textiles exports and slashed its textile and apparel quotas for
next year by 25 to 35 per cent.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, said China was doing nothing
to block at least Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.35bn) worth of illegal and
trans-shipped goods annually. Such shipments have undermined the US-China
quota arrangement, which allowed China average annual increases of 26 per
cent a year since 1991.
'While the US government wants to have a mutually beneficial textile trade
relationship with China, such a relationship must be based on fair trade
practices,' he said.
Mr Kantor's move brought cries of outrage from US importers. Ms Laura Jones,
executive director of the US Association of Importers of Textiles and
Apparel, said the US had offered 'only the flimsiest evidence' to support
its claims of widespread transshipments.
Although moving strongly against textiles, Mr Kantor had praise for China on
another front: its commitment to remove most of its import restrictions over
five years. In the second year of a bilateral market access pact, China has
removed restrictions on 258 products and taken important steps towards
opening its market to industrial goods.
'While the impact will be greatest beginning this year and next, US
companies have benefited already,' Mr Kantor said. Telecommunications
companies have already sold more than Dollars 500m worth of digital
switching equipment as a result of the agreement.
Even with the cuts in its textile quotas, China will continue to be the
largest supplier to the US of fabrics and clothing. Total exports in fiscal
1993 totalled Dollars 4.7bn.
The bilateral quota pact now has lapsed. Mr Kantor said the US is still
willing to negotiate a new one, but it must include a provision, similar to
the one concluded with 16 other countries, which allows the US to make quota
reductions when there is clear evidence of trans-shipment. Chinese officials
declined a US invitation to talks this week.
'Given the massive amount of trans-shipment experienced in recent years, it
would not be prudent to enter into an agreement with China without such
procedures,' Mr Kantor said.
While handing out praise and punishment together, Mr Kantor acknowledged
that he was also sending a message to China about US 'willingness to enforce
its trade agreements.' Ms Jones said the move was 'reckless' and would most
hurt US retailers.
'The US is playing with fire,' she said. 'Past experience indicates China
will not bow to heavy-handed pressure tactics.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940107

