FT944-11036

FT  08 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Lex Service sets up new division to tackle
EU


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Lex Service, the UK's biggest vehicle distribution and leasing group, is
forming an international division with the intention of breaking into the
car dealer networks of continental Europe. The move is a potentially
significant one for the development of vehicle retailing in the EU.
Continental car markets, including France and Germany, are much more
fragmented than in the UK. Most dealerships are privately owned and large
public groups, such as Lex, are virtually unknown. Most represent tempting
targets for UK groups seeking to replicate their multi-franchise dealer
chains on the Continent.
Lex has nearly 130 UK car and commercial vehicle dealerships, representing
more than 30 manufacturers. It sold 64,000 new and 30,000 used vehicles last
year and accounts for about 3 per cent of the UK new car market. Its annual
pre-tax profits amounted to Pounds 101.5m.
It and other large distribution companies, such as Inchcape, maintain that
they are able to make the economies of scale and heavy investments in dealer
facilities needed to strip the inefficiencies out of car retailing.
Mr David Beck, managing director of Lex's retail group, is to become
managing director of Lex Automotive International. He oversaw Lex's entry
into vehicle retailing in North America with the takeover of Campbell
Automotive, a chain of California dealers, in 1989.
Lex already has two small leasing ventures in France, covering cars and fork
lift trucks.
'However, we are now in a situation where we can look at continental
opportunities, both dealerships and importerships, systematically.' Lex
said.
The announcement of the European venture comes about a month after the
European Commission's decision to allow Europe's car makers and dealers to
keep their privileged system of exclusively franchised dealer networks for
another 10 years.
However, the amended terms of this 'block exemption' from normal EU
competition rules should make it easier for dealer groups with enough
financial resources to set up multi-franchise networks on the Continent.
As part of Lex's management changes, Mr Jon Walden, a main board director,
will replace Mr Beck as managing director of Lex Retail Group, which manages
the car dealerships. Mr Walden is managing director of Lex Vehicle Leasing
and chairman of Hyundai(UK).

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941108

