FT941-17127

FT  06 JAN 94 / Accountancy Column: What Jim Butler saw in over 40 years
service - Andrew Jack talks to a veteran of the accountancy world


   By ANDREW JACK


Mr Jim Butler started work in what later became the Lord Mayor of London's
official residence, retired last week from what used to be a cold storage
depot, and will soon be lingering briefly in the Caribbean before returning
to a 500-acre farm near Winchester.
The venues may seem bizarre for someone who has spent his lifetime as an
accountant, but then the man in question has witnessed enormous and
sometimes unexpected change in his 41 years with the profession.
Jim Butler joined Peat Marwick Mitchell & Co as an articled clerk on Pounds
150 a year in 1952, after graduating with a degree in mathematics from
Cambridge University. The firm then had 44 partners and just over 1,000
staff across 18 offices in the UK. Fee income was Pounds 1.2m.
When he retired at the end of 1993 as senior partner, KPMG Peat Marwick, of
which it is now part, had just reported fee income of Pounds 492m, and had
become part of the second largest accountancy network in the world. In the
UK, it has 594 partners and 6,300 staff in 43 offices. He describes his own
income as in the 'hundreds of thousands' a year.
'There have been some pretty dramatic changes, all very much for the good,'
says Butler, reflecting on his time in the profession as he sits in his
office overlooking the south bank of the river Thames from Puddle Dock, a
rather uninspiring concrete building that used to store frozen meat.
When he started, the firm was based in Ironmonger Lane in the City of
London, until recently the temporary home of the Lord Mayor. At the time it
was owned by the Peat family whose connections with Peat Marwick began in
1870 and remain strong.
Mr Michael Peat was until recently a partner and auditor to the privy purse,
or the Queen's private finances, a post held in the family for four
generations. Mr Gerard Peat, his father, now aged 73, was the last member to
benefit from an automatic right to become a partner. The first senior
partner who was not a Peat was appointed only in 1965.
Butler says just four 'general' partners controlled the firm when he joined:
Ronnie Leach, Gerard Peat, Freddie Proctor and John Corbett. 'We were in
fear of them. Corbett reduced me virtually to tears. I remember once quaking
at my desk waiting to see him.'
There were other 'general' partners too, who received a share of the profits
of the firm's six relatively autonomous regional partnerships. But as he
puts it: 'There were general partners and general partners.'
Some things have become more egalitarian since then. Partners' first names
appear on their doors, and the distinction of tea on a tray for partners and
not for staff has gone.
But the full partnership has still only ever voted on two issues: the merger
with Klynveld Main Goerdeler (KMG) in 1987, and the ratification of Butler's
successor, Colin Sharman, last year.
While their influence and profit share may have waned, the general partners
remain. So, too, does the regional structure, which Butler admits was
developed to evade professional rules which limited an accountancy firm to
20 partners, and which were only repealed in 1967. 'It was perfectly legal
and never challenged,' he says.
The restriction affected Butler, who was made an 'associate partner' - with
no equity stake in the firm but a place on the firm's letterhead - in London
in 1965 before a full partnership vacancy came up two years later. 'It was a
case of waiting for dead men's shoes,' he says. 'The retirement age was
fluid upwards, and for a long time till recently partnership was a job for
life.'
Back in the 1950s, he says, 'life was quite a lot easier and much more
mundane. Creative accounting was not a great feature. Things were much more
pedestrian. I audited a retail store and spent three days checking a till
roll against invoices.'
'We did everything for clients: audit, tax, advisory, investigation work for
acquisitions.' He even became a receiver during the property crash of the
early 1970s.
He says his predecessors would have been surprised by the growth in
technical departments within the larger firms, which advise clients on
compliance with the rules. 'The regulations have been tightened - rightly.
But if something is permitted, companies are going to want to do it.'
Clients have changed greatly over the years, he says. 'They have internal
ways of dealing with a lot of things now, such as very strong internal
acquisitions teams. They understand their own accounts much more than they
used to.'
He believes that in the past they treated the auditor with more respect as a
feared and independent character, invariably calling him 'Mr'.
Butler says he has been personally frustrated by the difficulty in
maintaining the traditional close relationship he has developed with his
clients - not least with Lonrho, the conglomerate. He remains a staunch
defender of the firm's position. 'Our role there never caused us any worry,'
he said. 'Anything at Lonrho we looked at extra carefully. The technical
department was involved.'
He says one of his greatest concerns was the enormous lawsuit brought in
relation to KPMG's audit of ISC, the fraudulent defence company purchased by
Ferranti, which the firm settled for Pounds 40m.
But he says the most important change within the firm for him was the 1987
merger with KMG, an international network which included Thomson McLintock
in the UK. He says merger mania began in 1984 in the US. 'Everyone said they
needed to get bigger.' He says the firm's merger was not driven by economic
need, but a 'continental strategy' reflecting the changes within Europe.
The details of the merger that was to become KPMG Peat Marwick were
developed between the senior partners of the firms in the US, Canada, UK and
Netherlands. 'I kept it secret from my own partners,' he says. 'We had a
continental strategy.'
Since then, the thrust to ever-bigger practices has waned. The firm went
from recruiting 1,000 graduates a year in the late 1980s to just 500 today.
It also introduced redundancy programmes - from which even partners did not
escape.
'Accountancy firms have become very much businesses,' he says. 'In practical
terms we run ourselves much more like a corporation now, with an executive
committee of senior partners. The top people spend much more time internally
than in the past.
'We have to be much more commercial. There is tremendous competition: in
audit tenders, the public sector, in consultancy and even in insolvency.'
He recalls that 'everyone was horrified' initially at the lifting of a ban
on marketing within the profession in the early 1980s. 'We always did
entertaining in the past: there were clubs and friendly competition.'
He denies commercialism has been at the expense of professionalism. 'We are
spending more and more time on risk management. We are open to claims if
not. We have to be commercial in order to get work, but we cannot afford not
to do our best to ensure we do first class, quality work.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940106

