FT941-4080

FT  12 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Why Standard slipped


   By DEBBIE HARRISON


Standard Life, founded in 1825, is the largest mutual insurer in Europe and,
arguably, one of the most successful. It is also one of the biggest
providers of personal pension plans, with just under 500,000 sold since
1988.
Its financial credentials include a top rating of AAA from both Standard &
Poor's and the other main US rating agency, Moody's Investors Services.
Continuity of investment staff is good and it has a tradition of strong,
conservative investment performance over the long term. But recent results
have been mixed.
The managed unit-linked fund is one of the largest on the market at Pounds
2,3bn, and clients with a regular premium contract will have seen returns
just above average over five years and just below average over 10. Where a
single premium investment was selected, the same fund shows consistently
above-average returns, reflecting the lower charges and commissions
associated with these contracts.
The main managed fund invests in several funds, including property, but the
managed 'stock exchange' fund excludes property. Both had below-average
returns in 1993, although they began to rally early this year.
Alan Goodman, assistant general manager for marketing, says: 'After several
years of good stock selections and a favourable bias towards UK investment,
the managed fund suffered from the effective devaluation of sterling
following its withdrawal from the ERM (exchange rate mechanism) in September
1992.
'Moreover, from late 1992 and for most of 1993, overseas equities performed
better than the UK market. The managed fund was underweight in this area
compared with other funds.'
Several of the society's funds reveal a peak in 1991/92 followed by relative
decline. The UK equity fund, also one of the largest in its sector with
Pounds 1,745m under management, achieved top quartile (top 25 per cent)
results over a rolling five-year period. But a closer look reveals a peak
performance in 1991, followed by below-average returns for 1993. The same
holds for the European and North American funds. Equally volatile are funds
earmarked for a lower risk approach.
The cash fund dropped to the bottom quartile in the year to February 1 1994
but maintains an above-average return over five years. The fixed-interest
fund peaked in 1991 and 1992 but dropped to the bottom quartile in the year
to February 1 1994, while the with-profits fund returned below-average
performance for virtually every investment period.
Standard Life sells 80 per cent of its products through Independent
Financial Advisers and 20 per cent through direct sales and tied agents but
recently split from its most important tied agent, the Halifax building
society. And while Standard's rates of commission to IFAs are average for
the industry, its charges are comparatively high.
On regular premium plans, you pay a 5 per cent initial charge (bid/offer
spread). There is an annual investment management charge of 0.875 per cent,
plus an extra annual charge of 1.5 per cent on all units bought during the
first two years. This extra charge is levied for up to 25 years on these
units although it is waived where the adviser does not take commission.
There is no initial charge on single premiums but there is a monthly service
charge of Pounds 3.05 on all contracts.
The society has been a major player in the transfer market, with around
66,500 plans sold to employees who have transferred their benefits to a
personal pension; this represents about 14 per cent of sales. But in 1992 it
suspended transfer business from tied agents while checks were carried out
on sales techniques. Goodman says: 'The entire advice process is reviewed
before any application is acted upon.'

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940312

