FT941-12929

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (9): An inherent flimsiness - UK exporters are
currently losing Pounds 180m a year because of letters of credit which fail
to ensure payment / Letters of credit / Analysis and credit watch


   By MARK RUNIEWICZ


Letters of credit (l/cs) are commonly regarded as a secure method of payment
but, since payment cannot be guaranteed, many banks do not accept them as
security for advances.
The protection afforded by an l/c can easily be lost when exporters do not
strictly comply with its terms. Moreover, there is the additional question
of country risk. All the compliance in the world will not guarantee payment
if a country runs short of foreign exchange.
For example, payment delays of up to a year are currently affecting Iranian
trade paper, including l/cs backed by central bank guarantees. Currently
almost 70 per cent of documents presented by UK exporters under l/c are
rejected due to a lack of compliance. This costs exporters around Pounds
180m per annum in lost goods and additional expenses.
Moreover, the figure is likely to rise this year following the introduction
of significant revisions of the international rules which govern l/cs - the
so called Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits issued by the
Paris-based International Chamber of Commerce (ICC).
The new rules, known as UCP500, came in to force at the beginning of January
this year and involve a cluster of technical changes. For example, there is
a new regulation that a bank which confirms an l/c can withdraw its
confirmation if the l/c's expiry date is subsequently amended.
Many companies engaged in international trade will probably be unaware of
UCP500 and thus the number of discrepant presentations will rise further,
along with the associated costs to exporters. Ironically, many companies
insist that orders will only be dispatched when they receive an irrevocable
l/c without checking their success rates in presenting correct documentation
to banks.
Many exporting companies fail to have any input into the wording of the l/c
and fewer still understand the crucially important difference between an l/c
payable in the exporter's country and one payable in the importer's country.
This can have potentially significant financial repercussions. For example,
a UK company recently received an l/c from Hong Kong valued at Pounds
350,000. Documents had to be sent to the bank in Hong Kong for payment. The
goods were shipped on November 2, 1993, and documents submitted to the UK
advising bank on November 9 and forwarded to the buyer's bank in Hong Kong
on November 11. The UK company was reimbursed on December 2, some 21 days
later.
The exporter had two options on November 9: to sell the documents to the UK
bank which would charge interest at 7.5 per cent (2.5 per cent over UK base
rate) for a period of 28 days to allow for any delays in receiving the
payment, generating a cost of Pounds 2,014, or to await receipt of the
proceeds from Hong Kong and fund the waiting period from working capital.
Neither option would have been required had the l/c been payable in the UK.
Many companies fail to specify the type of l/c which would be most
advantageous to them or, alternatively, build the negotiation costs into the
sales price. Also many exporters do not have a clearly defined country risk
strategy and often request the advising bank to confirm the l/c, which means
the latter accepting both the buyer's risk and the country risk.
However, advising banks are under no obligation to confirm l/cs.
Consequently exporters should ascertain if banks will accept particular
country risks before they request an l/c from the buyer and not leave it
until the l/c arrives. At that point it is often too late to redirect the
l/c to another bank.
Essentially, in addition to being totally informed on technicalities of
l/cs, exporters should adopt an organised strategy for their utilisation
beginning with the fundamental question: 'Do I need a letter of credit?'
While many exporters do not use l/cs when the latter would provide
much-needed security, there is also another group which habitually uses l/cs
in situations where they are unnecessary.
For example, an exporter recently requested a major UK bank to confirm an
l/c issued by its South East Asian subsidiary, adding an additional Pounds
350 in avoidable bank charges, given the minuscule risk involved. If an
exporter decides not to use an l/c, it has a variety of other options
available, including payment in advance, export credit insurance and
straight open account trading.
If, on the other hand, it indeed decides on the l/c option, it must then
additionally address other questions, including whether the l/c will be
unconfirmed or confirmed and, if the latter is the case, will banks accept
the associated country risk?
The flow chart (above) covers some of the areas that exporters should
consider when seeking an l/c. It is designed to reduce some of the areas
which cause discrepancies and to assist exporters in obtaining the security
that letters of credit are designed to provide.
Mark Runiewicz is trade finance consultant of the Bank Relationship
Consultancy, London (tel: 071-283-5454)

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

940127

