FT944-2684

FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (14): On the road to
profits - Japan, market is recovering


   By DENNIS NORMILE


After four years of falling sales, Japan's commercial vehicle market is
enjoying improved sales as Japan's economy recovers. In addition, stiffer
emissions requirements are forcing the retirement of older trucks, and new
draconian penalties for overloading are forcing transport firms to trade up
to larger trucks.
Coupled with the benefits of streamlining efforts by producers, Japan's
commercial vehicle industry is poised to see its most profitable year since
1990.
The Japan Automobile Dealers Association recently reported that unit sales
of trucks in October were up 8 per cent over the same month a year ago, and
unit sales of profitable large trucks jumped 31.4 per cent to 11,178
vehicles.
It was the sixth consecutive month of double-digit percentage increases in
sales of large trucks, those with a gross vehicle weight of 4 tonnes or
more.
This sales trend has led Hino Motors, Japan's largest medium and heavy-duty
truck maker, to forecast a doubling of last year's pre-tax profit. Isuzu
Motors now expects to show a full-year profit for the first time in four
years. Nissan Deisel is also expected to return to the black after a loss
last year.
Hino is so confident of the increased level of demand it has just announced
a 13 per cent price increases for new truck models.
This confidence is partly based on brightening prospects for Japan's
economy. Capital spending is starting to recover and the truck manufacturers
expect some pent-up replacement demand. New truck sales are also getting a
boost from tougher emissions requirements. Air pollution levels in the main
metropolitan areas, especially for oxides of nitrogen, have not fallen to
targeted levels. Diesel-burning engines are thought to be the main culprits
for oxides of nitrogen, so authorities are tightening emissions requirements
for trucks.
New vehicles have had to meet the tightened requirements since December last
year. Older vehicles will have to clear the hurdle as part of their periodic
safety inspections, but depending on a truck owner's circumstances, grace
periods can stretch for up to 12 years.
Older trucks will have to be modernised or retired and the industry expects
that many owners will opt to replace vehicles that do not meet the new
standards.
Those two factors, however, are seen to be having a relatively small impact
compared to new penalties for exceeding rated loadings. Previously,
overloading had been more or less winked at with a fine that amounted to
little more than a slap on the wrist. Overloading came to be a standard
practice, however, and authorities, citing safety and highway maintenance
concerns, stiffened penalties this past May. Load limit violators now face
fines of Y100,000 (USDollars 1,000) and the possibility of six-month jail
terms and the suspension of permits and licenses. Not surprisingly, police
have reported a dramatic decline in the number of load limit violations.
Sales of large trucks have been running at levels of 10 per cent or more
year-on-year every month since May as transport firms buy larger capacity
trucks to stay within rated load limits.
The recovery in demand does not mean that truck makers can ease up on their
streamlining efforts. For one thing, the move to larger trucks caused by the
toughened loading restrictions is seen as a temporary boost, although it
will increase replacement demand in the future. Earlier this year, Hino
president Tomio Futami predicted that the domestic truck market would
stabilise at around 150,000 vehicles a year in the near term. While this is
a vast improvement over 1992, when sales were barely over 115,000 vehicles,
it is still off the levels of the boom years 1988 through 1991, when sales
topped 170,000 every year. What is more, the strong yen has dampened exports
and is encouraging imports.
In the first 10 months of this year, commercial vehicle imports totalled
22,070 vehicles, an increase of 357.4 per cent over the same period last
year, according to the Japan Automobile Importers' Association. Nearly 60
per cent of those vehicles were light trucks built by a Nissan venture in
Mexico. But America's General Motors, in particular, has been dramatically
expanding its sales of commercial vehicles, thanks to the use of Isuzu's
sales network. GM is Isuzu's largest shareholder. And, finally, while Hino
and Mitsubishi Motors are profitable, Nissan Diesel and Isuzu are likely to
be barely so.
The makers recognise that this year's upturn gives them a little more
breathing space but that they will still have to carry through with the
restructuring and diversification plans put into effect over the last
several years.
The most dramatic aspect of that restructuring has been paring the
workforce. Hino says it has managed to cut the number of seasonal contract
workers it needs by half, from 26,000 to 13,000. All the makers have been
cutting overtime hours and reducing new hires. They have also been
restructuring sales outlets and subsidiaries. Isuzu merged an auto-body
subsidiary into the parent earlier this year to reduce management overhead.
The drive to concentrate resources is also seen on the production end. Hino
has ceased production of small passenger cars on consignment for affiliate
Toyota Motor Corp. While this probably reflects the need for Toyota to put
its own production facilities to full use, it will allow Hino to concentrate
on its more profitable truck business. There has also been an industry-wide
drive to co-operate to pare development and procurement costs and realise
economies of scale by swapping vehicles. The four leading truck
manufacturers jointly agreed on specifications for brakes for heavy-duty
trucks. Akebono Brake Industrial will supply identical brake systems to all
four. Co-operative arrangements are particularly thick in the small
commercial vehicle segment, which has not been profitable.
Hino will supply a 5,000 cc diesel engine to affiliate Toyota Motor Corp.
which will use the engine in a delivery vehicle which will be supplied to
Daihatsu Motor, another Toyota group company, on an OEM basis.
A more extensive swap has been worked out by Isuzu, Nissan Diesel and Nissan
Motor. The two Nissan companies will produce 1 tonne trucks and minivans for
sale under the Isuzu badge. In return, Isuzu will supply the Nissan
companies with 2 to 3 tonne trucks. Starting next year, the arrangement is
expected to involve 23,000 vehicles a year. Competition in the light truck
market is only expected to toughen as imports gain a greater toehold.

The Financial Times


London Page V

941216

