FT943-928

FT  27 SEP 94 / Arts: Dangerous Liaisons - Opera in San Francisco


   By TIMOTHY PFAFF


Two centuries and numerous stage and screen adaptations later, The Dangerous
Liaisons emerged in a new incarnation as The San Francisco Opera mounted the
world premiere of Conrad Susa's and librettist Philip Littell's opera.
It is baffling that the company commissioned Susa to create its first
full-scale premiere in 18 years. It had previously produced two Susa operas
for a spring season (Transformations) and for its apprentice singers (The
Love of Don Perlimplin), neither of which proved musically memorable
occasions. While Liaisons, now being filmed for television, may well prove
more memorable, its musically faceless score is unlikely to linger long in
the mind.
Ironically, for an opera about people obsessed with appearances and style,
Susa's score is virtually devoid of a unifying musical style - or even
personality. The orchestral carpet is a tangle of meandering sounds and the
vocal writing lacks tension, shape, and even a rudimentary sense of
direction. But for all that, San Francisco's expert cast, headed by
Frederica von Stade as the Marquise de Merteuil and Thomas Hampson as the
Vicomte de Valmont, took to the vocal parts as if they were top-drawer
Verdi.
Strangely, the most obvious blemish on Susa's score, its orchestration, may
not represent his own work. The programme discreetly identified Donald
Ontiveros, Manly Romero, and an entity called Music Publications
Technologies under a new category, 'Orchestration and editorial assistance.'
And in the weeks preceding the premiere there were rumours of other people,
with the requisite musical acumen (or the right software), orchestrating
this passage or that.
Music director Donald Runnicles lent his customary tireless energy and
cogent leadership to the enterprise, but there is a limit to what even a
music director can ask.
In most other respects, the makings of a promising opera seemed on hand.
Littell's English verse libretto - drawn directly from the Pierre Choderlos
de Laclos novel - proved serviceable, although Susa's heavy hand with the
musical applique did make one grateful for the surtitles. Production
director Colin Graham cleverly realised the letter motif that underlies
every aspect of this complex tale and effectively staged the overlapping of
scenes, characters, and even time and space frames that are at the heart of
Littell's play.
Resident designer Gerard Howland's fluid settings and costumes unearthed
subtle connections within the overall picture of decadent beauty. And Thomas
Munn's lighting was dramatic and narrative in its own right. All that said,
it was the cast that made the work as involving as it became. (Subject
matter notwithstanding, the long first act was simply dull.) As the Marquise
de Merteuil, Frederica von Stade was formidable and husky of tone one
minute, vulnerable and kittenish the next, and typically - but arrestingly -
sympathetic in her portrayal.
Thomas Hampson's Valmont was similarly fine-grained, convincingly sinister
and susceptible without once defaulting to stage cliche. Renee Fleming's
melting, then molten, performance as the tormented Madame de Tourvel took
over the second act, as it should.
Judith Forst's imperious Madame de Volanges, Mary Mills' complex and
affecting Cecile, and Johanna Meier's worldly-wise Madame de Rosemond were
accomplished, affecting musical characterisations. Australian tenor David
Hobson's Danceny was convincingly hormonal but had yet to come into focus.
The comprimario roles were played faultlessly.
Despite the cumulative theatrical power of this Liaison's second act, it is
so musically evanescent as to become, in the end, insubstantial and
unmemorable. As currently scored, Conrad Susa's The Dangerous Liaisons
becomes the latest entrant in a dispiriting string of American opera
premieres. In a savagely defiant final tableau, von Stade's Merteuil - in a
harsh caricature of Strauss' Capriccio Countess departing for a dinner of
Weltschmerz - exits with the raspy, vulgar exclamation, 'I'm hungry.' So, it
happens, are we.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940927

