FT944-10915

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (33): Some places feel like Japan - Madhya
Pradesh is flexing its industrial muscles


   By GORDON CRAMB


In his office, Honda's Mr H Masuda dispenses green tea. He wears a white
uniform, as does everyone else at this scooter manufacturing plant.
Compulsory morning exercises are followed by group production meetings. The
company union avoids strife and is unaffiliated to any umbrella labour
organisation.
Apart from the complexion of his fellow-workers, only two things belie the
fact that this could be Japan: the relative lack of automation in the
assembly process, and the handle on the colonial-style teacup.
Mr Masuda is on secondment as technical director of Kinetic Honda, 51 per
cent owned by the Japanese automotive group. Its factory is at Pithampur, an
industrial zone in the central state of Madhya Pradesh which lays claim to
be the Detroit of India.
The title is presumptuous, as no cars are produced there. But Hindustan
Motors has a plant for passenger vehicle engines, and Mitsubishi operates a
joint truck making venture. Officials say it and Volkswagen of Germany are
seeking land for possible car assembly.
Pithampur, near the commercial centre Indore, is one of two dozen growth
areas designated by the Madhya Pradesh government with the aim of promoting
industry in backward parts of the country's biggest state. Others include
Mandideep, on the outskirts of the capital Bhopal, from where Procter and
Gamble of the US supplies the Indian market with Ariel washing powder.
Progressive state governments in India are competing fiercely for new
investment, domestic and foreign, with packages of incentives and
concessions. In the case of Madhya Pradesh these offer a holiday from state
commercial taxes of up to seven years, and single-window clearance of
projects to expedite approvals.
Another main thing Madhya Pradesh can provide is a central location, with
road, rail and air arteries reaching each of the biggest cities in roughly
equal time. But its position (as the region's publicists would have it) 'at
the heart of India' is also a drawback: the state is landlocked.
Undaunted, the AVN, the industrial development corporation, is seeking to
buy waterfront land in Gujarat to the west in order to build a deep-water
jetty. This it believes would stimulate an edible oils industry in Madhya
Pradesh based around soyabeans, of which the state accounts for 80 per cent
of Indian production. Most output is sold as cattle feed.
Through similar interventions the state authorities have restored an air
service to centres abandoned by Delhi's government-owned Indian Airlines -
taking a stake in a private carrier with the requirement that it include
specified destinations - and built India's first toll road as an alternative
to the pitted national highway which serves Pithampur.
Poor roads and power shortages are, as elsewhere in India, the two handicaps
most frequently cited by businessmen. Export-oriented industries enjoy a
protected electricity supply and Mr S K Jain, president of Indo Rama
Synthetics, an Indonesian-controlled spinning mill which employs 1,850 in
Pithampur, says that 'in three years we have not shut down once because of a
power cut'.
But he adds that his parent company has chosen a site near Bombay in
Maharashtra state for its newest facility because of easier access to a
port.
A state industrial policy set out in May acknowledged that 'accelerating the
pace of development requires the expansion and strengthening of
infrastructure' and that this necessitated private sector involvement. To
this end, Bhopal's budgetary allocation for industry is planned to rise to 7
per cent from 4 per cent over the next two years.
In trying to close the gap with Maharashtra and Gujarat, its two main
rivals, the state's extra spending is intended to bring in private capital
rather than create public sector employment. If the government sets up
industrial projects on its own 'we are not going to be very efficient,' says
Mr M P Rajan, managing director of the AVN.
Uniquely, he couples this bureaucratic role with that of Madhya Pradesh
president of the private-sector Confederation of Indian Industry. 'No other
state would allow this,' he says. 'The government doesn't even mind if I
criticise their policies.' Ultimately he wants to shift majority control of
the AVN itself into private hands.
Madhya Pradesh has its share of state industries, some of relatively recent
origin, for which new roles need to be found.
There are, for example, no plans to privatise Optel, set up in 1989 as an
integrated maker of telephone cable, optical fibre and telecoms equipment,
but it is seeking joint ventures with Japanese industry majors.
The present Congress party government headed by Mr Digvijay Singh, chief
minister, came to power in elections last December after Delhi ended a
troublesome period of rule by the Hindu militant Bharatiya Janata party.
Unlike leaders of several other states, Mr Singh is still a full four years
from the next polling day and can shape economic policy without looming
electoral considerations.
While accepting that new private investment is likely to become increasingly
capital-intensive, he stressed in an interview that 'wherever government
comes in, we would rather have it labour-intensive'.
However, Mr Singh, a 47-year-old engineer, said he supported 'a massive dose
of privatisation in infrastructure' which would help the government maintain
social spending while increasing the proportion of the budget devoted to
industry.
Madhya Pradesh has lower literacy levels and higher poverty and infant
mortality rates than the Indian average. It also remains less urbanised. The
European Union is the main backer in a primary education programme for
deprived areas of the state which will be worth some Rs7bn over seven years,
the largest such scheme in India.
But another large scheme, from which multilateral donors have withdrawn
backing, threatens to cause unprecedented upheaval to rural communities.
The chief minister reaffirmed his government's commitment to the Narmada Dam
project which will flood vast tracts of the south of the state, saying only
that it was 'only hesitating on the issue of lowering the height' of the dam
wall. Such a reduction, he indicated, could reduce by at least a quarter the
100,000 people who would be uprooted while losing a rather smaller fraction
of the expected generation capacity for hydroelectric power. His figures are
not far out of line with those cited by local aid agencies, but they argue
that the greater clout of Gujarat and Maharashtra, which are to share in the
project while avoiding most of the resettlement problems, would mean that
their wishes were more likely to prevail. The World Bank pulled out after
campaigners highlighted social aspects of the project.
Narmada, if it is a disaster, is at least one the locals can see coming, and
one which was decided by their politicians. That was not the case nearly a
decade ago when a leak of poisonous gas from the US-controlled Union Carbide
factory in Bhopal killed thousands of mainly slum-dwellers and hardened
attitudes across India against multinationals. In September, amid a mass of
litigation, a takeover by domestic interests was finally agreed.
Social and environmental questions will also surround future foreign
involvement particularly in the energy and mining sector, where de Beers of
South Africa is poised to land diamond exploration rights over as much as
20,000 sq km in an eastern area of the state with a large tribal population.
The state has other minerals such as coal and iron ore, but these areas are
largely coterminous with forests. Perhaps conveniently, forestry and mining
fall under the same ministry in Bhopal.
The government is trying to close the state mining corporation, though
arranging the transfer of workers has been slow.
Long-term contracts to supply iron ore to Japan are being wound down as the
recession in that country has reduced demand for steel.
Demand for Kinetic Honda's scooters has brought large-scale export orders
from as far afield as Mexico and Turkey. As Mr Masudah and his local
colleagues sip their tea, Madhya Pradesh is trying to offer other foreign
investors a handle on India.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

941108

