FT944-14500

FT  22 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Pearson in Pounds 52m magazines deal


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Pearson, the media, information and entertainment group, is moving into the
general magazine business for the first time with the Pounds 52.5m purchase
of Future Publishing.
The company, which was founded in 1985, produces 30 magazines in the
computer and consumer field and is about to launch a new title on the
Internet.
The deal is an early coup for Mr Nick Alexander, who has recently joined
Pearson, the publishing interests of which include the Financial Times, with
the task of creating a magazine and consumer division.
Future Publishing, was launched with about Pounds 30,000 by Mr Chris
Anderson, who edited the VNU title Personal Computer Games before setting up
his own in a room of his home in Somerton, Devon.
The first magazine, Amstrad Action, was laid out on his kitchen table.
Mr Anderson, who has appeared in lists of the UK's richest people, still
owns about 93 per cent of the company and plans to use the money raised to
concentrate on a similar style of magazine publishing in the US.
The deal with Pearson has been agreed, although the last legal details will
be finalised over the weekend together with formal signing.
An announcement to the Stock Exchange is expected on Monday morning.
Future is perhaps best known for its computer titles such as Amigo Format
and PC Plus but the company has since developed 10 consumer magazines
ranging from surprising hits such as Needlecraft to Mountain Biking UK and
Classic CD.
One of the group's best known features has been its liberal use of free
gifts which are an integral part of the magazine, such as games, software
and demonstration CDs.
The group, which is based in Bath, employs some 400 people and had a
turnover of Pounds 41m and profits of Pounds 2.3m in the year to April 1993.
The purchase is the latest example of Pearson's strategic decision to turn
itself from a conglomerate into a media, information and entertainment
company.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941022

