FT944-2882

FT  15 DEC 94 / International Capital Markets: Borrowings raised ante in
Orange County debacle - Derivative Instruments


   By LAURIE MORSE


The Orange County, California, municipal investment fund facing more than
Dollars 2.5bn in losses after losing a highly leveraged bet on the direction
of US interest rates, did not need derivatives to snarl its portfolio. The
fact that the Orange County treasurer borrowed Dollars 12.5bn from
securities dealers to lift the ante on its bet ensured the fund would have
had devastating losses as interest rates rose, even if its purchases were
confined to conventional US Treasury notes.
However, it is interesting that Orange County and a host of other US
municipalities, money market funds and pension plans have found a way to
tuck some highly volatile interest-rate derivatives into their portfolios
while assuring their constituencies that they only invest in triple A rated
US government-backed debt.
This little deception has become far more transparent in the light of the
Orange County debacle, and is rapidly changing a long-held view that
government-backed debt is completely risk free. While the current debate
centres on debt issued by US government agencies, the discussion can easily
be extended to the international arena by examining the paper issued by the
international development agencies.
In the US, government agencies such as the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and
publicly-held corporations that package loans backed by US government
guarantees, such as the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae)
and the Student Loan Marketing Association (Sallie Mae) are massive
borrowers whose outstanding debt is second only to the US Treasury.
Their government guarantees assure these agencies very low borrowing costs,
but a number of them, seeking to lower costs further, have followed the
suggestions of the Wall Street dealers who act as their salesmen and issue
securities with imbedded features that make returns highly sensitive to
interest rate movements.
The derivative instruments, commonly known as 'structured notes,' offer the
same kinds of risks and rewards that are available by purchasing contracts
on listed futures and options exchanges. However, because they carry the
credit guarantee of the US government, and can be classified in investment
portfolios as generic 'government securities,' they are often purchased by
funds that would never be allowed to speculate in high-risk instruments such
as futures and options.
In the case of the Orange County fund, investment guidelines were so
conservative that even purchases of conventional shares were prohibited.
However, that did not stop Mr Robert Citron, Orange County treasurer, from
investing billions of dollars in agency structured notes. In several cases
it appears the fund bought entire agency issues valued at over Dollars 100m
each, tailored directly to Orange County's specifications.
Orange County officials said on Tuesday that approximately Dollars 8bn
remained in the municipal fund, but that about Dollars 2.5bn was still
pledged to dealers as collateral, reducing equity to about Dollars 5.4bn.
That compares with the Dollars 7.4bn initially put up by the town and
municipal agencies that are investors.
Of the securities remaining in the municipal fund, about 60 per cent are
structured notes consisting primarily of 'inverse floaters,' which have
coupons that fall as interest rates rise. With the Federal Reserve poised to
raise interest rates, these securities are barely marketable, although
Salomon Brothers has been retained to achieve an 'orderly' liquidation of
the portfolio.
The California municipal fund did not blindly stuff its portfolio with
inverse floaters. Mr Citron was a sophisticated investor who knew that these
volatile instruments could reap his county higher yields than conventional
investments. He, like many other money managers, successfully pursued risk
in exchange for higher returns for much of the past five years.
That the agencies have entered the business of issuing derivatives is only
mildly surprising. Mr Gene Eisman, a spokesperson for Fannie Mae, explains
it simply: 'We are a very large borrower of funds to serve the mortgage
markets in the US,' he says, 'Our main mission is to provide affordable
housing to low and middle-income families in the US. Structured notes are
just one more tool in the quiver of things we use to accomplish this.'
Fannie Mae says just 3 per cent of the Dollars 435bn in debt it issued last
year was structured notes. The Federal Home Loan Bank has about Dollars 55bn
in structured notes outstanding, or 31 per cent of its total debt.
To avoid another debacle, it has been suggested that the government should
stop endorsing, or guaranteeing, credit on derivative debt issued by the
agencies. This would take substantial courage on the part of legislators,
since the new budget-conscious Congress will need every trick to reduce
borrowing costs.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

941215

