FT944-11046

FT  08 NOV 94 / TeleWest looks to US model forgrowth hopes: Optimism ahead
of planned flotation


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


TeleWest, the largest UK cable operator, yesterday pushed ahead with its
flotation plans with a pathfinder prospectus suggesting a total value for
the company of between Pounds 1.61bn and Pounds 1.86bn.
An offer price per ordinary share, which will be between 165p and 190p, will
be announced on November 22 and TeleWest is scheduled on November 30 to
become the first cable company to be listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The aim is to raise between Pounds 330m and Pounds 380m in new money with
the sale of 216m ordinary shares in London and the Nasdaq market in New York
representing 26 per cent of the enlarged issued ordinary share capital - 22
per cent on a fully diluted basis.
Mr Alan Michels, chief executive of TeleWest, a joint venture between TCI of
Denver, the largest US cable operator and US West, the regional telephone
company, said: 'We believe that cable is a major growth area, that the UK
offers a most attractive regulatory regime for cable, and that TeleWest is
exceptionally well positioned in the UK cable market.'
There is already informal investor interest in as much as three quarters of
the offering at the midway price. Such interest suggests a change in
perceptions about UK cable and in particular about a company that still has
to spend another Pounds 1bn to complete its networks and which is unlikely
to be profitable before 1998 at the earliest.
The main reasons for the increasingly positive sentiment include:
The growing importance of cable's dual revenue streams from television
channels and telephone services. Ordinary cable television subscriptions
stand at around 800,000 with hopes for nearly 1m by the end of the year. By
October 1, 570,656 telephone lines were installed, compared with 244,946 a
year ago.
Growth in the stock price - 48 per cent since August 1 - of the first three
UK cable companies to be quoted on Nasdaq: Bell Cablemedia, Comcast UK and
International CableTel.
Excitement over superhighways of the future. US cable operators say that in
the US they talk about the superhighway but in the UK it is being built - by
the cable companies. Cable offers a clear route into video on demand and
interactive services if the consumer interest is there.
The hope is that the UK will eventually follow the US pattern on cable. In
the US cable first reached 10 per cent of homes, slowly crept up to 25 per
cent before taking off to attain 60 per cent penetration on the back of an
expansion of programme choice. 'We would expect and we believe the same
thing will happen here,' said Mr Michels.
In the UK however cable penetration - the ratio between homes which can
subscribe to those that actually do - has remained at around 21 per cent for
some years although the actual number of subscribers continues to rise as
more cable networks are built. Unlike the early days of cable in the US,
cable in the UK must develop alongside a mature video market and more than
2.5m installed satellite dishes.
TeleWest owns and operates 16 cable franchises while affiliated companies
own a further seven. The franchises account for 3.6m homes and 235,000
businesses. TeleWest has a 100 per cent equity interest in a total of 2.8m
homes - aggregating the minority interests - and 180,000 equity businesses.
By the end of September TeleWest had around 188,000 equity cable
subscribers, 125,000 residential telephone lines and 17,000 equity business
lines. In the 12 months to the end of September, revenues were Pounds 63m, a
fivefold increase since the financial year ending December 1991.
Mr Michels wants to increase average penetration by 2 percentage points to
23 per cent by the end of this year and by a further 2 percentage points by
the end of next year. To achieve this, TeleWest will support an
industry-wide advertising campaign on the merits of cable, sell cable more
extensively through high street outlets as well as door-to-door marketing,
and try to negotiate more flexible terms from cable's largest programme
supplier, British Sky Broadcasting (a venture in which Pearson, owner of the
Financial Times, has a significant stake), which is in turn likely to come
to the market by the end of the year.
One analyst suggested yesterday that talk of TeleWest being worth 10 times
operating cashflow sounded 'a bit rich'.
'I would like just a little more comfort that the management is flexible
enough to cope with whatever competition arises,' he said, adding that
TeleWest would probably rank high in an emerging cable sector on the London
Stock Exchange.
Lex, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 19

941108

