FT942-12783

FT  28 APR 94 / SIB orders fresh study of opt-out sales


   By ALISON SMITH


A new survey into the selling of personal pensions to people opting out of
their employers' pension schemes has been commissioned by the Securities and
Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog.
The study will be carried out by Bacon & Woodrow, a firm of consulting
actuaries which specialises in pensions and insurance consulting. It will
form part of the work undertaken by the regulators in response to concern
about the widespread failure of sales agents to meet regulatory requirements
in the selling of pension transfers.
Pension transfers are cases where policies are sold to people investing a
lump sum from a pension scheme with a former employer.
While the number of 'opt-outs' is thought to be much smaller than the
500,000 or more pension transfers sold since 1988, the industry is broadly
agreed that in almost all cases it will have been bad advice to opt out of a
current occupational scheme.
Thus, assessing the scale of opt-outs is critical for determining the likely
overall compensation payable to people who have received poor advice.
'Opt-outs may be less than the number of pension transfers, but they will be
more serious,' one industry expert said. 'In transfers even where the
decision was based on bad advice, the difference is perhaps fairly
marginal.' In almost all opt-outs, customers will have given up the
contributions their employers make to the occupational scheme.
The SIB is committed to producing by the end of July a report setting out a
framework for compensation arrangements.
The tight timetable this implies for the survey was made even more difficult
by the delay in appointing Bacon & Woodrow.
The earlier survey of pension transfer cases undertaken by accountancy firm
KPMG Peat Marwick met some opposition within the life insurance industry,
partly because it was based on looking at files.
The Bacon & Woodrow study will involve going back to sales staff and
clients. It is likely that it will involve thousands of policies sold
through around 100 life offices to try to identify the opt-out pension
sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940428

