FT944-14427

FT  22 OCT 94 / Books: Woman at odds with her nature - Out of conflict,
Doris Lessing has produced literature of the highest rank


   By JUSTIN CARTWRIGHT


UNDER MY SKIN: VOLUME ONE OF MY AUTOBIOGRAPHY by Doris Lessing HarperCollins
Pounds 20, 419 pages
This volume covers the years 1919 until 1949, the formative years. It is a
fascinating account of how Doris Lessing first wrestled with and then
escaped colonial life on the family farm and in Salisbury. Her very earliest
memories are of questioning virtually every aspect of received wisdom.
She was that phenomenon, like Katherine Mansfield and Olive Schreiner, and
perhaps Germaine Greer, a woman who throve on her clear-cut duty to defy
provincial society.
There is a rather moving passage in her recent and rambling African Laughter
where Lessing meets her brother at his farm and discovers that his memory of
old times is very different from hers. He is still puzzled, without wishing
to give offence, by the course of her life.
No doubt this incident will appear in Vol. II, but it seems to be the
central question of this volume. While on one level appearing to be the
bright, cheerful, 'Tigger' Tayler, the daughter of an invalid, failing
farmer and a hyperactive former matron at the Royal Free hospital, how and
why did she harbour both loathing for her mother and a belief in her
destiny, which was some thousands of miles away from Salisbury?
The detestation of her mother is on a par with John Osborne's, yet her
mother seems to be a more or less standard colonial, with all the prejudices
and many of the virtues. Her father, with his detestation of the military
(understandable as he lost a leg in the first world war), is more complex,
and never fully understood or explained.
In the realm of human relations, Doris Lessing appears to have been
singularly inept. Her lack of understanding is perhaps a result of her early
solitude and extensive reading. As she demonstrated in African Laughter, the
beliefs of her youth lie in ruins around her. Communism, which she renounced
in 1954, proved an illusion; belief in a post-war renaissance of rationalism
was shattered; the hope of a post-colonial flowering of Africa has proved
equally illusory.
But the habits of mind have not entirely died. Although she has satirised
the colonial left, she says that her own sense of guilt about abandoning
communism persisted into the 1960.
But the reader will be most intrigued to understand how, after her first
marriage, she was able to abandon young children and live in another part of
Salisbury, marry a communist she did not love and have a third child. She
seems unable to explain this most human of dilemmas, beyond the feeling that
she had to escape from her upbringing to follow the demands of her destiny.
Her destiny demanded that she should never be trapped. It also demanded
respect for dreams. Bouncy, chubby, Tigger Tayler has never forgiven those
who underestimated her.
Out of this tension she has built a wonderful career as a writer. There are
in this volume many insights into the material and the inspiration for her
work. There is also a sort of cloudy imprecision about her thoughts,
particularly on the psychological and political levels, which make this at
times a very unsatisfactory biography.
Strange, though, that these musings are invariably illuminated by some
shafts of understanding, as when she says: 'We should be careful of the
company we keep and the language we use. Regimes, whole countries, have been
taken over by language spreading like a virus from minds whose substance is
hatred and envy. When torturers teach apprentices their trade, they learn
from an ugly lexicon.' She should know: in her early days in Southern
Rhodesia, she was completely besotted by the language of communism: she even
doubts she would have resisted if she had been sent out to kill the kulaks.
What you have, then, is the biography of a very complex woman, a woman at
odds with her own nature, her own family, and the society in which she was
born. In the most fundamental way, in her determination to forge her own
life, she is the archetype of contemporary woman; but she is not a feminist,
if that means believing women are victims of men's exploitation. Sometimes
in her retelling of her loves and political preoccupations she suggests a
loneliness which none of the defiant protestations of 'I will not' can
disguise.
As I read on, I desperately wanted to know if she missed her children and
what had become of her daughter, Jean, by her first marriage. Her son John,
we learn casually, has died of a heart attack, 'not unexpectedly' in view of
the Rhodesian life style. Yet it is the miracle of art that out of the
turbulence and conflict - and probably heartbreak of these years she
produced literature of close to the highest rank.
As the volume ends, she is waiting in a boarding house in Cape Town with her
new son Peter for a ship to England. She knows that there will be a good
outcome as she watches and waits. Her manuscript of The Grass is Singing has
preceded her.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941022

