FT941-4248

FT  11 MAR 94 / World Stock Markets: Oil price trend the joker in Oslo's
hand for 1994 - Karen Fossli on prospects for Norwegian equities


   By KAREN FOSSLI


Last month Norway hosted the Winter Olympics, and captured 10 gold medals on
home ground. This performance has been echoed in the Oslo stock market,
where Norwegian equities, which slightly outperformed continental Europe in
the bonanza year of 1993, have moved well ahead of a faltering field this
year.
Furthermore, in spite of a recent market setback, and potential for further
weakness and turbulence in the short to medium-term, several analysts
believe that Norwegian shares have plenty of room to move up before they are
fully priced.
The market this year has moved from a fixation on domestic interest rates to
being driven by liquidity and corporate earnings, although interest rates
still remain an important factor.
Blue chip earnings for 1993 have been emerging recently in line with, or
slightly higher than, analysts' forecasts. However, since hitting a high for
the year of 688.23 on February 4, the same day that the Federal Reserve
tightened US monetary policy, the market has shed 4.4 per cent, coming under
recent pressure from firmer interest rates and a weaker dollar.
Norway is served best by a firmer dollar because of its export-driven
industries, consisting mainly of light metals and crude oil production, and
it is here that potential for short-term volatil-ity lies.
Goldman Sachs believes that Norwegian interest rates - currently about 5 per
cent for short rates and 5.84 per cent at the long end - have been
surprisingly resilient in view of recent international turmoil and weaker
oil prices.
The American bank cautions that Norway is dependent on international events
and is likely to continue to take direction from these, but believes that
there is, as yet, little fundamental reason to turn bearish on the longer
term outlook when considering the current valuation of the stock market
relative to interest rates.
It says there is still plenty of room for either the stock market or
interest rates to move up before the historical valuation relationship is
hit. But any negative development in crude oil prices is likely to cause a
dramatic rise in domestic interest rates.
Mr Kjell Skjevesland, a director at the Oslo-based Norse Securities, is also
concerned with the oil price/interest rates connection. Oslo's all-share
index could advance by a further 15 to 20 per cent this year, he says, but
he believes that in the short to medium-term the performance of Norwegian
equities will be determined by oil prices and interest rates.
'If oil prices fall to below Dollars 12 a barrel, alarm bells will sound and
interest rates are likely to shoot up,' he maintains. 'I believe, however,
that the Bundesbank is likely to cut rates in the next couple of weeks,
which will be good news for domestic rates and equities.' The joker, he
emphasises, is the oil price.
Oslo equities should also be supported by the solid condition of the
Norwegian economy. Gross domestic product grew by 2.5 per cent last year and
is expected to expand by between 3 and 3.5 per cent in 1994.
Inflation, at 2.3 per cent in 1993, was among the lowest levels in Europe,
and could sink to below 2 per cent in 1994. Wages last year increased by
just 2.7 per cent, the smallest rise for 30 years, and are expected to
remain unchanged in 1994. Private consumption is forecast to grow by 3 per
cent this year and next, fuelled by higher real wage increases and lower
interest rates.
Mr Michael Thompson, an analyst with James Capel, is very bullish and points
out that in spite of the economic sluggishness of Germany, one of Norway's
main trading partners, Oslo's earnings prospects have improved to the extent
that the market, at this early stage in the year, is already trading on just
14.5 times earnings.
Mr Thompson adds, however, that Oslo's advance could be stemmed by companies
tapping the market for fresh equity. Last year NKr6.6bn was raised, but he
believes that this could increase to NKr8.5bn in 1994.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

940311

