FT943-843

FT  27 SEP 94 / International Company News: Poseidon in ADollars 740m
venture deal


   By BRUCE JACQUES and KENNETH GOODING


   SYDNEY, LONDON


Normandy Poseidon, the Australian gold producer, and Bureau de Recherches
Geologiques et Minieres (BRGM), the French government-controlled mining
group, have announced plans to form one of the world's most diverse resource
ventures through transactions involving almost ADollars 740m (USDollars
544m).
The deal represents the first major overseas expansion by Normandy and
follows a recent decision by the French Government to merge its mining
division with a privately-owned group with a view to building an
international mining house.
It also calls into question the long-standing relationship between Normandy
and Anglo American Corporation of South Africa which in the past Mr Robert
Champion de Crespigny, Normandy's chairman, has described as 'very special'.
Anglo recently transferred its near-20 per cent holding in Normandy to its
offshore operating arm, Minorco, which also has ambitions to expand
globally. Although Normandy and Minorco will find themselves competing for
international assets, Minorco welcomed the BRGM deal and said: 'The world is
a big place. We hope relationships are good enough for (Minorco and
Normandy) to work side by side rather than in competition.'
Normandy's deal with BRGM will create a group with mining and exploration
interests in Europe, Africa and South America and also involve BRGM taking a
9 per cent interest in Normandy, which has annual Australian gold production
of more than 1m oz.
The centrepiece will be the formation of a new company, La Source Compagnie
Miniere SAS (LaSource), controlled 60 per cent by Normandy and 40 per cent
by BRGM.
The Normandy group will earn its interest in LaSource by paying ADollars
118m, while BRGM will contribute assets valued at around ADollars 338m and
liabilities of ADollars 50m.
Other major components of the deal include:
Poseidon Gold, a Normandy associate, will pay a further ADollars 130m for a
37 per cent share in Company Miniere International Or SA (Mine Or SA), which
will include all BRGM's gold interests. La Source will control 40 per cent
of this company and BRGM 23 per cent.
Mine Or SA will purchase, for about ADollars 43m to be satisfied by a
promissory note, companies controlling Eurogold Madenclik, a Turkish gold
operation, and other resource interests in Greece and Bulgaria.
On completion, BRGM will subscribe for 47.6m Normandy shares at ADollars
2.19, representing about 9 per cent of the company's capital, and raising
ADollars 105m. The price compares with a close of ADollars 2.55, up 5 cents,
for Normandy shares on Australian stock exchanges yesterday.
The deals are subject to government and shareholder approvals, and possibly
some pre-emptive rights. The contractual completion date is June 30 next
year.
Mr Champion de Crespigny said the transaction represented a quantum leap in
offshore expansion for Normandy. The new venture would provide access to
exploration ground and potential for further acquisitions.
Its assets would include an iron ore project in Guinea, a mineral sands
project in Cameroon and control of the Yanacocha gold mine in Peru.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940927

