FT943-12866

FT  22 JUL 94 / Some fight left in them: Reaction to the latest round of UK
defence cuts


   By BRUCE CLARK


Something unusual is going on in the rarefied world inhabited by the UK's
most senior generals, admirals and air marshals.
They are not complaining as loudly as might have been expected about the
government's latest economy drive, which will cost the defence establishment
more than 18,000 jobs and leave the forces even smaller than predicted by
the end of the decade.
But this does not mean that the atmosphere at the top of Britain's armed
forces is free from anxiety. While generally accepting the cuts announced
last week, the top brass is concerned about the next round of reductions
which - despite official protestations to the contrary - is widely expected
within three years.
They take some comfort from the fact that the measures announced by Mr
Malcom Rifkind, defence secretary, fell hardest on civilian employees of the
defence ministry, who lost 7,100 jobs. Service chiefs will shed few tears
about the trimming of a civilian bureaucracy to which they lost power in the
1980s under Mrs Thatcher.
Mr Rifkind even won some friends in the forces, by planning the MoD cuts
after wide consultation across the services and restoring to the service
chiefs some of the responsibilities they lost under his predecessors.
As one distinguished general privately commented: 'There is real hope now
that the principle of delegation to the service chiefs will now be applied -
and there is quiet rejoicing about the reduced size of the Ministry of
Defence.'
The other main victim of the cuts is the Royal Air Force, which will shed
7,500 jobs, as activities such as maintenance and training, previously
undertaken by airmen, are taken over by civilians. But even air force chiefs
 -who claimed to have warded off much deeper cuts than were finally decreed
 -have acknowledged the RAF was overmanned, compared with such formidable
air powers as Israel and Sweden.
So the job losses decreed by Mr Rifkind have been accepted with relatively
little complaint. Yet oddly enough, the minister's accompanying 'sweetener'
of a Pounds 5bn weapons procurement package has not laid to rest the forces'
fears about Britain's fighting strength in the medium term.
Virtually all the decisions announced by Mr Rifkind - some Pounds 2.4bn
worth of firm orders (for tanks, minehunters and ammunition) and Pounds
2.5bn in potential orders (for frigates, submarines and cruise missiles) -
were confirmations of purchases already announced in principle.
The MoD now admits that it could not have afforded the items on its shopping
list unless its newly announced drive to cut unnecessary costs and staff
jobs had been so wide-ranging.
This principle of trading weapons purchases for job losses has worrying
implications for the other procurement decisions to which the government is
committed in principle but for which it has not earmarked precise sums.
These 'decisions in principle' include the commitment to buy 250 Eurofighter
aircraft for at least Pounds 9bn from the year 2000; 12 new-generation
frigates for a total of about Pounds 3bn; and in the immediate future, new
attack helicopters.
In practice, the government may not be able to afford these systems unless
it is prepared to make further economies in personnel and other military
overheads.
Mr David Clark, Labour defence spokesman, reckons that by 1998-99, there
will be a Pounds 3.5bn shortfall between available revenues and total
defence spending commitments. 'The defence ministry knows this to be true,
but is keeping it quiet,' he maintains.
Fears over the looming shortfall are shared by many senior officers.
Mr Rifkind dismisses these concerns. He claims that even after last week's
cuts, Britain's fighting capacity remains unimpaired or even enhanced. This
view is supported by the reputation enjoyed by the UK's forces at home and
abroad. The army's stock has surged as a result of its performance in
Bosnia, where a tiny UK force of 3,000 men has played a crucial role in
bringing relative normality to the lives of hundreds of thousands of people.
This has been achieved by the army's employment of the old-fashioned - not
to say imperialist - skills of bluff and brinkmanship in the handling of
conflict; and it has won the army some new friends in unfamiliar quarters,
beginning with the Labour party.
The army's influence in Nato is also at a high point. UK officers run the
showpiece of the alliance: the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps, which brings
together the forces of up to 12 nations for any purpose, from humanitarian
aid to high-intensity tank warfare.
But as service chiefs are aware, the UK's prowess in military affairs rests
on thin ice. The latest round of cuts will leave the ice a little thinner;
and the next round could bring the forces to breaking point.
Prestigious as it is, engagement in Bosnia is stretching the forces to the
limits of their capacity. For example, the deployment of ships in the
Adriatic is close to exhausting available navy resources.
Only by the skin of their teeth were the UK forces able to transport one
extra battalion to Bosnia earlier this year. The operation involved 36
flights by the RAF's ageing fleet of Hercules transporters, and the use of
three of the navy's five landing ships, one of which was sent for overhaul
this week.
An acutely embarrassing situation could arise if the next Bosnia-type crisis
breaks out in the next two years when the forces are in the middle of a
painful transfer from military to civilian logistics. Mr Michael Clark, of
London University's Centre for Defence Studies, says the government is
taking a 'calculated risk' that it will not be wrong-footed by an unexpected
crisis.
The UK's last two wars - in the Falklands and the Gulf - were unpleasant
surprises and left in smithereens the conventional wisdom of the moment
about defence needs.
In both conflicts, the government benefited from good luck. In the Gulf, the
forces had just enough time to prepare their weapons for battle, and the war
was short enough to avoid difficult questions about ammunitions supplies.
Politicians may have forgotten the role of luck and the dangers of assuming
it will hold; but generals and admirals have not. While they have adopted a
relatively low-key response to the current round of cuts, they warn that
further sacrifices in manpower and weaponry would incur risks for which they
will not be held responsible.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940722

