FT944-2969

FT  15 DEC 94 / The Lex Column: Electric shock


Trafalgar House has sent a shock through the electricity sector. At the
minimum, news that it may bid for Northern Electric will force all 12
regional electricity companies to pay greater attention to shareholder
value. The move could also trigger consolidation of the industry.
Northern is vulnerable because it has done relatively little to cut costs.
So a more aggressive management may be able to squeeze greater value from
its assets. But whether Northern falls will depend on how much Trafalgar is
prepared to pay. Shareholders are unlikely to be interested in an offer of
less than Pounds 8 a share in cash plus whatever net proceeds Northern
receives from demerging its stake in the National Grid - worth perhaps a
further Pounds 2 a share.
Northern's best defence will be to improve earnings per share by gearing up
its balance sheet through large dividends or share buy-backs. With a stable
monopoly franchise, the company could manage gearing of over 50 per cent.
Though Northern has already bought back 10 per cent of its equity, it is
still ungeared.
The alternative defence - seeking a white knight - could be futile. Other
companies, notably Scottish Power, are thought to have looked at Northern.
But why would they become embroiled in a bidding war with Trafalgar when
they have 11 other recs to choose from?
Such thinking points to copycat bids or mergers rather than counterbids. For
bidders outside the industry, the logic of buying a rec would be that they
could manage it better - unless, like Trafalgar, they can also use up tax
losses. For other electricity companies, the logic is different: merging two
recs could eliminate duplication in head offices, customer services and
billing systems. That could save up to Pounds 50m a year, though not all the
benefits would go to shareholders. The industry's regulator has said that
customers must receive their cut.
While intra-rec mergers could make sense, it would be a mistake if they were
embarked on for defensive reasons. Shareholders would not be pleased if two
fearful recs joined forces as a way of avoiding tough decisions on
cost-cutting. It would be better to remain independent, cut costs and gear
up balance sheets.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941215

