FT943-975

FT  27 SEP 94 / Rivals dispute price claims by Energis


   By ANDREW ADONIS


Energis, the new UK long-distance telecommunications operator, unveiled its
prices yesterday, promising strong competition with British
Telecommunications and Mercury.
However, Energis's claims that its tariffs were up to 44 per cent cheaper
than BT's standard rates met an angry denial from BT, which said that some
of Energis's published figures exaggerated BT's tariffs by half.
For daytime calls the price differential between Energis and BT standard
tariffs is between about 11 per cent and 17 per cent. It is also
significantly cheaper than Mercury for some calls.
Volume discounts can make straight comparisons misleading, but taking
account of its own volume discounts, Energis remains strongly competitive
with both BT and Mercury, particularly for high-volume telecoms users.
Energis has no local network and is competing with BT only for long-distance
and international traffic.
A subsidiary of National Grid, Energis has used National Grid's pylons to
carry its 3,500km fibre-optic network.
It said that its overheads were far lower than those of its rivals in terms
of initial investment and operating costs. Energis has invested Pounds 250m
in its long-distance network, compared with Mercury's Pounds 2.7bn. It has
about 340 employees, Mercury 10,500.
The prices were presented by Mr Gordon Owen, Energis chairman, and Mr David
Dey, chief executive.
Mr Dey said that unlike BT and Mercury Energis would contract out all
functions except strategic management and customer service, significantly
reducing its cost base.
Energis identified small and medium-size businesses as its main target. This
is the segment of the corporate sector which has gained least from Mercury
in the last decade. Mercury said it was now concentrating on the same group.
BT also faces local competition from cable operators, and from other
operators concentrating on specific sections of the business market,
particularly in the City.
Mr Laurence Heyworth, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming, the merchant bank,
said the launch of Energis was likely to accelerate the reduction of
long-distance phone tariffs, bringing them more closely in line with local
call prices.
BT alliance, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940927

