FT942-14762

FT  19 APR 94 / Arts: Lady Windermere's Fan / Our critic finds Wilde in
Kilburn


   By PAUL DRIVER


Sean Kearns's gigantic Duchess of Berwick says 'None of us men do look what
we really are,' as she quick-changes before our eyes into Lord Augustus
Lorton. But the point about the production by the Irish company Rough Magic
of Wilde's Lady Windermere's Fan, now at the Kilburn Tricycle, is not that
it is a drag interpretation but a brusque and clever ensemble piece in which
four of the seven actors happen to have multiple roles, male and female; a
production certainly thereby risking a roughness of despatch, but securing
its moments of magic.
The play is put within a double frame of music and circus. When we enter, a
violinist (Aingeala de Butca) and pianist (Andrew Synnott) are half-visibly
playing Palm Court Faure at the rear, and they sustain a musical commentary
throughout the entire action, underpinning suspense with a dry pizzicato,
sawing out the heartbreak, and crucially, of course, playing dances for the
Second Act ball. The Victorian melodrama of the plot becomes melodrama in
the other sense of melos plus talk.
The circus idea is that the butler Parker, acted by Mal Whyte, who also
skilfully takes the roles of Lady Plymdale and raucous Australian Mr Hopper,
presents the play at the outset in the character of a clown or Lulu-style
ringmaster, when he also points out the Tricycle fire-exits and mentions the
conveniences of the interval. He keeps his clown's white and rouged cheeks
in all three of his roles. Miche Doherty as a mincing Lady Agatha ('So
devoted to sunsets]', as her mother the Duchess says) and a scaldingly witty
Cecil Graham, wears that makeup too, as do Kearns and Darragh Kelly's deaf
Lady Jedbergh.
Through circus tricks the small cast on the small platform manages to
reproduce the whirl and glitter of a ball most admirably; and the collective
clownface is doubtless a gloss on Lord Darlington's famous remark, 'I think
that life is far too important a thing ever to talk seriously about it'.
Martin Murphy, despite the earring and rings, makes the latter a dour sort
of dandy, and is more convincing later when thwarted love has taken the
dandy's humour away (also, it would seem, his English accent). Ali White is
an excellently noble and foolish, beautiful Lady Windermere; Paul Hickey
perhaps too solemn as her husband. Helene Montague's vivid Mrs Erlynne - the
scarlet woman - succeeds rather by force than finesse. The production's
magic comes with the strange, dark, cigar-smoky, violin-permeated atmosphere
of the all-male passage of the third act, when epigrams are hurled like
knives.
Till May 7; then in Sligo, Limerick, Belfast, Dublin.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

940419

