FT942-15490

FT  15 APR 94 / West threatens more air strikes against Serbs


   By EDWARD MORTIMER and LAURA SILBER


   ZAGREB


The Bosnian Serbs received stern warnings from the White House and Nato
yesterday after they provoked the United Nations by threatening a UN
compound near Sarajevo with a tank and shelling the safe haven of Tuzla.
The UN said Serb forces moved in on French soldiers at a UN depot at
Krivoglavci, just outside Sarajevo, and tried to take back heavy weapons
surrendered in February, as part of a deal to avert air strikes.
Nato officials said the shelling of Tuzla, seen as a direct challenge to the
UN commander General, Sir Michael Rose, died down after US, British, French
and Dutch aircraft buzzed the Serb positions.
The alliance also stated pointedly that it still had a mandate to make air
strikes against heavy weapons in the Sarajevo area. Nato aircraft were in
the air and ready to strike, one US official said.
President Bill Clinton said the Bosnian Serbs would be making a mistake to
treat the UN or Nato personnel as combatants. He accused them of trying to
'leverage their position' by detaining UN staff in Serb-controlled
territory.
The attack on Tuzla, a UN-designated safe area in north-eastern Bosnia, was
a direct challenge to Gen Rose, who this week prompted Nato to carry out air
strikes against the Serb forces attacking Gorazde, another safe haven.
The airport at Tuzla is an especially provocative target. The UN three weeks
ago declared it open as a route for relief supplies to central Bosnia, but
no aid flights have yet landed there, because Serb forces insist on having
their own monitors on the spot - a demand rejected by the Bosnian
government.
Tuzla is the centre of the largest region of Bosnia still under government
control.
In Belgrade, the local office of the United Nations High Commission for
Refugees reported mounting harassment, with Molotov cocktails thrown at its
premises, and vandals slashing the tyres and smashing the windows of UNHCR
vehicles.
The Belgrade office of the relief agency Unicef has also received bomb
threats, and a UNHCR official was threatened with pistols as she was about
to be interviewed by a western television team.
Lord Owen, the EU mediator, said yesterday that the shelling of Tuzla 'can
only be a direct provocation'.
He was speaking on board a Ukrainian Yak 40 aircraft which was taking him
and his UN colleague, Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, back to UN headquarters in
Zagreb, after talks with Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, in
his mountain stronghold of Pale, and with Gen Rose in Sarajevo, where 4,317
UN troops and other personnel are encircled by Serb checkpoints.
The mediators themselves had considerable difficulty reaching the airport
from Sarajevo, as the Serbs have blocked the main road with containers, so
that the party had to take a detour through the suburb of Dobrinja, where
they were held up by a traffic jam of UN vehicles.
Lord Owen and Mr Stoltenberg are so far the only western representatives who
have been allowed in to Bosnian Serb territory, in an obvious effort by the
Serbs to distance themselves from the UN and US and to revive the earlier
Geneva peace process.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940415

