FT942-15390

FT  15 APR 94 / Arts: No love in 'The Butterfly Kiss' - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


No-one likes to break a butterfly upon a wheel, so I shall be gentle with
the new play at the Almeida, save to say that it is one the most unpleasant
pieces I have seen on a London stage. According to a programme note, the
subject of Phyllis Nagy's Butterfly Kiss is matricide, 'dramatically
speaking', the note claims, 'a no-go area'. And it is true that a girl does
kill her mother. But it is not the subject one objects to; it's the play.
A butterfly kiss, the programme also reveals, is American slang for 'a
caress given by winking one eye so that the lashes brush against the face of
the receiver'. Yet unless you count the increasingly frenetic groping of a
couple of lesbians in the background, there is not much caressing in the
piece; nor much winking either.
Instead, there is a lot of brandishing of a vicious-looking kitchen knife
and the suggestion, possibly a joke, that Sloan Ross, the ex-US Marine
turned lepidopterist, may kill butterflies with a Luger, the same gun which
is eventually used by his daughter to kill his wife.
The motivation remains obscure throughout partly because this is one of
those irritating plays that dot backwards and forwards in time. But even if
you try to put the events in chronological order, the motives are still
unclear.
There is an old woman and a daughter, both of whom seem fairly high on the
bottle. The daughter marries the ex-marine, who turns up at the wedding with
another ex-marine as best man and a floozy who (we learn) is already the
mistress of the groom.
Sloan, the groom, tells his wife that he does not want children - yet.
Nevertheless, a daughter called Lily arrives and it is she who may be at the
centre of the piece. By the time she is 14, she has seduced the other
marine. She then kills her mother with the gun handed to her by her father,
possibly at her mother's drunken request: there is some suggestion that it
is manslaughter, not murder. Lily (played by Elizabeth Berridge) is also
seduced by a lesbian named Martha - who at least has the virtue of being the
only remotely attractive character in the piece.
Perhaps there is something to be said for Sloan's amiable ex-marine friend,
Teddy Roosevelt Hayes, but since the part is not filled out it is impossible
to say. There is a striking set, with a case of butterflies in the
background, designed by Mark Thompson. Otherwise one wonders what a director
like Steven Pimlott and a theatre like the Almeida are doing with a piece
like this. Phyllis Nagy, the author, is a New Yorker living in London who is
now the Arts Council writer-in-residence at the Royal Court, so there may be
more to come.
Almeida Theatre until April 30. (071) 359 4404

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940415

