FT944-14468

FT  22 OCT 94 / The Long View: Knowing your limits


   By BARRY RILEY


Unlimited liability used to be a curiously old-fashioned sign of a
gentlemanly way of doing business. Now it simply looks like an open
invitation to ungentlemanly litigants. With the current flotation of several
more corporate vehicles for Lloyd's, including Wellington Underwriting and
Matheson Lloyd's Investment Trust, following the earlier group of investment
trusts launched last year, it appears as though these limited liability
vehicles will account for more than a fifth of total capacity at the
troubled London insurance market in 1995.
Before many years have gone by it is likely that the unlimited liabilities
assumed by names for the past centuries will have become a thing of the
past. Many names have, of course, simply been wiped out. The luckier ones
will wonder why they should ever take such risks again.
So much for an ancient tradition - and good riddance too, many ruined
gentlefolk will say. But willingness to back your skill and your reputation
with your entire fortune is a highly laudable feature of any financial
community. It served the City of London well for centuries. Now, however,
unlimited liability is disappearing from Lloyd's as it largely disappeared
from the Stock Exchange a decade ago.
The professions are going the same way: one of the biggest accountancy
firms, KPMG Peat Marwick, believes it has found a way to incorporate its UK
auditing business with limited liability. The well-advised partners at Peats
have no intention of suffering the fate of the less well-served Gooda Walker
names.
Unlimited liability was once much more widespread, for instance among
merchant banks - but Baring Brothers, for example, incorporated a century
ago after its rescue by the Bank of England. Today odd pockets of unlimited
liability still cling on - at the US investment bank Goldman Sachs, and top
stockbrokers Cazenove.
Unlimited liability outlived its relevance in the big global markets many
years ago, when the potential risks began to multiply and US lawyers began
to sharpen their teeth. However, it has persisted because of the privileges
it has bestowed and, in the case of Lloyd's, because the risks were not
understood, at any rate by the Names.
The main attraction has been lack of disclosure. The penalty for the
privilege of limited liability is that your financial affairs must be
revealed to your actual or potential creditors. Limited companies must pay
for expensive annual statutory audits - paradoxically conducted until now by
secretive partnerships of auditors who shrink from public disclosures. There
have also been tax advantages.
Lloyd's expanded steadily in the postwar years because of its plethora of
tax and currency loopholes at a time when wealthy Britons paid 98 per cent
income tax on investment income, and were trapped by foreign exchange
controls.
In the same period, London Stock Exchange firms thrived as unlimited
partnerships so long as the securities markets were closely controlled, with
fixed commissions and a clublike rulebook. Even the jobbers, who accepted
position risk in a way that the brokers did not, traded satisfactorily in a
sheltered environment. Once the markets were opened to international
competition, however, the risks multiplied.
Why did Lloyd's not see the same problem coming? An important problem was
the existence of a layer of agents between the risk-bearers (the Names) and
the market. There was a breach of trust and immense losses resulted. Now,
many ruined Names will suffer the final insult that they will be unable to
participate in the return of the Lloyd's market to profit.
Lloyd's last reported a profit (of Pounds 509m) in 1991, in respect of 1987,
on the three-year accounting system. Then came the losses, reaching over
Pounds 2bn for each of 1990 and 1991. Of course, not all syndicates made
substantial losses. There has been a flight to quality, with the 400-odd
syndicates of 1990 likely to dwindle to 150 or less by 1995.
The corporate capital is obviously being attracted to the best syndicates.
Lloyd's results will anyway have improved out of recognition in the past
couple of years, with the insurance cycle turning round (although it may now
be past its peak). New capital should make a good return so long as it is
successfully ring-fenced from the past problems of Lloyd's, largely related
to asbestosis and pollution.
But the year-old Lloyd's investment trusts, of which there are about a
dozen, have failed to shine so far. The big attraction is that the capital
can work twice over - yielding a normal investment return but also a second
profit from backing the insurance risk. Yet the Lloyd's market remains under
a suspicion. There continue to be fears that the ring-fencing from the 'old
years' will be breached, and Lloyd's 1995 solvency test might yet prove a
tough hurdle.
The kind of unprecedented claims through the US courts that sank so many
Names have also threatened the big firms of accountants. Most are open to
various claims of negligent auditing from aggrieved investors.
It was an anomaly that accountants should have retained unlimited liability
as they grew over decades from small beginnings to global firms auditing
multinational corporations. As with Lloyd's, the risks grew out of
proportion to the available wealth. A prominent American firm, Laventhal &
Horwath, actually ceased trading in 1990, and others remain threatened. Most
of the Big Six US firms have become Delaware limited liability partnerships
during the past few months.
All this, no doubt, is progress. But in the City of London, unlimited
liability once put a premium on the senior partner's nose for probity. Would
old-fashioned partnerships have, for instance, floated quite so many
ill-prepared new issues as have been launched this year? The danger is that
limited liability leads to limited responsibility.

The Financial Times


London Page I

941022

