FT942-14817

FT  19 APR 94 / Confident Lib Dems predict more gains


   By DAVID OWEN


The Liberal Democrats yesterday underlined their confidence of making
headway in next month's local elections, predicting that they alone among
the three main parties would gain seats in areas they already control.
As the Conservatives and Labour traded punches over the relative cost and
efficiency of councils they control, Mr Matthew Taylor, Liberal Democrat
campaign chief, said his party's 'revolutionary' approach to local democracy
would be reflected in the results of the May 5 elections.
Mr Taylor said the party would advance not only in areas where 'Labour and
Conservatives have been too long in control', but would be 'the only party
that advances in areas where we do have control and influence'.
The Liberal Democrats' confidence is in marked contrast to the attitude of
the other two leading parties which have tended to play down their election
prospects.
The Tories yesterday trained their fire on Mr Jack Straw, the shadow
environment secretary, with Sir Norman Fowler, the party chairman, accusing
him of 'making evidently bogus claims' and 'statistical gerrymandering'.
Sir Norman was supported by Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, who said
Labour councils were not up to scratch, whether the yardstick was price,
priorities or competence. 'No matter how Jack Straw flannels, it's obvious
to all that Labour councils cost you more,' he added. Mr Straw accused his
opposite number of getting some of his facts 'badly wrong'.
The Liberal Democrats yesterday launched a document detailing the changes
Liberal Democrat councils were making to give people greater involvement in
the running of their local communities.
Mr David Rendel, local government spokesman, said his was the only party
doing this because 'the principle of devolution is more important than
playing political games'.
Speaking at the Scottish TUC, Mr George Robertson, shadow Scottish
secretary, said the elections for Scotland's nine regional councils and
three island authorities could 'go down in history' as a verdict on the
government.
He said: 'This government deserves to be judged harshly, and I believe that
the people will do just that.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940419

