FT941-13115

FT  27 JAN 94 / Budget measures face challenge


   By DAVID OWEN


Budget proposals on capital gains tax and insurance are expected to come
under fire as MPs begin to scrutinise the detail of the 244-clause finance
bill next week.
Conservative MPs are among those trying to force changes to the plans of Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, to scrap the indexation of capital losses
and to impose a 3 per cent insurance premium tax from October 1995.
A move to prevent the Inland Revenue from taxing directors' and officers'
liability insurance (D&O) as a benefit in kind is also expected.
MPs argue that the present position acts as a deterrent to those considering
becoming company directors since, in the case of non-executives, the premium
can sometimes exceed what they would be paid.
Following this week's second reading MPs are expected to start evaluating
the fine print of the bill on Monday. The proposed insurance premium tax is
among the subjects listed for debate.
Conservative backbench critics are unlikely to join Labour in arguing that
the new tax - forecast to raise Pounds 750m in a full year and to affect 85
per cent of households - should be abandoned altogether. But they are
expected to argue that the list of exemptions should be extended to include
Pool Re, the specialist terrorist damage reinsurer set up after commercial
insurers withdrew from the market, and others.
Under current plans long-term insurance products such as endowments would be
exempt, as would some types of commercial insurance, such as export credit
and shipping insurance.
MPs will also seek clarification on details such as whether the tax point
for the new levy would be the date when a payment notice was sent out or
when payment was received, and whether the tax would be chargeable on
commission.
Strong Tory opposition is expected to Mr Clarke's proposal to abolish the
indexation of capital losses while retaining the indexation of capital gains
 -a change forecast to raise an additional Pounds 300m by 1996-97 and
portrayed in November as a tax-avoidance measure.
MPs are expected to argue that by removing indexation for transactions on or
after Budget day Mr Clarke will in some cases impose real capital gains tax
rates of more than 40 per cent on ordinary investors.
The purchase of D&O insurance has expanded greatly in recent years, in
response to the growing number of potential liabilities faced by company
directors.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940127

