FT942-12815

FT  28 APR 94 / World Trade News: Fresh push to curb aid for shipbuilders


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Business Editor


The world's leading shipbuilding nations plan a final attempt in Paris next
month to conclude an agreement curbing inter-national subsidies after more
than four years of neg-otiations.
The talks, which broke off acrimoniously in late March, will resume in the
week of May 23 on the basis of a draft text prepared by the chairman, Mr
Staffan Sohlman, Sweden's ambassador to the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
The negotiations have been given renewed impetus by the possibility that
failure to agree would prompt the Clinton administration to back bills in
Congress which would authorise US retaliation against ships built in
subsidised foreign yards.
Retaliation, in the form of a ban on such vessels entering US ports, would
severely disrupt maritime transport and could trigger an international trade
war.
The seven delegations involved in the talks insist any agreement must be a
comprehensive package deal. But though they have agreed some of its proposed
elements - including an end to direct budgetary subsidies  - they remain
divided on several important issues.
One of the biggest breakthroughs to date has been acceptance by Japan and
South Korea of western demands for an anti-dumping code, providing for
penalties on shipbuilders which pursued 'injurious pricing' strategies.
However, negotiators say a complex wrangle has developed over the procedures
for settling disputes over alleged violations of the proposed subsidies
rules.
The US, which exports few ships, wants strict procedures administered by an
independent panel of judges. But its demand is opposed by other countries,
which fear it could make it harder to sell vessels to US shipowners. A
further stumbling block in the talks is the Jones Act, the long-standing US
legislation which requires a fixed proportion of cargo passing through
American ports to be carried in vessels built in US yards.
Though other delegations have pressed for repeal of the Jones Act, most
accept this is politically unlikely and that, in any case, the legislation
affects only a small fraction of the world's shipping fleet.
Several delegations say they are ready to settle for a US undertaking that
tonnages covered by the Jones Act will not exceed recent levels. However,
the European Union, under pressure from France, is calling on the US to
improve its offer.
Some delegations suspect France of using the Jones Act as a pretext to try
to torpedo the negotiations. They say that, without subsidies, most French
shipbuilders could not compete with more efficient lower-cost yards,
particularly in Asia.
The third difficulty is over a US demand for a provision in the proposed
agreement to allow governments to require vessels financed by 'home credit'
schemes, which benefit their national shipping fleets, to be built in
national yards.
Though other delegations blamed the breakdown of the negotiations in March
on the last-minute tabling of this demand, most now seem less strongly
opposed to it.
However, some say they are still concerned that its real objective is to
enable the US to expand its merchant shipbuilding capacity by assisting the
conversion of military yards to commercial purposes.
The negotiations, held under the auspices of the OECD, also involve Finland,
Norway and Sweden.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940428

