FT942-15789

FT  13 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: France settles for a draw in
fight over fish imports


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


France yesterday got a little further in its efforts to get the EU to set up
a crisis regime for the European fishing industry and clamp down on fish
imports
Last month, Paris bludgeoned the European Commission into a two-month
extension until mid-May of minimum import prices for white fish and Atlantic
salmon by threatening to veto Norway's entry into the Union next year. But
after that signal victory, yesterday's encounter of EU fisheries ministers
was more like a score draw.
Seven member states supported France. But the UK, Germany, Holland and
Denmark  - major importers of fish for their processing industries  - formed
an alliance to block the French demands until they were well diluted.
France said that the 30 per cent fall in white-fish prices earlier this
year, which led to serious riots by Breton fishermen, was without precedent.
It wanted tighter health and veterinary controls on imports, which moreover
should only be landed at designated ports, and to subject incoming fish to
the minimum price regimes set by local fishermen's associations. It has
already been holding up fish imports, especially from Russia, the Ukraine,
Poland and the US, through zealous health inspections.
France was able to claim that it had won its demands when Germany lifted its
objections, leaving the British, Dutch and Danes to be outvoted. But the
price of Bonn's switch is that the new controls will apply only to fresh
fish, thereby excluding the majority of imported fish, which is brought in
for processing.
The new regime starts on May 15 and will be reviewed after two years, during
which regional fishermen's associations will be able to raise prices to a
maximum of 10 per cent over the EU reference price, provided the increase
applies to both EU and imported fish.
Moreover, France had to agree to higher tonnages of special quota fish for
the processing industry, imported under low tariffs of 0 to 6 per cent.
France had complained that 62 per cent of EU imports, and 86 per cent of
French imports, were being brought in under special tariff deals.
But the main battle over the structural crisis in Europe's fisheries has
been postponed to the next ministerial meeting here in June, by when the
Commission is to come up with recommendations.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

940413

