FT943-693

FT  28 SEP 94 / Arts: Goodness triumphant in 'La Cenerentola' - Opera


   By DAVID MURRAY


La bonta in trionfo was Ferretti's subtitle for La Cenerentola, Rossini's
Cinderella opera. That was a bit of lily-gilding: never has a happy ending
been so earnestly, repetitiously signalled, from the start of the opera.
(Perhaps Ferretti was a little anxious; though La Cenerentola is a comic
masterpiece, it has its cruel moments.) At Covent Garden on Monday,
nonetheless, goodness triumphed so wonderfully  - in the person of Olga
Borodina - that the subtitle seemed to tell the plain truth.
Miss Borodina's Angelina looks placid and artless, a sleepy pussy-cat. From
about the second line of her favourite song, however, as the voice swung
down into its rich low register, everyone suddenly realised that we were to
get something extraordinary. There is translucent warmth and depth in her
mezzo, but also an uncanny immediacy; one feels personally addressed. Though
it is a big voice, with power to spare, it always retains that quality of
modest, intimate confession.
She went from strength to strength. The first passages of coloratura found
her not quite focussed, but once adjusted she soared away, dazzling more
with every number. At the close, in the great 'Non piu mesta', fluid art
vied gloriously with radiant feeling. Somehow the poignant simplicity
remained intact, as if her Angelina has never expected anything, is amazed
and delighted by what happens, but takes it all in her stride.
This is a performance to treasure. Everybody else in this Cenerentola is
well up to form, and more. Michael Hampe's production, elegant, unfussy and
perfectly sympathetic, has again been revived by David Massarella; since
half the cast are new to it, one should credit him with some degree of
creative input.
The nasty step-sisters, for example - Jennifer Rhys-Davies and Christine
Botes, both new - inhabit their roles with bright comic malevolence,
excellently mimed but staying well within credible bounds (and singing very
well). The new Alcindoro, that curious Christian mystic who replaces the
fairy godmother, is Alastair Miles, who has at least three-quarters of the
appropriate gravitas and a fine, fervent uplift. Don Magnifico, the
stepfather so disgracefully awful that he can only be funny, is Simone
Alaimo, whose Sicilian extravagance is probably all his own, ebullient and
stylish.
Returning from earlier casts we have Raul Gimenez as the fairytale Prince
Don Ramiro, and Francois Le Roux as his fly valet Dandini. Gimenez is a
long-standing Rossinian stalwart; here he was in particularly affecting
voice, which in his case is like very dry sherry with a strong kick. Last
time round - with the enchanting Anne Sofie von Otter - I do not remember
such a magical rapport between him and Angelina in their first duet, each
musing raptly to himself or herself. This time it drew tears.
Le Roux is again so personable and clever that a little vocal fudging goes
unnoticed. The new conductor is Bruno Campanella, who offers a rare
combination of light, nervy touch and a rigorous way with quick tempi: quite
right in Rossini, though the singers had to scramble a bit. I wouldn't have
missed it for anything.
In repertory at the Royal Opera to October 15.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940928

