FT944-14560

FT  22 OCT 94 / Fowler urges probe over MPs' interests


   By DAVID OWEN


A former Tory cabinet minister last night called for a wide-ranging
independent inquiry into MPs' outside interests as an influential Commons
committee prepared to consider the alleged non-registration of a 1987 visit
by Mr Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, to a luxury Paris hotel.
Sir Norman Fowler, who stepped down earlier this year as Tory party
chairman, said the inquiry should be modelled on the Cadbury committee set
up to consider questions of corporate governance.
Sir Norman told his constituency association that it had been 'a bad week
for parliament' and action was needed to assure the public that MPs' conduct
was governed by 'proper and sensible rules'.
Sir Norman said: 'We do not need a committee of inquiry to tell us that
putting down questions for payment is wrong. That is self-evidently the
case.
'But it is quite clear that . . . some politicians do not intend to let the
matter rest there. We should not allow the agenda to be set by political
muckrakers. We should respond by recognising that there is legitimate public
concern.'
Sir Norman's remarks came as Mr Alex Carlile, Liberal Democrat MP for
Montgomery, made a formal complaint, demanding a Commons investigation into
Mr Hamilton's visit to the Ritz hotel on a trip alleged to have been paid
for by Mr Mohamed Fayed, owner of both the hotel and Harrods, the London
department store.
In a letter to Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith, Tory chairman of the select
committee on members' interests, Mr Carlile said he wished to make a formal
complaint so that the matter could be investigated.
Referring to reports in The Guardian newspaper about the visit by Mr
Hamilton and his wife - 'at a total cost of allegedly over Pounds 4,000' -
Mr Carlile said the 'non-registration of that interest has . . . never been
investigated or ruled upon by your committee', despite 'reports to the
contrary'.
Downing Street said on Thursday that Mr Hamilton's visit had been looked at
by the committee. Tory party managers had been told by the chairman that it
was taking no action. But senior Whitehall officials have acknowledged that
the committee had not produced a formal report.
Mr Terry Lewis, Labour committee member, said yesterday that Bob Cryer, the
late Labour MP, had raised Mr Hamilton's hotel bill in committee but his
recollection was that there was no investigation.
Mr Carlile's letter will be discussed by the committee at its next meeting -
a date for which has yet to be set.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941022

