FT941-4089

FT  12 MAR 94 / Markets: Bond investors let their hearts rule - Wall Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


During the bull cycle in financial assets, between 1990 and 1993, the US
stock market happily trailed along behind a booming bond market. When bond
prices rose, so did share prices. This made sense. Higher bond prices meant
lower long-term interest rates.
Lower rates were both good for the struggling economy, because they cut the
cost of capital for companies and loans for consumers, and good for share
prices, because they made stocks look more attractive relative to
fixed-income securities.
However, now that the bulls have deserted bonds, and long-term interest
rates are speedily rising, the stock market is struggling to unhitch its
wagon from a panicking bond market.
This is not to say that the stock market should ignore the bond market's
decline. Since October, long-term interest rates (as measured by the yield
on the benchmark 30-year government bond) have risen more than 100 basis
points - from just below 5.8 per cent to 6.95 per cent.
Stock market investors are right to be worried by this sharp increase in
rates, because higher rates threaten the economy's health by raising the
cost of borrowing for corporations and consumers. They also make equities
look potentially less attractive compared to other assets. Just as
important, the stock market should be concerned if the bond market's losses
have been prompted by signs of steadily rising inflation. Inflation, as the
economists keep repeating, is the enemy of financial markets.
But - and it is a big 'but' - short- and medium-term interest rates, even
with the recent increases in bond yields, remain low by historical
standards. Also, little evidence exists that the recent growth in US
economic activity has been stoking the inflationary fires. If anything, the
long-term outlook for inflation is surprisingly bright.
Unfortunately, bond market investors are allowing their hearts to rule their
heads. And investors in stocks, rattled by the big increase in long-term
interest rates, are proving equally fickle.
This week, the markets were so shaky that two unsubstantiated rumours about
the Whitewater affair contributed to a sharp, and panicky, decline in bond
prices. First, a Washington DC political newsletter reported congressional
gossip that the body of Vince Foster - the aide to President Clinton who
committed suicide last year - had been moved from an apartment to the
Virginia park where it was later discovered.
Second, a newswire service reported that Hillary Clinton had invested money
in a hedge fund that later benefited from shorting US pharmaceutical stocks.
This report attracted a lot of attention because the president's wife has
been playing a key role in drawing up plans for a reform of the country's
healthcare system, plans that have hit the share prices of big drug
companies.
There was little evidence at the time to back up either story, but the
financial markets are so nervous that both reports, combined with
revelations about the allegedly improper actions of White House staff over
investigations into the Whitewater matter, badly spooked already jumpy bond
market investors. Or, at least, that was what traders were saying on
Thursday, when the 30-year bond fell 1 1/4 points. The sharp drop in bond
prices, inevitably, sparked a sell-off in the stock market.
Amid the smokescreen sent up by the Whitewater affair, the rumours of
skulduggery in the White House, and the growing fears - justified or
otherwise - of returning inflation, there is an important truth. The
financial markets, after three years of unprecedented prosperity, are having
to adjust to a new environment. And that adjustment is proving painful.
At least some of the pain in the stock market is being alleviated by a
continued revival in the mergers and acquisitions business, which has been
keeping share prices in certain key industry sectors - including, banking,
telecommunications and media - buoyant.
This week it was the turn of the defence sector to reap the rewards of a
highly-publicised takeover move. On Monday, Martin Marrietta announced an
agreed Dollars 55-a-share bid for Long Island defence contractor Grumman.
Three days later, Northrop, another defence group, upped the stakes by
offering Dollars 60 per share for Grumman.
The news had a dramatic impact on Grumman's share price which, over six
trading days, climbed 75 per cent. The stock now stands at around Dollars
64, which implies that the market expects the bidding war to escalate. A
month after the furious battle for control of Paramount Communications
ended, the stock market has another contested takeover on its hands.
 ---------------------------------
Monday      3856.22  +  23.92
Tuesday     3851.72  -   4.50
Wednesday   3853.41  +   1.69
Thursday    3830.62  -  22.79
Friday      3862.70  +  32.08
 ---------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

940312

