FT942-12332

FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (16): Rising
interest rates in the US create a dilemma for Europe - Bonds / As the turn
in the American economic cycle accelerates, the logic for a 'decoupling' of
bonds is becoming stronger, say analysts


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


After a painful first quarter, the question facing bond investors is whether
Europe's bond markets are going to be able to act independently from the US
market, where rising interest rates are pushing bond prices down and bond
yields up.
As the turn in the interest-rate cycle in the US accelerates, the logic for
a 'decoupling' of European and US bonds becomes stronger.
Malcolm Roberts, head of global bond research at UBS, is confident that it
will come. 'Decoupling between the US and European bond markets will emerge
in coming months: the US market faces monetary tightening, while continental
European bonds will respond favourably to gradual monetary easing. The US
yield curve will flatten, while European curves are likely to steepen.
Despite the likelihood of a stronger dollar, the best common-currency
returns still lie in higher-yielding European markets.'
The logic behind this is that, with most European economies still in
recession, governments will be forced to cut interest rates further, causing
bond prices to rise.
So far, European governments have been constrained in their easing of rates,
largely because, whatever the logic of economic fundamentals, today's
financial markets are strongly interlinked, and falls in US bond prices tend
to drag down European bonds.
Although many analysts believe that, based on economic fundamentals,
European bond prices are currently undervalued, this does not necessarily
make them a good buy. The markets have shown in the first quarter of the
year that they do not always perform according to economic fundamentals.
One thing is clear: the kind of gains which bond investors made last year
are unlikely to be on offer this year.
'It all depends on what kind of investor you are and what your time horizon
is,' cautions Marie Owens-Thomsen, an international strategist at Midland
Global Markets, who advises the bank's own traders. 'If you want to make a
relatively quick but safe buck, you should buy bonds. If you are less
risk-averse you should buy equities.'
Despite the fact the European bonds were able to shrug off declines in the
US market during the Easter break, Ms Owens-Thomsen remains nervous. 'I
still believe that Europe is highly dependent on the US, and the US is still
panicky,' she warns.
However, there are some grounds for optimism. One is that many bond fund
managers who got it wrong at the start of the year by holding long positions
in bonds have now managed to reverse those positions. This means that, while
they are likely to have incurred losses during the first quarter, they are
now better positioned for the more bearish environment.
In the first quarter, many conventional bond funds were slow to start
selling, believing that the price declines were not justified by economic
fundamentals. However, prices were pushed down by hedge-fund managers, who
tend to hold highly leveraged positions, and proprietary traders at banks,
who use their own institutions' capital to take positions on the market.
Bond fund managers have not only lightened their bond holdings in the course
of the first quarter, but have also sold longer-dated bonds in favour of
shorter-dated bonds, hoping that the short end of the yield curve is safer
and will benefit more from any cuts in interest rates.
However, Mr Rob Gambi, manager, international fixed interest and currencies,
at AMP Asset Management in London, believes there are some dangers in this
strategy. 'They are in danger of being whip-sawed,' he warns. That is,
having sold at a loss, they may be forced to buy back long-dated paper at a
higher level, if the market starts to rally.
'Initially favour short ends in Europe, but extend duration when markets
consolidate,' JP Morgan advises its clients, in its latest Global Markets
publication. Of course, just when the markets can be said to be
consolidating is proving a difficult call.
Mr Gambi believes that, at current levels, the market has priced in
over-pessimistic expectations. 'Last year the pendulum went too far the
other way. Now, because it's been such a rapid move downwards, the
perception is too negative,' he says.
For example, the UK money markets are now pricing in a one-point rise in
interest rates in the coming year, although many analysts still believe that
there is room for a further easing in UK rates.
Nevertheless, the UK's economic recovery is likely to continue to undermine
the gilts market, which is particularly vulnerable to scares from the US,
since the UK's economic cycle is ahead of the rest of Europe.
Although they seem particularly undervalued, their high degree of volatility
is likely to keep investors away from the high-yielding markets such as
Italy and Spain. Further, given the shift towards more conservative trading
strategies, it could be safest to stick to markets which can rally on the
back of domestic investment, rather than having to rely on a large inflow of
foreign funds.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940429

