FT944-2873

FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (4): An inherent contradiction -
Acceptance of Islamic banking is growing


   By ROULA KHALAF


After years of struggle to define itself, Islamic banking - which follows
the Koran's prohibition against receiving or paying interest - is gaining
greater acceptance in both the Arab banking world and the global financial
markets.
Bolstered by a growing wave of Islamic consciousness amongst depositors on
one part and the realisation among western banks that they might as well
take advantage of the increasingly esoteric way some people are choosing to
bank, Islamic banking is attracting newcomers and is now seen as the
fastest-growing segment of Arab banking. The US's Citibank has jumped on the
bandwagon and is set to open a full-fledged Islamic banking subsidiary in
Bahrain next year.
The growth of Islamic banking is a cause of concern as much as celebration,
as intensifying competition will increasingly drive banks to take on added
risk in an industry that remains fragmented and largely outside the reach of
regulators.
Industry statistics are hard to come by, but estimates put total funds
invested in an Islamic way in the region of Dollars 50bn. Based on a study
of eleven Islamic banks in the Gulf, Egypt and Jordan, Mr Farah Fadil, an
economist formerly with the Central Bank of Kuwait, says Islamic demand
deposits account for nearly 17 per cent of total demand deposits, and almost
15 per cent of savings and investment deposits. He estimates these funds
grew at 8 per cent to 9 per cent annually in the last 10 years.
Saudi Arabia continues to resist granting Islamic banking licences, lest it
draws attention to the fact that all banks deal in interest. But Al Rajhi
Banking & Investment Company, which has a banking licence on the condition
that it not officially call itself Islamic, remains the largest Islamic
deposit taker, with 1993 assets of Dollars 7.6bn.
Kuwait Finance House, meanwhile, is one of the largest commercial banks in
Kuwait, with a 15 per cent share of the deposit market and Dollars 3.8bn in
total assets. However, conventional Gulf banks like Saudi Arabia's National
Commercial Bank, which have opened 'Islamic windows' to cater to religious
clients, are now stepping up their Islamic banking activities.
Jeddah-based Al Baraka with an estimated Dollars 2bn in assets and
Geneva-based Dar Al Mal Al Islami, with Dollars 609m in assets, have tried
in vain to obtain licenses to take deposits in Saudi Arabia and now act more
as investment companies, catering mostly to large depositors. A newcomer to
the field is the International Investor, an Islamic merchant bank set up in
Kuwait in 1992 with institutional Saudi and Kuwaiti shareholdings.
The increased competition on the commercial and investment banking sides is
likely to put pressure on the industry to provide better yields to
depositors. According to Mr Fadil, Islamic banks, with very few exceptions,
provide returns below those offered by conventional counterparts.
The reason may lie in the fact that there is an inherent contradiction in
Islamic banking. The Koran prohibits interest because money should not be
created out of money. Rather, profits should be generated from taking risk
on productive investments and depositors should share in the bank's profits
as well as losses. But the banks know that when depositors, religious or
otherwise, place their money in a bank, they expect to come back and find
it.
Faced with this challenge, Islamic banks, to some Moslem scholars' chagrin,
have chosen to mirror conventional banking's fixed rate products that
provide a pre-determined rate of return in a short term. About 75 per cent
of Islamic banking funds are invested in short term commodity trades and
trade finance deals where, in return for a fee, a middleman - often a
Western bank, like Citibank - arranges for a trader to buy goods on Islamic
banks' behalf and resell them at a predetermined mark-up.
To minimize their credit risk further, Islamic banks often seek guarantees
from third parties.
The Western banks have always been happy to oblige. Islamic banks, at least
in the early days, paid so little to depositors that they were considered a
relatively cheap source of funding. Islamic banks are often willing to
receive sub-Libor rates to get their funds invested.
The concentration of Islamic money in short-term deals continues to generate
much debate in Islamic banking circles as to whether the industry is
following the spirit in addition to the letter of the Koran.
Many Islamic scholars insist that the aim of Islamic banking should be to
develop the economies of poor Moslem countries by providing finance to small
enterpreneurs ignored by conventional banks - 'the challenge of Islamic
banking is not to finance the same project on another legal basis,' says Mr
Volker Nienhaus, an Islamic banking expert at Germany's Bochum University.
The drop in interest rates in recent years, however, has eroded margins on
trade finance and though Islamic banks do not deal in interest, the mark-ups
they charge are for competitive reasons directly linked to the interest rate
market. This, coupled with the spread of Islamic boutiques, which widened
depositors' choices, has forced Islamic banks to focus on longer term deals
in an effort to improve yields.
Islamic scholars are pleased with the arrangement, which brings Islamic
banking closer to the spirit, if not only the letter, of the Koran. And so
are Western bankers, whose experience and international reach allow them to
bring long-term deals to the Islamic banks' table.
Leasing transactions are gaining popularity. For example, ANZ Grindlays last
year arranged for Al Rajhi to lend Dollars 92m in bridge finance to
Pakistan's Dollars 1.9 bn Hub Power project. The International Investor,
meanwhile, raised Dollars 450m in Islamic money in 1993 to finance leases
for seven Kuwait Airways aircraft.
United Bank of Kuwait recently set up an Islamic equipment leasing fund,
marketed to Islamic and non Islamic clients, and promising a 9 per cent
return.
Mr Duncan Smith, UBK's head of Islamic investment banking unit, says the
shares in the fund can be traded and UBK has agreed to buy the shares back
from investors wishing to sell.
But there is much work ahead for the industry. A main challenge is to expand
the menu of products it offers. Some Western financial institutions, for
instance, are peddling derivatives tailored to the Islamic market. But can
Islamic banks invest in derivatives? It depends on the bank's sharia board,
whose members are experts on the Koran but less so in the field of bank
options, considering them 'unislamic,' but Dar Al Maal's sharia board, for
example, has approved the use of currency options.
What about equities?
It used to be the case that all Islamic banks resisted investing in equities
of listed securities on world markets because most companies have some form
of leverage. Now Dar Al Mal has convinced its sharia board that equities are
acceptable investments. The International Investor, meanwhile, says its
sharia board approves investments in companies that are no more than 30 per
cent leveraged.
'It's up to each institution to say what is Islamic,' says Mr Richard
Duncan, director of Islamic finance at ANZ International Merchant Banking.
The absence of a standard interpretation of the sharia, or Islamic law, will
dampen further development of the industry and slow efforts to establish
capital markets where standard products can be traded between various
Islamic banks.
Another growing concern is that the industry remains unregulated, lacking
not only a lender of last resort in case of failure - and there have been a
few in the 1980s - but also restricting banks from assuming risk and
managing their daily liquidity. The banks cannot keep reserves with the
Central Bank or borrow on the interbank market because they would have to
receive interest in return.
Mr Fadil says that Islamic banks have resorted to privately arranged
short-term liquidity techniques as a substitute, but he argues that these
instruments are often costly and thus negatively affect the banks' profit
maximization - 'this is an unregulated sector that controls a high
proportion of monetary aggregates in the economy, and this is a cause for
concern,' says Mr Fadil. 'What is needed is the beginning of a dialogue
between central banks and islamic banks.'

The Financial Times


London Page 42

941215

