FT941-3602

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (1): Dazzled by the rising
sunshine - William Dawkins discusses a biography of the failed Victorian
romantic writer who interpreted a nation's dramatic transition / Aspects of
Japan


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   A Fantastic Journey


the Life and Literature of Lafcadio Hearn
by Paul Murray
Japan Library, Knoll House, 35 The Crescent, Sandgate, Folkestone, Kent.
CT20 3EE, Pounds 19.99
379 pages
One sunny April morning, 104 years ago, the small form of Patrick Lafcadio
Hearn, an obscure provincial journalist, stepped ashore at Japan's Yokohama
dock, after a long sea voyage from Vancouver.
Dazzled by 'the white sunshine of a perfect spring day,' Hearn, aged 39,
felt that he had arrived 'in the land of dreams - surrounded by strange
gods.' He was to spend the 14 remaining years of his life there, 'trying to
see into the heart of this mysterious people,' as he modestly put it.
The experience transformed Hearn from a failed Victorian romantic writer
into one of the greatest interpreters of Japan's high-speed transition in
the late 19th century from a medieval to a modern society.
Hearn fell in love with Japan, which he saw as an orderly refuge from his
own turbulent past, and a means to artistic fulfilment. He married a
Japanese, fell out of love with Japan in his old age, when he came to see
the country as suffocatingly insular, and became the first foreigner to be
buried there with the Buddhist rite.
This biography is not, strictly speaking, a business book. Yet it is an
agreeable way of sharpening one's understanding of what makes this country
tick, at a time when Japan is going through bewilderingly rapid change, just
as it was in Hearn's time.
Half Irish and half Greek, this odd character has over the years become a
mainstream literary figure for many Japanese - so an understanding of Hearn
throws some light on Japan's soul.
Hearn's popularity among Japanese readers is understandable, given his view
of Japan as a mirror to show to the west its own moral inadequacy. The 12
books he wrote there also include a poetic record - in the ghost stories,
for which he is best known in Japan - of an era for which many urban folk
feel increasing nostalgia as Japan becomes more western.
Hearn's ideas, clearly explained in this book, are a useful guide to the
traditions behind modern Japanese behaviour. His admiration for ju-jutsu,
the art of applying an opponent's own strength to defeat him, invites an
obvious moral for anyone negotiating with Japanese business or government.
Some scholars have even claimed that the US would have understood Japan
better before Pearl Harbour if it had paid more attention to Hearn's
analyses of Japan's moral and religious standards.
He was one of the first westerners to recognise the importance of Shinto,
later a staple of Japan's militarism. Hearn likened Shinto to the
ancestor-worship practised by the ancient Greeks, and saw many other
parallels between 19th century Japan and ancient Greek society.
To its credit, Paul Murray's biography does not try to ram home pretentious
modern lessons from Hearn's life. Instead, this is a straightforward account
of Hearn's multi-faceted story, by a biographer whose career as an Irish
diplomat in New York and Tokyo parallels some of Hearn's own travels.
It is hard to pick up a biography that shows as much respect for its
subject's character as this one does, because Hearn was an unattractive,
prickly, man. 'Always ill-dressed, unkempt, slovenly; with the face of a
weasel and the manners of an oaf, he was nevertheless one of the most
brilliant and picturesque writers of his day,' in the words of one newspaper
obituary.
One of Mr Murray's important themes is that Hearn's strange life helped make
him free from prejudice in explaining Japan, by comparison with the zealous
Christian missionaries and European-minded professors writing about the
country at the time - and many commmentators since.
Hearn's personal fantastic journey began on the Greek island of Lefkas, from
which he got his middle name, in 1850, when he was born to an Irish surgeon
in the British army and a beautiful but illiterate local woman.
His parents soon split up, leaving Hearn to be brought up by an aunt in
Dublin, in an environment of cultured leisure, only to be packed off in his
late teens to what appears to have been a brutal life in an English boarding
school. Hearn left school at the age of 19, minus one eye - lost during a
game, and a source of lasting psychological awkwardness - to try his luck as
a journalist in the American provincial city of Cincinnati.
There, he specialised in writing about 'the rotten underbelly of society',
including murders, executions, slaughterhouses and city corruption. This
taste for the grotesque later manifested itself in his prolific output of
popular fiction - Hearn is an exponent of the Victorian horror genre,
alongside Bram Stoker and Edgar Allan Poe.
A short-lived illegal marriage with the daughter of a negro slave in
Cincinnati precipitated a scandal. Hearn escaped to New Orleans, where he
became the small-town star of the local newspaper and started to publish his
first works of popular fiction. New Orleans treated him well, but the
ever-restless Hearn wanted a taste adventure.
Armed with a publishers' commission, he set off for the West Indies, for
what turned out to be a disappointing two-year stay in search of inspiration
for more popular fiction.
Hearn romantically claims that his decision to try Japan for his next
adventure began with the 'pleasure bordering on pain' derived from looking
at a paper fan with a simple bamboo design.
As Mr Murray explains, the decision to emigrate to Japan was more
complicated. Chance played a part in keeping him there for the rest of his
days, ending in the arms of his Japanese family in Tokyo. His life was,
appropriately for a journalist, a great story. Moreover, it is a story that
contains a few pertinent messages for anybody trying to understand modern
Japan.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940315

