FT942-12441

FT  29 APR 94 / UK bank takes 5% Swissair stake for 'mystery investors'


   By PAUL BETTS and IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


A British bank has accumulated a 5 per cent stake in Swissair, Switzerland's
flag carrier, worth nearly SFr100m (Pounds 46.5m), on behalf of what
Swissair calls 'mystery investors'.
The accumulation of the block of shares comes at a time when Swissair is
warning that its longer term future is in jeopardy because of Switzerland's
isolation from the European Union.
Mr Otto Loepfe, chief executive, told the group's annual press conference
yesterday: 'In the end, it may well be Switzerland's integration into, or
isolation from, the European Union that determines our own corporate
survival.'
Switzerland's decision in December 1992 to stay outside of the European
Economic Area means that Swissair cannot take advantage of the new
liberalised single European airline market.
Mr Loepfe denied that British Airways was the mystery buyer of the shares.
Mr Peter Nydegger, finance director, conceded that the airline was 'not very
comfortable' with the purchases.
Swissair restricts any single shareholder to 3 per cent of the votes. Also,
non-Swiss citizens may not hold more than 40 per cent in aggregate, and
nominees may not vote.
The airline, which has already reported a 48 per cent decline in 1993 net
income to SFr59m and passed its annual dividend, has seen its registered
shares tumble from a peak of SFr1,176 in 1989 to a low of SFr420 last
December. They have since recovered to the SFr785 level.
The group, which said its flight operations were improving but would
continue losing money in 1994 for the fifth consecutive year, is still
struggling to develop a strategy for long term survival.
Following the collapse last November of its planned merger with Scandinavian
Airlines System, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Austrian Airlines, Swissair
said it was seeking to intensify its commercial links with SAS and Austrian
in Europe and with Delta Air Lines and Singapore Airlines in the long-haul
market.
The group, which has more than SFr2bn in liquid reserves, has concentrated
on expanding its non-flight business in the EU.
It is in negotiations to acquire SAS's airline catering operations to turn
its own catering subsidiary into the world's third largest.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940429

