FT944-5814

FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Management Buy-Outs (4): Impressive profits but no
hurry to float - Case study / Gardner Merchant


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


Gardner Merchant, bought by the management from Forte for Pounds 402m at the
end of 1992, has been reporting its results as if it had already come to
market.
But those who were expecting it to float this year have been disappointed.
Presenting an impressive increase in interim profits in October, Garry
Hawkes, the chief executive, said the group was under no pressure to float.
'Our investors are happy with their returns, and clearly the current market
conditions are not very encouraging,' he said. In the same week the
depressed conditions led three other companies to defer flotation plans.
Gardner's management buy-out succeeded only after 12 months of uncertainty.
An attempt by the management to acquire the business, backed by Kohlberg
Kravis Roberts (KKR), the New York-based leveraged buy-out specialists, had
failed earlier in the year, as did a takeover proposal by Compass, its main
rival in contract catering.
Forte wanted to sell Gardner to concentrate on its international hotel and
restaurant businesses. However, it retained a 25 per cent stake when a
consortium led by venture capital company CinVen mounted a successful bid.
Mr Hawkes, the managing director, and other senior staff subscribed for 8
per cent of the company. He said the buy-out was 'an attempt to bring back
ownership and hopefully motivation' to the managers who had delivered 15 per
cent growth for Forte in recent years.
At the time Rocco Forte, chairman of Forte, said the investors hoped to
float the group in four years - although other observers were talking of a
listing as early as the end of this year.
The omens looked good. In addition to operating in rapidly expanding markets
as government contracting out increased, the group had the advantage of
requiring very little capital.
Debt was also unlikely to be much of a burden because the interest rates on
most of the Pounds 200m of senior debt was hedged long term.
Furthermore Gardner was used to paying most of its profit and cash flow to
Forte in dividends.
The liberating effects of the MBO were soon obvious. By May, Mr Hawkes
revealed that the company had sold more contracts in the first two months of
1993 than during the whole of the previous year.
The results for 1993 showed just how much Gardner was distracted by bids and
buy-out plans in 1992. In the financial year ending January 31, 1994,
profits before interest and tax rose by more than 50 per cent and turnover
burst through the Pounds 1bn barrier.
Strong cash flow enabled the group, which employs 47,000 people worldwide,
to cut its senior debt from Pounds 200m to Pounds 163m.
Mr Hawkes described the first year of independence as 'one of the most
successful years in our history'. He cited strong morale, helped by the fact
that 1,000 managers were shareholders.
Their 8 per cent stake was expected to rise to 20 per cent on flotation. A
further 6,800 employees had been granted the right to share options.
Since then the group has made its first significant acquisition, doubling
the size of its business in the US with a Dollars 100m deal to buy part of
Morrison Restaurants' contract food division.
The deal made Gardner the fifth biggest contract caterer in the US, although
it remains behind arch-rival Compass Group.
The acquisition took Gardner into 40 states, up from 18, and the number of
US employees rose from 5,500 to 13,000. US turnover is expected to rise from
Dollars 180m to Dollars 400m, and account for 25 per cent of total group
turnover.
'It fits brilliantly, and we are very happy with it,' says Mr Hawkes.
The group now has a good presence in the southern states, whereas it was
stronger in the north, and has further strengthened its position in the
business and industry market.
The deal was financed through increased bank debt, taking the total to about
Pounds 225m. But in August the group completed a Pounds 240m refinancing
package with the Royal Bank of Scotland and five other banks.
The package included a Pounds 155m five-year loan to refinance borrowings
left over from the MBO; a Dollars 100m five-year loan to fund the Morrison's
acquisition; and a Pounds 20m multi-currency working capital and guarantee
facility, again over five years.
Mr Hawkes says the refinancing demonstrated confidence in the group,
especially as it had been done between the MBO and the future flotation.
The interim results, announced in October, showed strong organic growth,
with a net gain of 175 contracts, compared with 163 previously. Profits
before interest and tax were almost 14 per cent ahead at Pounds 26.9m in the
six months to July 31 on the back of a 9 per cent rise in turnover to Pounds
556m.
The group relies on the UK for more than half its business and most of its
profits. UK profits grew to Pounds 19.9m (Pounds 17.2m) on sales of Pounds
320m (Pounds 291m).
Almost one-third of new contracts in the UK, where margins improved from 5.9
to 6.2 per cent, were in the public sector - an area the group has targeted
for future growth both in the UK and overseas.
In the rest of Europe profits edged ahead to Pounds 5.5m (Pounds 5.2m) on
sales of Pounds 152m (Pounds 141m), held back by the recession in France.
European margins eased to 3.6 per cent (3.7 per cent). Profits from the rest
of the world, including the US, were Pounds 1.5m (Pounds 1.3m) on sales of
Pounds 83.3m (Pounds 77.2m).
The group considers there are still considerable opportunities in the core
businesses. It wants to exploit the critical mass more, growing on the
existing cost base, improving information technology and taking further
advantage of its purchasing power. Then, when the time is ripe, it will
float.

The Financial Times


London Page III

941201

