FT941-5550

FT  05 MAR 94 / Markets: When it pays to be suspicious - Serious Money


   By GILLIAN O'CONNOR, Personal Finance Editor


Some 35 years ago, American investment guru Benjamin Graham* wrote: 'An
elementary requirement for the intelligent investor is an ability to resist
the blandishments of salesmen offering new common-stock issues during bull
markets.' Unfortunately, far too many private investors have failed to take
heed.
New issues flooded on to the London market in 1993 and have continued this
year; March alone will see newcomers worth more than Pounds 3bn. The list is
eclectic enough to fit most fancies - department stores, housebuilders, drug
developers, even a Ghanaian gold miner - and some of the prices asked pay
scant regard to the market's recent queasiness. But, as usual, many private
investors are putting more effort into tracking down the newcomers than
searching for good value among companies quoted already.
It would be unfair to suggest that all the newcomers will be bad
investments, but it is sensible to be even more selective than normal when
buying new issues. In the first place, these tend generally to come in waves
near the top of a bull market. So, even if they are good companies, you are
likely to be buying into the stock market at a bad time.
Second, all too many companies arrive with the best of their growth behind
them, or when stock market expectations for their type of business are
unrealistically high. Sometimes, the major shareholders are looking for a
profitable time to offload a lot of their shares, perhaps to repay debts
incurred in an earlier buyout. To quote Graham again: 'Most new issues are
sold under 'favourable' market conditions - which means favourable for the
seller and, consequently, less favourable for the buyer.'
Anyone doubting that issues flow fastest in a bull market needs only to
remember the mid-1980s or look around him now. But is there any evidence
that new issues are generally expensive relative to other companies quoted
already on the market?
Academic research suggests that, on average, they outperform on the first
day after the issue but do substantially worse than the market over the next
few years. Over a three-year period, US issues lagged by 30 per cent and
those in the UK by a comparatively modest 11 per cent**. Companies that
started best tended to finish furthest behind.
A couple of surveys conducted by the Investors Chronicle in the mid-1980s
added some detail to this pattern. They showed that share prices of many of
the most fashionable issues performed a parabola - they went up like a
rocket for a few months but then burned out. But the surveys also showed
very large variations in performance between different companies. The
general message seemed to be that, provided you were selective, buying new
issues need not be disastrous.
That conclusion still begs an important question, though. Can private
investors actually buy shares during the launch period and at the issue
price?
Doing so has become increasingly difficult. Popular issues which are open to
the public tend to be heavily over-subscribed. All too often, private
investors either receive no shares or a derisory number.
Then, too, many issues seem to have become 'shares for the boys.' Smaller
companies sell all their shares through placings with large institutional
investors - which means that private investors' first opportunity to buy
them is in the secondary market after the price has risen. This week, even
House of Fraser, hardly a minnow, announced that it is making only a quarter
of its issue available to private individuals. The odds are becoming
weighted ever more heavily against the private buyer.
But several of the latest crop of launches are investment trusts. Indeed,
the three largest have raised a remarkable Pounds 1.5bn between them.
Perhaps investors who buy new funds have a better chance of success than
those taking a direct stake in individual companies. After all, the
interests of fund managers, unlike those of the promoters of individual
companies, ought to be identical with those of investors.
A recent study by the London Business School*** suggests that new investment
trusts behave very much like other new companies. Rather illogically, their
share prices tend also to go to a (small) initial premium over the launch
price. Over the longer term they tend, on average, to underperform both the
UK market as a whole and their chosen sector.
The study shows no correlation between early strength and subsequent
weakness. But, again, there is a marked variation between the records of
individual trusts.
The flaw in all such research is that there is no guarantee that past price
patterns will be repeated. This is particularly relevant with investment
trusts, where discounts were still common when the LBS study was started.
Overall, though, the evidence still suggests that if you want to try your
hand at new issues, it pays to be suspicious, if not paranoid. Or, as Graham
puts it: 'New issues have special salesmanship behind them, which calls for
a special degree of sales resistance.'
*The Intelligent Investor, by Benjamin Graham, Harper & Row Dollars 30;
**Sundry papers by J Ritter and M Levis; ***Investment trust IPOs: Issuing
behaviour and price performance, by Mario Levis and Dylan Thomas.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940305

