FT944-2793

FT  16 DEC 94 / SG Warburg and Morgan Stanley: Subtle shift in the
relationship - Warburg and MAM


   By NORMA COHEN


When SG Warburg sold off a quarter of its holding in Mercury Asset
Management in 1986, it was trying to make a point.
Not only did it want to reap some of the value of its fast-growing fund
management arm, it wished to underscore the independence of MAM. At a time
when too many questions were being asked about dealings between the fund
management and stock brokerage arms of merchant banks, independence seemed
like a good message to send to the public.
Warburg has underlined the message by siting its headquarters in Finsbury
Avenue in the City of London and those of MAM just on the edge near London
Bridge.
Now, officials at Warburg may well be wondering whether MAM has become a
little too independent. With a potentially valuable merger between Warburg
and US investment bank Morgan Stanley thwarted by the independence of MAM
directors, the relationship between the two firms may be permanently
altered.
'MAM have always seen themselves as very independent of Warburg. Not only
for regulatory reasons but because their business in character is very
different from that of Warburg,' said a fund manager at a rival firm. 'At
the level of the MAM board, they will not welcome losing their
independence.'
Neither Warburg nor MAM would comment on suggestions that the Morgan Stanley
deal has badly strained relations between the two. 'There are relationships
here which go back 20 years,' one MAM insider said.
But the head of a rival fund management firm argues that 'there must be some
bad blood between those two buildings'.
'There are bound to be a few recriminations,' adds Mr Philip Gibbs,
securities industry analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
And, industry experts say, MAM may well emerge with the upper hand. Over the
past seven years, MAM has consistently accounted for the lion's share of
Warburg's earnings, Mr Gibbs notes. Any effort by Warburg to force MAM
directors to toe the line could encourage the departure of some of its
leading lights - thus undermining MAM's value. Within Warburg, MAM has its
own board and executive committee, and considerable autonomy in setting its
own strategy and expansion. Its executive committee reports to the Warburg
board, of which its chairman, Mr Hugh Stevenson, is a member.
MAM has periodically asserted its independence in ways that have proven
embarrassing to Warburg. For instance, MAM directors were so irritated at
the way Warburg handled the purchase of shares in oil company Lasmo, for
which the bank's client, Enterprise, was making a hostile bid, that it cut
its dealing with Warburg's brokerage arm for several weeks.
MAM and Warburg are now both expected to mull the contentious issue of
whether the minority stake in the fund management company ought to be
purchased by Warburg. One objective would be to ensure that MAM cannot
thwart a marriage should another suitor emerge.
Alternatively, some analysts suggest that Warburg may wish to sell its MAM
holding and re-invest the capital in its investment banking business.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

941216

