FT944-5899

FT  01 DEC 94 / Waddington passes Monopoly to Hasbro and collects Pounds 50m


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


Hasbro yesterday bought Waddington's games division for Pounds 50m in cash,
giving the biggest US toy and games group a monopoly on Monopoly, the
world's best-selling board game.
Mention Monopoly in the UK, and people immediately think of Waddington. But
the archetypal game of capitalists, once banned in the Soviet Union as
ideologically unsound, was invented in the US in the 1930s.
Waddington has always been a printing company, diversifying into games in
the 1920s by printing playing cards. The grandfather of Mr Victor Watson,
who retired as chairman last year, obtained the Monopoly licence for the
British Empire in 1935. The licence was granted by Parker Brothers of the
US, now part of the Hasbro empire. Hasbro itself had a licence to market
Cluedo, owned by Waddington, outside the UK.
Mr Michael Buckley, chief executive of Waddington, said that the sale of the
games division was viewed with some regret, but it was matched by pleasure
at how the group could use the cash. 'The games division is a super company,
but we did not think we could make it any bigger or better.'
The deal will leave Waddington cash positive to the tune of Pounds 13m. It
plans to invest further in both the printing and packaging divisions.
Hasbro was pipped to the post this summer in a battle for Scrabble with
Mattel, its main rival in the US market. Mattel paid Pounds 62m for JW
Spear, the UK company with the rights to Scrabble outside North America.
Hasbro, which owns the North American Scrabble rights, said it felt the
winning price for Spear, at about 21 times earnings, was too high. However,
it is paying about 21 times earnings for the Waddington division, which made
operating profits of Pounds 3.5m on sales of Pounds 25.9m in the year to
April, because of the quality of the portfolio.
Mr Brian Ellis, of Hasbro UK, said the Waddington catalogue had 850 items,
only about 60 of which were games. Monopoly, which sold 300,000 sets in the
UK last year, represented only 15 per cent of the turnover.
'It is much more of a general toy company than a games company,' he said,
citing in particular the Get Set craft products, which are expecting 35 per
cent growth this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941201

