FT944-6164

FT  30 NOV 94 / Blur between a shaky past and an uneasy future: Attempts at
cheer in Japan


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Corporate Japan lets its hair down this week for the start of annual
bonenkai, or 'forget the year', celebrations.
Executives have less reason to forget this year than last, when they were at
the bottom of a record four years of profits decline. The Japanese economy
started to pick up early this year as did corporate profits.
However, elements of previous Japanese recoveries, a strong rise in capital
spending and a sustained surge in domestic demand, are absent. So beer
rather than champagne is called for at this year's bonenkai.
Results for the first half were slightly better than many companies
expected. Overall, quoted companies, excluding financial businesses,
reported a 3 per cent rise in recurring profits, before tax and
extraordinary items.
This is the first time listed companies have managed to lift profits on
falling turnover - down 2 per cent in the first half - for 40 years,
according to James Capel Pacific. For the full-year to March, companies
expect 8 per cent growth in recurring profits on a 1 per cent decline in
turnover.
There are two reasons to be cautious. First, the recovery comes from a very
low base, so earnings per share still languish at levels last seen 15 years
ago. Second, it contains a large export component.
'On the strength of these results, it is not clear yet that the domestic
economy has got itself into a self-sustaining recovery,' says Mr Jason
James, strategist at James Capel Pacific.
A look at the interim period's winners and losers explains why. The best
performers were the big integrated electronics firms, whose chipmaking
profits have surged on demand from the US personal computer market.
Steelmakers saw increased losses but predicted a sharp recovery thanks to
demand from China and its Asian neighbours, while airlines were lifted by
healthier overseas business travel.
Losers were companies in commodity-type businesses unable to put up prices,
such as watchmakers and video game producers. Meanwhile, financial companies
continued to be burdened by bad debts and declining domestic loan volumes.
For the most part, the purely domestic companies able to show high growth
over this period are small, unquoted service businesses - such as discount
retailers, mobile telephone groups and business services - whose results are
not generally published.
The patchiness of Japan's corporate recovery invites the question of whether
domestic demand will pick up in time to compensate for an eventual US
slowdown.
The outlook for two big components of demand, corporate investment and
consumer spending, is not bright. Japanese industry, even in the upturn, is
only running at 72 per cent capacity, the lowest since 1976, which does not
bode well for capital spending, now in its fourth year of decline.
The moral of all this is that western fund managers, who have been pouring
cash into Tokyo this year in the hope of getting in on the earnings recovery
early, may need to be more selective than in the past, warns Mr Alan Livsey,
strategist at Kleinwort Benson in Tokyo.
The market's average price earnings ratio, of 70 times this year's earnings,
a level last seen in early 1987, is more of a function of low earnings than
a sign of high profits expectations, he warns.
At best, recurring profits could double over the next three years,
but there will be a bigger than usual difference between leaders and
laggards.
Fast-growing niches in the service sector, high technology stocks and
exporters to booming east Asian economies, can be expected to outperform,
say analysts. The traditional manufacturers that used to be the pillars of
Japanese industry will have a struggle to raise profits, as they face
competition from low-cost rivals.
For maturing economies, it is a familiar pattern. For equity investors, it
means a longer than usual read through piles of analysts reports before
deciding where to place their cash.

The Financial Times


London Page 49

941130

