FT944-5886

FT  01 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Thos Cook cheque buy proceeds - Two
operations to be kept separate in case final go-ahead not given


   By ALISON SMITH


Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, has allowed Thomas
Cook Group, the travel company, to proceed on a temporary and conditional
basis with its acquisition of Barclays Bank's travellers' cheques business.
The deal was blocked last month just before it was due to be completed, when
Mr Heseltine referred it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission on the
advice of Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading.
Thomas Cook said yesterday that the acquisition had now been completed,
subject to an order from the department of trade and industry saying that
the core businesses must be kept separate.
This means that Thomas Cook must keep its own data and processing systems
distinct from those it is acquiring from Interpayment Services.
This is to ensure ISL could still be disentangled if the MMC recommended,
and Mr Heseltine agreed, that the deal should not be allowed to go ahead.
Thomas Cook is already the world's largest issuer of Mastercard travellers'
cheques, and the deal makes it the biggest issuer of Visa travellers'
cheques as well.
It is increasing its share of the Dollars 54bn (Pounds 33bn) travellers
cheque market from 17 to 30 per cent. The market is led by American Express
with 44 per cent.
When the deal was announced in August, Thomas Cook said that part of its
rationale was the use of the same distribution and processing facilities.
But Mr Graham Rider, Thomas Cook's managing director of financial services,
said yesterday that the first stage of bringing the operations together
simply involved putting them in the same location.
Integrating the systems themselves was not due to begin until next autumn.
The DTI decision on the MMC recommendation is expected in spring.
The DTI took the unusual step of issuing the new order after joint
representations from Thomas Cook and Barclays. They argued that putting the
deal on hold until after the MMC report would undermine the case for
proceeding at all, with the risk that the business would have to be closed
down.
ISL is said to be running at a loss of about Pounds 20m a year.
Thomas Cook intends to operate the Interpayment Visa brand separately. Mr
Rider said that though the deal would be less attractive if the two
processing systems had to remain separate indefinitely, it would not be a
'deal-breaker' since most of the synergies arose from co-locating the
operations.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941201

