FT942-14393

FT  20 APR 94 / Markets Report: Dollar fails to rally


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Continued trade and political uncertainty in Japan put a dampener on the
dollar yesterday despite the 25 basis points increase in US short-term
interest rates on Monday, writes Philip Gawith.
The US currency closed in London nearly two pfennigs lower at DM1.701 from
DM1.7202 on Thursday. It was also weaker against the yen, finishing at
Y103.215 from Y103.625.
Most analysts remain cautiously optimistic about the outlook for the dollar,
but sentiment is becoming increasingly uncertain as investors despair at
what is required to boost the US currency.
The D-Mark was the beneficiary of dollar weakness. Today the German currency
may come under pressure when the Bundesbank announces the extent to which it
has allowed the repo rate to fall in the weekly securities repurchase
auction.
Elsewhere, the Bank of Portugal lowered its emergency lending rate to 12 per
cent from 13 per cent, signalling the beginning of a return to normality
following a few weeks when the escudo was under attack.
The dollar has remained under pressure ever since the resignation earlier
this month of Japan's prime minister, Mr Morihiro Hosokawa. Delay in
appointing a successor has aggravated concerns about whether a new
government will be able to make progress in resolving Japan's damaging trade
dispute with the US.
Sentiment was not helped by the release of US February trade figures showing
that the overall deficit, including goods and services, widened to Dollars
9.7bn from a revised Dollars 6.6bn in January.
Dealers said the dollar was also under pressure from Japanese exporters
selling the dollar to meet yen requirements. Some had held off converting
their dollar receipts as the US currency weakened recently, but decided to
change them when it appeared the dollar's downside risk had risen.
Mr Chris Turner, currency strategist at BZW, said: 'What the dollar needs is
the conviction in the bond and equity markets that the Fed is doing enough
to combat inflation.' Currently, there was confusion both about what the Fed
was doing, and what it was achieving.
Mr Mark Austin, treasury economist at Midland Global Markets, said the risks
for the dollar are on the downside. 'People are starting to say: What else
do we need to take the dollar higher, and there is nothing obvious on the
horizon.'
The weak dollar spilled over into D-Mark strength across the board.
Investors often return to the D-Mark in times of uncertainty.
The French franc closed at FFr3.429 against the D-Mark from FFr3.422, but
was later trading at FFr3.4350, below its old ERM floor of FFr3.4305. Part
of this weakness is attributable to anticipation that the Bank of France may
cut interest rates at its council meeting on Thursday.
Mr Brian Hilliard, senior international economist at SGST, said recent
industrial relations setbacks had also knocked some of the shine off the
policies of Mr Edouard Balladur, the prime minister.
The amount of any French rate cut is likely to be determined by the extent
to which the Bundesbank cuts the repo rate today. Call money remained fairly
easy yesterday at 5.50/5.60 per cent, below the current repo rate of 5.7 per
cent. Market predictions are that the repo rate could fall by as much as 10
basis points.
In the futures market the June euromark contract finished three basis points
firmer at 94.69, but the longer contracts lost ground.
Ms Wendy Niffikeer, senior economist at IBJ International, said by cutting
rates the Bank of Portugal was 'testing how much of an interest rate cut the
currency can tolerate.' She said the central bank had chosen a slightly
awkward day, as the peseta was weaker and the two currencies normally track
each other.
With the escudo having stayed fairly stable yesterday - it closed at Es102.1
against the D-Mark from Es101.8 - the IBJ analyst predicted further cuts as
the central bank tries to return to pre-crisis interest rates. The emergency
rate was then at 10 per cent.
Sterling finished over a pfennig down against the stronger D-Mark, closing
at DM2.5144 from DM2.5288. In the money markets, the Bank of England
provided late assistance of about Pounds 415m after declaring a revised
shortage of Pounds 1.15bn. Earlier it had put Pounds 522m of liquidity into
the system. Overnight rates were in the 5-10 per cent range.
In the futures market, the June short sterling contract closed 4 basis
points up at 94.75, but the prices of longer contracts fell.
Investors responded enthusiastically to news that the mainly Zulu Inkatha
Freedom Party has decided to contest next week's elections in South Africa.
The commercial rand firmed by 3 per cent to R3.5575 against the dollar from
R3.6605. The financial rand, the investment currency, closed 8 per cent
higher at R4.915 from R5.345.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

940420

