FT942-16218

FT  12 APR 94 / South African Elections: 'Comrade Joe' is no Stalin -
Michael Holman on campaign trail with S African communist Slovo


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


Black South Africans literally sing his praises. Many of their white
compatriots would like to kill him. In Cape Town's Guguletu black township
he is a hero.
Former guerrilla chief, avowed communist and, according to opinion polls,
the second most popular man in South Africa, Mr Joe Slovo is on the campaign
trail in the country's first all-race election.
The reception for 'Comrade Joe' at the Guguletu rally is rapturous. The
crowd's tangible warmth takes a tired man into the crowd's embrace and
visibly revives him.
A roar of approval greets the entry of Mr Slovo, South African Communist
party chairman, into the township's dusty stadium, the last appointment on a
36-hour whistle-stop tour of Cape Town and its coloured and black suburbs.
He mounts the platform, soaking in the acclaim, clenched fist aloft.
'Amandla] (power). De Klerk must go] De Klerk must go] De Klerk must go]'.
En route to Guguletu Mr Slovo, who is on the extreme right's hit-list, is
squeezed between two security guards, a raincoat-draped rifle placed upright
between the occupants. Two-way radios crackle as the fleet of cars careen
through townships that could house hit-men, body guards sprint ahead as car
doors open, and the tension that underlies Mr Slovo's life every day is
brought home.
He gives no outward sign of strain. Tousled silver hair, face turning
slightly pink, Mr Slovo perspires under the autumn sun. He has a sharp
tongue and the debating skills of the barrister he once was.
Indeed, there is a touch of the Rumpole about him, that fictional barrister,
shrewd in court, wise in the ways of the world, and on the side of the
underdog almost since he arrived in South Africa in 1936, a 10-year-old
Yiddish-speaking Lithuanian Jew called Yossel Mashel Slovo.
But the genial, avuncular figure on the platform is also, it seems fair to
assume, ruthless if necessary. He helped form and lead Umkhonto we Sizwe
(Spear of the Nation), the ANC's armed wing, to serve a cause and a party to
which he has dedicated his life. That cause has claimed the lives of his
wife and the man whose memory he celebrated at the weekend  - his
comrade-in-arms, Mr Chris Hani.
A year ago Mr Hani, the head of Umkhonto we Sizwe and Communist party
leader, was gunned down in a quiet middle class Johannesburg suburb while
walking home with the morning newspaper.
At the open air memorial service under a blue Cape sky and overlooked by
Table Mountain, Mr Slovo salutes Mr Hani's memory, and turns the event into
a party rally.
In the life-and-death battle against apartheid, the graveyards of the 15,000
who have died of political violence since 1984 have become the platforms of
the politicians, and the obsequies and ideology intermix.
His excoriation of President F W de Klerk and Zulu leader Chief Mangosuthu
Buthelezi are rapturously received, but the ANC, near certain overall victor
in the poll this month, is in trouble in the western Cape.
The region is home to most of the country's 'coloured' (mixed race)
community. With the 658,000 white voters divided between Mr de Klerk's
National party and the liberal Democratic party, and the 427,000 black
voters (almost certainly an under-estimate) overwhelmingly ANC, the 1.3m
coloured electors will determine the outcome in the region.
With the coloureds disowned by the race that shared in their creation,
disenfranchised in the 1950s, and evicted in the 1960s from their historical
home known as District Six in the heart of Cape Town, Mr Nelson Mandela
might seem their natural choice.
But the ANC made a tactical error in appointing as ANC regional leader Mr
Alan Boesak. Although coloured and with a brave record of opposition to
apartheid, his troubled private life and radical reputation bother an
essentially conservative community, also fearful of ANC dominance of the new
government.
Not least of their concerns is Mr Slovo himself, sent as much to set these
fears at rest as rally the ANC vote. In private house meetings and in city
halls he canvasses support of white professionals and coloured community
leaders, helped by Mr Franklin Sonn, a respected coloured academic drafted
late into the campaign.
The night before the Guguletu rally, Mr Slovo tried to lay to rest the
communist bogy before an audience in Cape Town university's medical school
of doctors and medical workers, mostly white.
The influence of the SACP is reflected in the candidates. Of the top 200
names on the ANC list for the 400-member National Assembly, Mr Slovo is
fourth, after Mr Mandela, Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, the ANC secretary general, and
Mr Thabo Mbeki, the 'shadow' foreign minister. Another 33 people on the list
are acknowledged SACP members; a further five are former members.
But, says Mr Slovo, what you see and hear is what you get: 'No hidden
agenda', he tells the audience, pointedly comparing the open stance of the
SACP to the secretive Broederbond, the elite group of Afrikaners that in its
heyday ran the National party and South Africa.
He concedes there has been a 'murky side' to the SACP past, 'locked into
horrific Stalinist distortions'.
The response, whether at the University of Cape Town, at a meeting of the
Jewish community the next day, or in the coloured homes, is difficult to
gauge - polite, but sceptical for the most part.
Guguletu is the highlight of the day: the crowd is black and ANC to the
core. But preaching to the converted in front of the television cameras may
not win floating voters.
Once a heavily fortified outpost of apartheid, in Guguletu posters urging
citizens to know their rights adorn the walls. On the dashboard of a taxi a
National party sticker, with a beaming President de Klerk, reveals the
coloured driver's preference.
Despite Mr Slovo's best efforts, he says, the National party, not the ANC,
will run the province after the election.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940412

