FT942-15629

FT  14 APR 94 / Leading Article: Paying for parties


The business of fighting elections is an expensive one in modern
democracies. Political parties need large sums of money to pay for their
campaigns, advertising and mailshots. Frequently, raising the finance
requires them to sell their souls to special interest groups such as
companies, trade unions or even crime syndicates.
In the UK, the Conservatives rely on corporate supporters and wealthy
individuals, including foreign businessmen whose motives in making donations
are unclear. Labour depends on trade unions, which make no bones about the
fact that they expect influence in return for their support. Each party has
in recent times received suspect gifts - the Conservatives from Mr Asil
Nadir, the disgraced tycoon; Labour from Mr Robert Maxwell. Public concern
over these gifts last year led to an inquiry by the all-party Commons Home
Affairs committee, which reported yesterday.
Sadly the report is a wasted opportunity. The Conservative majority on the
committee saw no advantage in changing the rules. Their party gains
financial advantage from the generosity of its individual supporters, who
are wealthier than Labour's. They therefore backed a code of practice that
would change little.
The Labour minority report sought to rectify the current imbalance in
resources between the two main parties. Its recommendations, which include a
ban on overseas donations, go well beyond what is needed to restore public
confidence. It also calls for state funding of political parties, a measure
for which there is little support among voters. State funding has not, in
any case, stopped parties becoming embroiled in fund-raising scandals in the
countries that have adopted it.
On one point, however, the minority report is right: donations of more than
Pounds 5,000 a year from a single source should be publicly disclosed.
Wealthy people, companies and trade unions are all entitled to give money to
the parties they support - including parties overseas. But the source of
party funds is a matter of legitimate public concern to voters. The public
has a right to know who is trying to influence politicians with the
deployment of significant sums of money.
One further measure might be considered on company donations to political
parties, which must currently be declared in annual reports. A few companies
seek endorsement of such donations at regular intervals through a vote at
the annual general meeting. Trade unions must rightly seek support for their
political links at regular intervals, to ensure that they reflect the wishes
of their members. Shareholders have the same right to be consulted when
their money is to be spent on political machines.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

940414

