FT941-3589

FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (15): 'The threat from
advertisers' - Raymond Snoddy discusses an academic's theory that private
entities, rather than governments, are the most consistent and most
pernicious 'censors' of newspaper content / Media


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Advertising and a Democratic Press
by C. Edwin Baker
Princeton University Press, Dollars 24.95, Pounds 20
203 pages (incl 50pp of notes)
Critics of advertising usually point to its role in promoting an ultimately
unsustainable consumerist view of the world, or its potentially disruptive
impact in thrusting luxurious lifestyles under the noses of those who cannot
afford them.
Prof Edwin Baker has an even graver charge to level at the industry, at
least in the US: that it has destroyed diversity and competition in the
American press and, at least to a degree, debauched its standards. He
believes advertisers pose an even greater threat than politicians to press
freedom.
'Despite the potential danger and occasional occurrence of government
censorship, private entities in general and advertisers in particular
constitute the most consistent and the most pernicious 'censors' of media
content,' Prof Baker argues.
For the author, the most deadly case of advertiser influence was the mass
media's 'virtual silence' about the dangers of cigarette smoking, long after
these effects were well known to the medical community, to protect media
revenues from cigarette advertising.
The power of advertising can extend throughout the media conglomerates, such
as when a New York Times series on medical malpractice so upset
pharmaceutical companies that they threatened to withdraw 260 pages of
advertising from a medical magazine owned by the paper. Rather than buckle,
the New York Times sold the magazine.
However, the central thesis of the book is that advertisers have played a
fundamental role in destroying competition in the US newspaper industry. By
1989, only 26 US cities still had competing dailies.
This process of consolidation - which has, on the whole, produced a bland,
timid non-partisan press, according to Prof Baker - has largely resulted
from the fact that the largest paper in an area gets a disproportionate
amount of advertising. The increasing subsidisation of the cost of editorial
material leads to increasing dominance and the collapse of rivals. As rival
papers become uneconomic, overall circulations fall, because the survivors
do not acquire all the subscribers of the deceased titles.
Prof Baker believes that a commitment to democracy strongly supports the
treatment of media content as a 'merit good', to which all citizens should
have access, at least to some reasonable extent.
The author has one relatively simple suggestion to make to cure the problem.
To reduce the influence of advertising on newspapers, Prof Baker would place
a 10 per cent sales tax on newspaper advertising and redistribute the money
as a subsidy based on a paper's circulation revenue. This might reduce
advertising revenue by 10 per cent, but could increase revenues from
circulation by 30 per cent, rewarding newspapers that pleased their readers.
A similar process could apply to broadcasting. In 1989, for example, a 6 per
cent tax on television advertising would have provided Dollars 1.78bn to
fund public broadcasting.
Whether such an interventionist approach amounts to practical politics or
not, Advertising and a Democratic Press is an essential book for anyone
interested in the structural impact of advertising on American newspapers in
particular and the American media in general.
It is less clear how relevant such an analysis is for the British press.
Although advertising subsidises newspapers to a significant extent, a
reasonable diversity of views has survived, even though left-of-centre
opinions are considerably under-represented.
The relevance to Europe of Prof Baker's views cannot, however, be dismissed
entirely. He cites the well-known case of the Daily Herald. When it ceased
publication, it was read by 4.7m people, nearly twice as many as the Times,
FT and The Guardian added together. The problem was not a lack of readers,
but that the Herald's readers 'were disproportionately poor working-class,
and consequently did not constitute a valuable advertising market to reach'.
Ironically, a free marketeer like Rupert Murdoch appears to be moving in
Prof Baker's direction by cutting the price of The Times to 30p. By doing
so, he has based his main hope for the paper's future on increased
circulation revenues, by persuading more people to buy the paper, rather
than courting advertisers by offering a narrow elite readership.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

940315

