FT943-811

FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Mauritius (1): Tiger in the making - Successful as
a manufacturing base, Mauritius needs to develop new skills and a stronger
service sector


   By TONY HAWKINS and MICHAEL HOLMAN


Within a generation, Mauritius has gone from gloom to boom.
Some thirty years ago an eminent economist warned that the Indian Ocean
island faced 'ultimate catastrophe' unless its rate of population growth was
checked.
Today Mauritius prospers. Once a sugar mono economy, beset with high
unemployment and rampant inflation, it has developed a thriving,
labour-intensive, industrial sector, heavily reliant on clothing exports,
and a highly successful tourist business, while a start to the development
of offshore financial services has been made.
Population has stabilised at 1.1m, unemployment is negigible, and per capita
income has doubled in 13 years. It should be a role model for Africa;
instead it is leaving the mainland trailing in its wake.
Ethnically, politically, culturally, and especially economically, Mauritius
is not part of Africa.
Attitudes could scarcely be more different: contrast Mauritian industry
minister, Jean-Claud L'Estrac, extolling the virtues of foreign expertise,
skills and investment, with the suspicion of expatriates displayed in so
many parts of the continent.
While Mauritius is anxious to be part of Africa - much store, especially
from a marketing viewpoint, is laid on its membership of the Preferential
Trade Area of East and Southern Africa (PTA), and it is negotiating entry to
the (overlapping) Southern African Development Community - the island is far
more outward-looking, in economic policy as well as in political attitudes,
than its African counterparts.
Today Mauritius is closer to newly industrialising country (NIC) status than
to sub-Saharan Africa. The UN's Human Development Report lists the island in
the top 25 developing countries, ahead of Brazil, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.
Since the mid-1980s, gross domestic product growth has averaged 6.5 per cent
annually, and inflation 7.5 per cent; unemployment is estimated at 1.6 per
cent, and the budget deficit is a modest 2.2 per cent of GDP.
Finance minister Ramakrishna Sithanen's recent budgets bulge with
first-world supply-side ideas designed to improve market efficiency, offer
new incentives for savings and investment and improve the infrastructure.
Refreshing, too, is the country's ability to pay its own way. The ubiquitous
'donors', dominating such discussions in Africa, seldom feature in
Mauritius. External debt will fall to 30 per cent of GDP this year, while
the debt-service ratio will be only 6.5 per cent of exports.
Since 1982 Sir Aneerood Jugnauth, the prime minister, has presided over the
transformation, based on economic measures to which all the main parties
subscribe, ensuring policy continuity irrespective of who wins the next
general election, to be held by 1996.
All this means that the yardstick against which Mauritius must be assessed
is Asian rather than African, although whether it can make the leap to NIC
status will depend on practicising what it preaches.
Most agree that the Export Processing Zone is unlikely to maintain its
existing dominance of the economy. Mauritian businessmen accept the need to
develop new skills and a capital-intensive growth path, while retaining
their competitive strength, especially in garment manufacture, built up over
the past decade.
Some companies, the Floreal Group being the flagship, have taken the
multinational route, setting up a labour-intensive plant in nearby
Madagascar, while looking further afield to the possibility of manufacturing
in China or India.
Others, such as the New Island Clothing group, are manufacturing to Marks
and Spencer specifications for the UK market.
The strategy is crucial. Mauritius is increasingly at a competitive
disadvantage, not just because it is a full-employment economy, where wage
costs have doubled in the past four years, but also because of its location.
The choice is between importing labour, going offshore as Floreal has done,
or sharpening its competitive edge in manufacturing.
Devaluation - 25 per cent in the past five years - has helped maintain
competitiveness, but the zone must now implement structural solutions rather
than temporary palliatives. 'We have to redesign the Mauritian citizen,'
says a businessman, referring not just to the need for better and more
relevant education and training, but also for a change in attitudes.
Mauritius may be ahead of Africa in terms of work ethic, but when it comes
to the Asian tigers it is not in the same league.
Nor does investment efficiency measure up to 'tiger' standards. While ratios
are high, an estimated 30 per cent of GDP in 1994, the capital-output ratio
of 19.4 per cent in recent years is well below Korea's 29 per cent and
Taiwan's and Thailand's 35.5 per cent.
This is explained partly by weaknesses in the financial system, some of
which were tackled in this year's budget, but also by structural factors -
especially an inefficient labour market.
Welfarist attitudes die hard, reflected in the readiness to abolish exchange
control and to liberalise money markets, while retaining restrictive labour
laws. With much underemployment, labour market deregulation would allow
better use of scarce resources.
Immediate growth prospects are good. GDP will grow 4.5 per cent in 1994-5,
slower than the past two years because of the impact on sugar production of
cyclone Hollanda early in the year. The current account deficit last year of
MRs700m (1.2 per cent of GDP) will increase sharply to 4.2 per cent in
1994-5, but if aircraft purchases are excluded, it will be slightly lower at
1 per cent. With net capital inflows of some MRs3bn the balance of payments
will be in healthy surplus.
Inflation is expected to fall from 9.5 per cent to 5 per cent by mid-1995.
Real interest rates are positive, with bank rate, tied to the treasury bill
rate at 11.2 per cent, and the savings ratios (24 per cent of GDP)
should be boosted by budget measures designed to increase the flow of
investible securities. This includes privatising five parastatals, starting
with Air Mauritius later this year. At the same time, the Stock Exchange is
being opened up to foreign investors.
With the EPZ facing a more competitive international environment, including
the loss of Lome preferences ,growth will slow, while sugar prices will fall
in response to Uruguay Round agreement.
While tourism is most likely to fill the gap in the short term, physical and
environmental limitations, mean the potential for tourism-driven growth
beyond the turn of the century is hard to assess. This is why the drive to
develop the services sector - embracing offshore banking, the free port,
offshore companies, data capture, pre-press services for the printing
industry, computer software - has assumed such importance. The number of
offshore companies has risen from 150 a year ago to more than 1,000.
Leaders, both in government and business have few illusions. Business and
government are working more closely than in the past, while in the political
sphere there is a shared vision of the future.
But while the centre will hold, it is vital that the service culture,
increasingly evident in tourism, becomes more entrenched in the economy,
because that is where the island's future lies.
 --------------------------------------------------
GDP PER HEAD (CONSTANT 1987 PRICES)
 --------------------------------------------------
Year                        Dollars
                      (1987 prices)
 --------------------------------------------------
1980                          1,650
1981                          1,750
1982                          1,825
1983                          1,820
1984                          1,900
1985                          2,000
1986                          2,170
1987                          2,350
1988                          2,475
1989                          2,560
1990                          2,710
1991                          2,800
1992                          2,975
1993                          3,100
 --------------------------------------------------
Source: Central Statistical Office, Port Louis
 --------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page I

940927

