FT944-2431

FT  16 DEC 94 / Retail sales stagnate as recovery gains strength:
Manufacturers tell CBI demand is buoyant - Stores say customers are cautious


   By PHILIP COGGAN and PETER NORMAN


Britain continues to experience a joyless economic recovery.
Manufacturers have recorded their strongest improvement in overall demand
for nearly six years this month, the Confederation of British Industry says.
But this buoyancy has not been felt in the high street. Official figures
yesterday showed that retail sales stagnated in November and October.
The CBI's latest survey of manufacturing, published today, suggests output
will grow at an accelerating rate in the next four months. By contrast, the
Central Statistical Office yesterday reported that seasonally adjusted
retail sales rose 2.5 per cent in the year to November, the lowest annual
rise since April 1993.
Together, these latest indicators show how higher taxes and a competitive
exchange rate are rebalancing Britain's economic recovery from the
consumer-led growth of a year ago to an export and manufacturing-led upturn.
The data also reinforced a picture of growth with low inflation. The CBI
survey found no net increase in the number of companies planning to raise
prices in the next four months. The British Retail Consortium, representing
90 per cent of the industry, said cautious consumers were keeping 'retail
inflation at a very low level and margins under pressure'.
Warm weather in November also proved bad for retailers. The consortium said
sales of outerwear, warm clothing and accessories such as hats and gloves
were sharply down. 'The mild weather and absence of epidemics again marred
the sales of over-the-counter medicines,' it added.
The National Lottery was a mixed blessing for retailers. Newsagents said
lottery tickets generated significant extra sales but queues curbed sales of
other goods. Lottery ticket purchases are likely to depress the official
retail statistics since they are not included in the CSO's retail sales
total.
Ticket sales in the four weeks to last Saturday were Pounds 205.1m. If that
pace continues, the lottery will scoop up nearly Pounds 2.7bn in a year,
equivalent to 1.8 per cent of UK retail sales.
The details of the sales figures show that retailers are finding it
difficult to attract shoppers without cutting prices. The consortium says
that department stores reported fragrance sales well ahead, but only with
the help of price promotion that had damaged margins.
Seasonal adjustment is an important part of the statistical process at this
time of year; November is normally the second busiest shopping month. While
the seasonally adjusted figures show no change in sales between October and
November, in unadjusted terms sales actually rose by 7.5 per cent.
The CSO's preferred measure is to use a three-monthly average. On that
basis, sales volumes in the three months to November were 3 per cent higher
than in the same period of 1993. Yet the rise compared with the previous
three months (to August) was just 0.5 per cent. In value terms, unadjusted
retail sales in November were 3.4 per cent higher than in November 1993.
Comparing the three months to November with the previous quarter, the
strongest sector was household goods, which recorded a rise of 1.9 per cent;
the weakest was other non-food, which includes stores such as off-licences,
florists and tobacconists, which reported a fall of 0.9 per cent.
However, food retailers reported sales volumes in the three months to
November which were 0.6 per cent higher than in the previous quarter, and
4.8 per cent higher than in the same period a year ago. The consortium said
fresh produce and poultry sold well, and Christmas foods were in demand.
Significant falls in sales of camcorders, video games and home computers
were reported. Yet sales of white goods, televisions and hi-fis were up on a
year ago.
The CBI survey, which covered 1,207 manufacturers between November 25 and
December 14, found that 27 per cent thought their present order book was
above normal, 19 per cent below normal, and 54 per cent normal.
The resultant plus 8 per cent - which the CBI considers indicative of the
trend - was the highest since January 1989. It compared with a balance of
plus 5 per cent in November and minus 19 per cent in December last year.
Export order books were also above normal, although the balance of plus 7
per cent in December was below November's 10 per cent positive balance.
The CBI indicator of companies planning to raise domestic prices was
unchanged: a positive balance of 22 per cent for both months.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

941216

