FT944-2805

FT  16 DEC 94 / British Gas drops high street advice and payment services


   By ROBERT TAYLOR and ROBERT CORZINE


British Gas is to withdraw all consumer advice and complaints services from
its high street showrooms next month as part of the transformation of its
network into a purely retail operation.
The company has agreed to trade union requests to station security guards at
some shops because of fears that the withdrawal of services might anger some
customers.
A trial of the new-style showrooms in nine cities has resulted in threats by
some customers to employees, according to British Gas officials.
At present, consumers can use gas showrooms to pay bills, inquire about
services, make complaints or receive energy efficiency advice.
But from January 3 the shops will be converted to wholly retail appliance
outlets. The advice and complaint services will be available by telephone
for the price of a local call.
Customers who want to pay their bills in person will be directed to post
offices or encouraged to pay by bank transfer.
Ofgas, the industry regulator, said it was satisfied with the alternative
arrangements. It regards the post office scheme, introduced this year, as
particularly effective, as gas bills can be paid at any of 19,000 post
offices, compared with only 266 gas showrooms.
Meanwhile, the series of public-relations pitfalls that has beset British
Gas in recent weeks continued when MPs and consumer groups criticised the
company for trying to impose deep pay cuts on showroom workers only weeks
after Mr Cedric Brown, British Gas chief executive, was awarded a 75 per
cent pay rise.
The House of Commons employment committee said it wants Mr Brown to testify
at a hearing into the issue of executive pay next month.
Yesterday's furore concerned the retail division, which this year was made a
separate business unit as part of British Gas's restructuring. The number of
showroom workers is to fall from 3,300 to 1,300 by 1996.
The division's managers say they have inherited pay scales and working terms
and conditions that are inappropriate to the retail sector.
Mr Bill Adamson, sales director, said showroom staff were paid about 15 per
cent more than their counterparts in similar shops, and terms and working
conditions were more generous.
Pay talks were continuing, he said, and no action would be taken until the
middle of next year.
Gas chief faces grilling, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 20

941216

