FT942-16203

FT  12 APR 94 / London and Dublin will resume talks on Ulster


   By MICHAEL CASSELL and TIM COONE


The British and Irish governments will this week signal their determination
to press on with the Northern Ireland peace process following the failure of
last week's IRA ceasefire to achieve a political breakthrough.
Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland minister responsible for conducting
talks with the province's main parties, is to resume immediately the series
of bilateral discussions aimed at seeking agreement on the shape of a
political settlement in the province.
In Dublin Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, is expected to
announce today the opening of formal talks with Irish opposition leaders on
the setting up of the proposed Forum for Peace and Reconciliation, first
mentioned in the Downing Street declaration as a way of promoting
cross-border relationships.
The message from both governments will be that Sinn Fein, the political wing
of the IRA, will be able to participate in both exercises only when the
republican movement decides on a permanent cessation of violence. Since the
end of the IRA ceasefire on Friday, the province has again been hit by
terrorist attacks from the IRA as well as from loyalist groups.
In spite of Ulster politicians' intense public criticism of the so-called
three-stranded talks process and the prospect of slow progress at least
until after the European elections in June, the Northern Ireland Office
intends to press on with the internal dialogue and with efforts to agree
with Dublin a more detailed framework for political progress.
Until now Mr Reynolds has resisted opposition calls to establish the forum,
preferring to wait for a response from Sinn Fein to the Downing Street
declaration.
In December Mr Reynolds said the purpose of the forum would be to bring Sinn
Fein into an initial negotiating process with nationalist parties following
a permanent cessation of IRA violence. Dublin's thinking now is to leave an
empty seat for Sinn Fein pending an end to IRA violence.
Mr John Bruton, the leader of Ireland's opposition Fine Gael party, said
yesterday that the peace process now required 'more practical and more
immediate' measures including talks between Northern Ireland's political
parties on a Bill of Rights for the province.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, yesterday started a
week-long visit to the US to explain the government's policy on Ulster.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940412

