FT943-12812

FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Metall Mining chafes over
majority stake


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


Metall Mining, the inter- national mining arm of Metallgesellschaft, is
growing increasingly impatient at delays in the sale of a 50.1 per cent
controlling stake in itself held by the ailing German industrial group.
Metallgesellschaft has indicated that it plans to spin off its stake in
Metall through a public offering as part of efforts to improve its
liquidity. Metall and its financial advisers are eager to take advantage of
the recent surge in copper prices to go ahead with the sale.
'The market is indicating that it would be receptive,' one Toronto
securities dealer said yesterday.
Metallgesellschaft's stake in Metall has a market value of about CDollars
465m (USDollars 336.9m). The main stumbling block however, is a convoluted
arrangement involving Metall's 35 per cent stake in Norddeutsche Affinerie,
one of Europe's largest copper smelters.
Metall is also understood to be frustrated at recent management changes at
Metallgesellschaft's head office in Frankfurt, which have blurred lines of
communication. The discussions on Metall's future also involve numerous
creditors to whom Metallgesellschaft has pledged its Metall shares as
collateral.
'There are more than two parties and each has its own agenda,' one person
familiar with the talks said.
Metall's partners in Norddeutsche Affinerie are MIM, the Australian mining
group, and Degussa, the German metals company. Metall acquired its interest
from Metallgesellschaft last September as part of a rationalisation of the
German parent's metals business before its present troubles surfaced.
MIM and Degussa demanded assurances at the time that the Canadian company's
stake would revert to Metallgesellschaft if the seemingly healthy German
group were to sever its ties with Metall. Metallgesellschaft would be
obliged to pay Metall a fair market price for the assets.
Metall has so far been unable to obtain a waiver of this arrangement from
its partners.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940722

