FT942-12825

FT  28 APR 94 / Russia warms to Nato peace partnership


   By BRUCE CLARK


   BRUSSELS


A senior Russian general will visit the military headquarters of Nato today
amid mounting speculation that his country is about to soften its attitude
to co-operation with the alliance.
General Vladimir Zhurbenko, deputy head of the Russian general staff, will
be among the top brass from 15 former Communist countries who visit the
headquarters at Mons, near Brussels.
Gen Zhurbenko pointedly declined to disclose his country's intentions at a
discussion in Brussels yesterday between chiefs of staff from the former
Warsaw Pact and their opposite numbers in Nato.
However, Field Marshall Sir Richard Vincent, chairman of Nato's military
committee, said the Russian visitor had played an 'entirely constructive'
role in discussions about joint east-west exercises within the Partnership
for Peace.
Nato has invited all its former adversaries in the eastern bloc to join
Partnership for Peace, a programme of military co-operation which could pave
the way for full membership of the Atlantic alliance for some of them.
Some 15 former communist countries have joined the programme or are in the
process of doing so.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, was expected to sign up to
the programme during the visit to Brussels on April 21, but the trip was
cancelled after a plunge in Moscow's relations with Nato following the first
air strikes in Bosnia.
In the last few days, co-operation betweens Russia and the west over Bosnia
has again improved and the Serb withdrawal, which averted the possibility of
fresh air strikes by Nato, also lightened the atmosphere.
Another sign of improving relations between Russia and the main western
countries is the renewed interest in some western capitals in upgrading
Russia's ties with the Group of Seven leading industrial nations.
Officials close to President Boris Yeltsin have said that Russian
participation in the Partnership for Peace could hinge on Moscow's full
acceptance into the G7 club. The G7's Italian presidency has indicated
willingness to accept Russia as a full partner in the group's political
consultations, although not in its discussions on the world economy.
A senior Russian diplomat is understood to have telephoned Nato headquarters
on Tuesday night with what western officials viewed as a helpful message
from Moscow.
The message was to the effect that Russia had strongly pressed the Serbs to
withdraw from Goradze, and the pull-out was now broadly complete. However
the diplomat said Russia accepted the inevitability of air strikes in the
event of backsliding by the Serbs.
General Pavel Grachev, Russian defence minister is due to visit Brussels on
May 24, providing an opportunity for Moscow to sign up to Partnership for
Peace.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940428

