FT942-14786

FT  19 APR 94 / Business and the Law: Coal and Steel Treaty clarified -
European Court


The competition rules in the European Coal and Steel Treaty may not be
enforced in national courts without a prior decision by the European
Commission, the European Court of Justice ruled last week.
The ECJ gave its ruling in the context of an action for damages by Banks, a
private coal company, against British Coal for infringement of the Coal and
Steel Treaty and/or Rome Treaty competition rules.
Banks produces coal under extraction licences granted by British Coal.
British Coal has the sole right to extract coal and to grant licences. There
are two kinds of licence. One, a 'royalty licence', obliges the licensee to
sell the coal produced to British Coal at a price specified in the licence
agreement.
In March 1990, the National Association of Licensed Open Cast Operators
(NALOO), of which Banks is a member, lodged a complaint with the European
Commission under the Coal and Steel and Rome Treaty competition rules.
First, it challenged the fairness of long term supply contracts at fixed
prices made between British Coal and the electricity generators, National
Power and PowerGen. Second, it attacked the extraction licence system as
regards both the criteria for granting licences and the level of royalty
imposed.
On May 23 1991, the Commission rejected NALOO's complaint. NALOO appealed to
the Court of First Instance which has stayed the proceedings pending the
outcome of the present case started by Banks in February 1991.
In the action for damages, Banks argued that the licence royalty level was
excessive and that the price paid under delivered licences was unreasonably
low.
In answer to the first two of six questions asked by the English High Court,
the ECJ said that only the Coal and Steel Treaty competition rules were
relevant to the case as both the extraction of unworked coal and the
businesses concerned fell within the scope of the Coal and Steel Treaty.
The general rules prohibiting restrictive agreements and misuse of a
dominant position applied. The Court said a specific rule relating only to
unfair and discriminatory product pricing practices did not apply. British
Coal could not be regarded as engaged in the sale of products where it
granted licences to extract coal.
The ECJ then said that the competition rules in question did not confer
rights which were directly enforceable by private parties in national
courts. In the case of restrictive agreements, the Treaty rule gave the
Commission sole jurisdiction to rule on the compatibility of an agreement
which would otherwise be prohibited.
As long as such incompatibility had not been established by the Commission
itself, individuals could not contend in national proceedings that an
agreement was incompatible.
Similarly, in the context of misuse of a dominant position, the Treaty rule
reserved to the Commission the power to verify whether a dominant position
was held or acquired and being used for prohibited purposes. The ECJ said
that the sole jurisdiction of the Commission precluded individuals from
relying directly on that provision in national courts.
The fourth question was whether national courts could or must award damages
for breach of the competition rules in question. The fifth asked whether
that power or obligation depended on a prior decision of the Commission, the
exhaustion of remedies available under the Coal and Steel Treaty and/or
completion of the steps or procedures indicated in the relevant provisions.
The ECJ said that since the Commission had sole jurisdiction subject only to
review by the CFI and ECJ, the national courts may not entertain an action
for damages in the absence of a Commission decision.
The Court ruled that the decisions taken by the Commission were binding in
their entirety on the national courts in accordance with the Coal and Steel
Treaty rule to that effect. However, the national courts may still ask the
ECJ to rule on the validity or interpretation of those decisions.
C-128/92: Banks v British Coal, ECJ FC, 13 April 1994.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS

The Financial Times


London Page 13

940419

