FT941-4244

FT  11 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Early gains reversed after Wall
Street opens - Market report


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A setback in the US bond markets had greater effect on London than on other
European financial centres yesterday. UK stocks made good headway in the
first half of the session, encouraged by dividend and profits reports. But
share gains were reversed hurriedly in mid-afternoon when British government
bonds came off the top sharply as US Federal securities opened lower.
Trading volume was moderate, with an increase of nearly 24 per cent in the
day's Seaq total reflecting little more than a burst of activity among
regional brewing stocks as Whitbread unloaded its stakes in 10 smaller
brewers by selling them to one marketmaker, which then passed them on to
institutions.
After an uncertain start, the FT-SE 100 Index advanced by 17.3 to the day's
peak of 3,264, following bond markets which strengthened in response to a
favourable report on the US economy from the Federal Reserve.
Excellent dividend and profits from BTR encouraged a stock market now
looking for its lead from the corporate sector. Barclays Bank and
Rolls-Royce were among others to show evidence of improving trading
conditions for British companies.
The setback, when it came, was swift and the FT-SE 100 ended the day at
3,233.9 for a net loss of 12.8. Weakening sentiment in gilt-edged markets
was quickly translated into falls in stock index futures. Equity traders
were hard put to explain the late fall, but noted political uncertainties in
the US and comments from the president of the Bundesbank, although neither
factor appeared to justify the reversal of trends in UK equities and bonds.
Some strategists said that European markets are likely to turn nervous every
time worries over Federal Reserve intentions resurface.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index escaped the late sell-off but ended 4.6 off at
3,908.4. Seaq volume of 901.1m shares compared with Wednesday's 730.2m,
which was worth a healthy Pounds 1.65bn at retail, or customer, level.
The contrast between the first and second halves of the trading session was
well displayed by the success, in stock market terms, of the Whitbread deal,
which was worth well in excess of Pounds 200m and among the largest of its
type seen in the UK market.
The stocks involved were taken up quickly and without greatly affecting
share prices. 'A bold stroke by a confident marketmaker,' was the comment
heard in the dealing rooms. Whitbread was known to be intending to sell the
share stakes, but the planning of the deal was immaculate.
However, in the afternoon, shares across the Footsie range crumbled when
sentiment turned negative and some traders predicted a weak opening today,
especially if the Dow Average fails to recover from the 24-point fall on
record at the London close.
Although most analysts of the London market appear to agree that the
sell-off of the past three weeks has been overdone, they also warn that the
risk of further losses remains high. European bond markets are still proving
highly sensitive to moves or news from the US Federal Reserve.
With further tightening in Fed credit policies still widely predicted, stock
markets in London and elsewhere in Europe are expected to suffer repeated
bouts of nerves, and yesterday afternoon's performance may prove to be just
one example.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

940311

