FT942-14543

FT  20 APR 94 / Surveyors group seeks to improve valuations


   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent


The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors yesterday published a
wide-ranging list of recommendations intended to improve the credibility of
commercial property valuations.
The institution called for an explanation of property valuations to be
included in the published accounts of companies which have a significant
interest in property.
The institution also proposed greater co-operation between valuers and
auditors. Valuers should have direct access to audit committees, it says.
The institution is responding to increasing criticisms concerning the
reliability of property valuations, which have led to a series of legal
actions and some high-profile disputes.
Among these is the case of Queens Moat Houses, where two firms of valuers
differed by nearly Pounds 500m in valuing its portfolio at the end of 1991.
Most of the recommendations published yesterday are intended to tighten the
institution's regulatory powers, to improve valuers' technical skills and
the clarity of their reports, and to increase liaison between valuers and
auditors.
Under the proposals, the institution would have new powers to examine and
comment on controversial valuations.
It would also establish clear powers to discipline members for 'blatant
disregard' of the institution's advice about valuations.
The report also calls for more widespread comment by valuers on the risk
factors attached to valuations, price trends, and economic indicators.
The institution also believes there should be greater communication between
valuers and their clients, leading to clearer instructions. A summary of
these instructions, it suggests, should accompany the final valuation.
Mr Clive Lewis, institution president, said it was important that valuers
dispelled the mystique surrounding commercial property valuations. Clients
should be offered more information and explanation about valuations, he
said.
The report was written by an institution working party and will be the
subject of a consultation process until July next year.
The Mallinson Report. Commercial Market Group, RICS, 12 Great George St,
London SW1 3AD. Pounds 25 (free to chartered surveyors).
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 8

940420

