FT943-12747

FT  23 JUL 94 / UK growth hits a 5-year high: Manufacturing plays leading
role - North Sea oil and gas perform well


   By GILLIAN TETT, Economics Staff


The strength of Britain's economic recovery increased in the second quarter
of the year, in spite of April's tax rises, as total output rose above
levels seen before the recent recession.
With the manufacturing sector playing a key role in the growth, the data
suggested that the UK economic recovery is becoming increasingly broad
based.
Gross domestic product grew by a seasonally adjusted 0.9 per cent in the
three months to June, compared with the previous three months, the Central
Statistical Office said.
Compared with the same period a year ago, second quarter output was 3.3 per
cent higher. This was the fastest level of growth for more than five years
and suggests that the Treasury's forecast for 2.75 per cent GDP growth this
year will be comfortably reached.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, UK chancellor, welcomed the figures as 'the sort of
recovery we want to see', not least because inflation was running at
relatively low levels, and unemployment falling.
'I intend to make sure we turn this favourable combination not into a boom
which goes bust, but into an upswing which lasts for many years,' he added.
The output figures benefited from a strong performance from North Sea oil
and gas, which accounted for nearly a fifth of the overall annual GDP
growth. Measured without the erratic oil and gas sector, output rose 0.8 per
cent in the three months to June, quarter on quarter, and 2.7 per cent, year
on year.
Nevertheless, the CSO said that even excluding the North Sea contribution,
output in the last quarter was now above the previous record reached in
1990, just before the recession.
In the City, analysts pointed out that faster growth might raise fears that
the economy was running into capacity constraints and fuelling inflationary
pressures. Encouragement was taken from signs that the recovery was becoming
more industry driven, after being largely consumer driven last year - not
least because trade figures earlier this week showed a steady growth in UK
exports to countries outside the European Union.
Mr Paul Turnbull of brokers Smith New Court said: 'At the beginning of the
year a lot of people were saying tax rises would weaken growth. In fact it
has accelerated.'
The manufacturing, energy and utility industries grew strongly in the last
quarter. The CSO said provisional estimates indicated that the index of
production, which covers these industries, would come in for the June
quarter above the previously established trend of 1.3 per cent, quarter on
quarter, well ahead of the rate of GDP growth. The transport, storage and
telecommunications sectors also saw strong growth, the CSO said. The retail,
hotel and catering sector - the only areas where firm figures are available
 -grew 0.6 per cent, quarter on quarter.
Editorial Comment, Page 6; Currencies, Page 11; London stocks, Page 13 and
Weekend II; World stocks, Page 19; Lex, Page 22; Markets, Weekend II

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940723

