FT942-15459

FT  15 APR 94 / Lebanese detain Iraqis over killing


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON


   AMMAN


Two Iraqi diplomats are being held by the Lebanese authorities on suspicion
of assassinating a prominent opponent of President Saddam Hussein in Beirut
on Tuesday. The dissident, Mr Taleb as-Suheil, is said to have played a
prominent role in a planned coup attempt in Baghdad last July.
The diplomats were named as Mr Khaled Khalaf, commercial attache, and Mr
Mohammed Kadhem, cultural attache. Beirut has asked Baghdad to lift their
diplomatic immunity so that they may face trial. A third man, Mr Hadi
Hassan, is believed to have taken refugee inside the Iraqi embassy, which
has been surrounded by police.
The Lebanese government has said that all three are held to be Iraqi
intelligence agents. But Baghdad has denied any involvement and called for
their immediate release.
The killing comes amid growing signs that the security situation in Beirut
is deteriorating. A Jordanian diplomat was gunned down earlier this year and
two Palestinians belonging to Abu Nidal's notorious terrorist organisation
were arrested and charged with the killing. In February a bomb went off in a
church near Beirut, killing 11 worshippers. The Lebanese Forces, a
right-wing Christian group which was formerly allied to Israel during the
country's civil war, was subsequently banned and four of its supporters
charged with the bombing.
The recent spate of killings is likely to mar the government's
reconstruction efforts and hinder plans to raise finance on the Euromarkets.
Security in and around the city has been stepped up and both Lebanese and
Syrian soldiers are again patrolling the streets.
Mr Faris Bouez, Lebanon's foreign minister, said yesterday that it was too
early to say whether Beirut would cut diplomatic ties with Iraq over the
killing but that 'Lebanon cannot be taken advantage of, not under the
diplomatic cover or diplomatic immunity, to settle scores and to practise
crime'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940415

