FT943-12955

FT  22 JUL 94 / Sony closes plant as local demand falls


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO and WILLIAM DAWKINS


   TOKYO


Sony, the consumer electronics company, said yesterday it was halting
production at a plant in central Japan because of a decline in the domestic
market.
The plant at Atsuta, outside Nagoya, is one of two in Japan where Sony
produces printed circuit boards for video cameras. The company will
consolidate domestic production at its other Japanese plant.
Meanwhile, Matsushita, the world's largest consumer electronics company,
said yesterday it intended to reduce its administrative staff by 30 per
cent, or about 6,000 people, by the end of fiscal 1996 rather than the end
of fiscal 1997, as originally planned. The cuts are part of an attempt to
improve profit-to-sales ratio to 5 per cent by the end of 1996 from 1.5 per
cent in 1993.
The announcements by Japan's two leading consumer electronics companies
highlight the difficulties the industry faces after several years of falling
profits and efforts to cut costs and restructure.
The domestic environment has changed dramatically from the days when
manufacturers expected rising demand for a wide array of products.
The maturing of the market, coupled with demands for cheaper products and a
flood of low-priced imports from Asian countries, has triggered a sharp fall
in prices.
Sony's move marks the first time in its recent history that production has
been halted completely at a plant. 'The Atsuta plant is feeling the effects
of lower demand in the camcorder market,' a Sony official said yesterday.
The plant faced other concerns, such as insufficient space to expand, a lack
of abundant water needed to wash printed circuit boards, and its age: the
facility was opened in 1973.
The move also highlights Sony's need to develop more innovative products
that can trigger market demand. In video cameras, for example, the group
blemished its image as an innovator when it followed Sharp, a smaller
company, in launching a video camera with a built-in screen.
Matsushita, meanwhile, faces pressure to streamline its vast administrative
workforce, which numbers 20,000 across seven group companies. The group's
large administrative staff has become a symbol of how it has grown into a
corporate dinosaur, out of touch with market realities.
Japanese consumer electronics makers such as Matsushita and Sony will have
to move swiftly, analysts believe, to restructure their operations to meet
the demands of a new era.
Japanese households spent less in May for the fourth month in succession,
but a subsequent surge in sales of beer and air conditioners due to an
unusually hot summer may revive consumption, writes William Dawkins in
Tokyo.
The latest household survey by the government's management and co-ordination
agency shows a 1.7 per cent drop in consumer spending in the year to May.
Spending rose for four months until February, but then moved into reverse in
line with a weaker labour market.
An agency official said May's decline was due mainly to lower spending on
rice, a reaction to widespread stockpiling because of shortages earlier in
the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940722

