FT943-751

FT  28 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Nigeria selects consortium to build gas
plant


   By PAUL ADAMS


   LAGOS


The Nigeria Liquefied Natural Gas Company has selected a consortium led by
Kellogg of the US as the preferred contractor for a turnkey contract to
build a proposed natural gas liquefaction plant near Bonny in eastern
Nigeria. The contract is due to be awarded in the first quarter of 1995,
provided that NLNG has completed the financing for the project, estimated to
cost Dollars 4.6bn.
The Kellogg consortium includes Technip of France, Snamprogetti of Italy,
and the Japanese Gas Company (JGC). The rival consortium is led by Bechtel
of the US. Kellogg and Bechtel, which have built most of the world's LNG
plants, were both invited to re-bid using the Air Products liquefaction
process after the Nigerian government overturned the decision by technical
advisers Shell to award the contract to Kellogg using a process designed by
Technip.
That was the last of several false starts for the controversial project
since its conception more than 20 years ago. Last year the project was
relaunched with Shell taking the lead and the Nigerian National Petroleum
Corporation (NNPC) reducing its stake to 49 per cent. Shell, Elf Aquitaine
and Agip hold another 49 per cent and the International Finance Corporation
has agreed in principle to take the remaining 2 per cent.
The crucial issue now is financing. The second stage of funding for the
Nigeria LNG company is in place after the Nigerian government and its
foreign partners, Shell, Elf and Agip, recently increased the total
shareholders' capital in two escrow accounts to about Dollars 1bn, a large
part of the equity which it expects to need for the project. About 40 per
cent will be equity and the rest loans. Schroders merchant bank is helping
the company to raise finance from export credit agencies and other official
creditors, while the International Finance Corporation will lead the
commercial bank funding.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940928

