FT941-4256

FT  11 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Cut-price coal stokes up
industry row in Australia - Nikki Tait on an acrimonious dispute sparked by
the latest supply deals with Japanese steel mills


   By NIKKI TAIT


All is not well in Australia's coal industry. Last week, hundreds of
striking miners swarmed across the grassy knoll at Parliament House,
protesting at the recent price-cuts agreed between the nation's coking coal
producers and the Japanese steel mills. The miners' six-day protest action
shut down mines in Queensland and New South Wales. Coal companies costed the
lost production at ADollars 170m.
The two sides are due to meet at the Australian Coal Industry Council on
Monday, a tripartite discussion forum brokered by Mr David Beddall, the
federal resources minister. On the union side, there is a demand for an
inquiry into pricing and, underlying this, a long-standing suggestion that
Australia should negotiate its annual coal contracts with the all-important
Japanese buyers on a collective, not an individual company, basis.
Coal, after all, is the country's biggest export, and over 40 per cent goes
to Japan. If the buyers are working as a cartel, doesn't it make sense for
suppliers to do likewise?
From the companies' side comes a warning that even an inquiry of this nature
could send damaging signals to customers. If anything is to emerge, says Mr
Denis Porter at the New South Wales Coal Association, it should be a review
which looks more broadly at obstacles to growth in the industry's
efficiency, not 'a witch-hunt into pricing'.
The unusual aspect to this spat is that parts of the financial community,
including broking houses like BZW and Potter Warburg, are equally critical
of the producers' deal-making. Without necessarily endorsing the union
notion of a 'national coal marketing board', analysts say that the
Australian-Japanese negotiations, which set an international marker for coal
prices, have become ritualised, and that this works to the sellers'
detriment.
The latest round, comments one analyst, 'was not a well thought-out
marketing effort. There didn't seem to be much co-ordination between
producers. . . When the Japanese offered something ridiculous, they got
frightened'.
The coking coal agreements were finalised in late-January. As usual, one
company led the round, in this case Broken Hill Proprietary. When the
agreement was unveiled, it showed price cuts ranging from 8.5 to 9.5 per
cent (in US dollar terms) for hard coking coal, and around 8 to 8.5 per cent
for soft. This was the fourth successive year that coking coal prices had
fallen, and even producers admitted they were shocked by the size of the
1994 drop. Coal shares tumbled.
BHP defended the deal on the grounds that Canadian producers, despite their
cost disadvantage, were waiting to snap up market share. More generally,
producers pointed to the enormous problems confronting the Japanese steel
mills at present, and to longer-term developments in steel-making technology
which mitigate against much upturn in coking coal demand.
No one, not even the unions, denies the buyers' parlous situation. But the
industry's critics point out that the Japanese are adept at picking off
large producers who will take bigger price cuts by offering them more
attractive tonnages. In a business with high fixed costs, this can be
persuasive. But it can also spell big problems - leading to downsizing and
lost jobs - for the smaller producers who are then obliged to mop up.
At the very least, critics think the system could be shaken up. Price
negotiations for steaming coal, where underlying prospects are brighter than
for coking coal, could go ahead of coking coal, perhaps. The coal companies
could pay more early attention to other Asian buyers, instead of being
fixated with Japan. More speculatively, the notion of establishing a coal
equivalent of the London Metal Exchange could be considered.
Mr Leigh Clifford, CRA group executive for energy resources, says this would
only add dangerous volatility. 'Sure, the price can go up, but it can also
go down,' he comments. 'And you can't do anything about it'.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

940311

