FT941-4123

FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (9): Sweet dreams that can
turn into nightmares - So you've got your gold watch and now you want a
proper garden. Don't let sentiment take over / Gardens


   By PATRICIA MORISON


Retirement offers every keen gardener the sweetest of dreams. No longer will
gardening be slotted into weekends and those summer evenings when, for a
marvel, the train is on time. Retirement opens a prospect of unhurried days
and years. Even so, before throwing yourself into an orgy of improvements,
it is worth taking an unsentimental look at your garden and its
surroundings. Does it really merit your energies for the rest of your
gardening days?
Just as a significant proportion of couples decide, on reaching retirement,
that life could be a good deal pleasanter with a new partner, the same is
true of the garden. Although it might be painful in the short term, parting
from your old garden could be vastly better than slogging on with a hopeless
case.
Think about the features of your present garden that no amount of time and
money will change. Is it sun-less? Does it lie in a frost pocket, year after
year frustrating your ambition to send superb apples to the local flower
show? If it has hungry, stony soil or back-straining clay, does it really
deserve more years of struggle?
But as in the search for a new human partner, however, it behoves you to be
circumspect when choosing a new one. Otherwise, you could end up in a worse
plight than before.
First, there is the soil. Gardeners who are house-hunting should insist on
making several substantial test digs around the place. One probe is not
enough because it is sod's law (literally) that you will dig at the only
patch of workable soil.
Light is a trickier factor. House-hunting in winter can disguise the fact
that, in the summer, umbrageous trees to the south may take most or all of
the sun.
Even if that does not concern you horticulturally, it could matter very much
if basking in a conservatory was part of the plan. And if the new house is
in a conservation area, or if the trees have a local authority protection
order, you will be prevented from felling them - or even pruning them
heavily.
Few people recognise that summer house-hunting also has drawbacks. It is
important to think ahead to winter and work out the angles for those months
when the sun hangs low. Otherwise, your new garden could overshadowed by
surrounding buildings. Crocuses will never open and the soil will remain
cold late into spring.
If you are house-hunting in winter and spring, many things may go
undetected. Only the growing season will reveal if the borders are riddled
with couch grass, bindweed and ground elder. That is why the general feel of
a garden, kempt or unkempt, pruned or left wild, is so revealing.
Anyone who is not yet a good gardener, but means to become so in retirement,
would do well to take a knowledgeable friend to view the short-listed
gardens and look for signs of criminal neglect. It is unlikely that borders
gone wild would put you off buying a lovely property, but at least you would
know to expect the worst.
Once the most thuggish weeds have run amok through a border and tightened
their stranglehold on roses, paths and box hedges, there is no way you will
ever get rid of them without starting again.
This means hard work: lifting plants, replacing them if they are
inextricably weed-bound, and using weed-killer (unless you are absurdly
namby-pamby and propose to devote years to the job). Reclaiming a garden
from the worst kinds of perennial weeds will be neither cheap nor quick.
The matter of whether the soil is acid or alkaline is crucial only to
gardeners who have a particular passion for certain plant families. Whatever
is growing already in a garden or its surrounds probably will show whether
gentians or rhododendrons are to be part of your new gardening life.
These are deep matters, which matter to gardeners alone. Do not expect
estate agents to be any help in tracking down a garden for your golden
afternoons. Even so, when I toyed with finding a cottage in the Cotswolds
last year, it was a shock to find how feeble they were. Awareness of
Britain's most popular leisure activity has yet to impinge on your average
chap with a clip-board. I was on the books of eight agents, not one with
software allowing it to specify that I should receive particulars only of
gardens above my minimum acceptable size. Two-thirds of particulars gave no
indication of the area of garden with a property.
Even more infuriating was that, when I rang agents, they often had no
precise idea of the size of the gardens they were handling. Rather than take
measurements, they preferred to suggest you made a time-consuming journey to
see for yourself.
My own house in central Oxford has an unusually large, south-facing garden
for the area. Yet, when thinking of selling, I had to insist on the
particulars being reprinted to include the measurements and a brief
description of the garden.
All the same, it is worth pondering the crucial matter of how big a garden
you want for retirement. Something larger is tempting: finally, you might
think, here is the chance to make a water garden, grow alpines in raised
beds, or plant an orchard. But there is the problem of time and Time.
Time with a small 't' simply means not under-estimating how busy you could
still be, even in retirement. Again, the life partner enters into it.
By now, it will be apparent whether he or she is a gardener. If not, it is
hardly tactful to start making a still bigger garden - which, inevitably,
would occupy much of your energies - when the non-gardening spouse's
perception of retirement was travelling the world and seeing more of the
family.
Then, there is the larger question of Time. Good gardeners know it already
but novices never do: a new garden is a slow business. It takes 10 years
before an orchard gives a reasonable return, four years before old roses
start to perform well, and the same for a newly-planted herbaceous border to
start looking like the picture in your mind's eye.
Retirement should usher in two decades or so of vigorous activity. But
gardeners who are perfectionists by nature have to accept that they make a
rod for their own backs if they take on too big a plot. As the joints begin
to stiffen, it is always possible to resort more and more to hired labour.
But if part of the charm of finishing work was to get away from dealing with
personnel problems, it is perhaps not the best idea to make them an integral
part of your retirement scenario. Even with a large and challenging garden,
it is extremely hard to find knowledgeable, hard-working, full-time
gardeners in sympathy with the owner's own tastes.
All in all, then, it might be sensible to be circumspect when hunting for
the retirement garden and scaling down, not up. This need not mean loss of
face or less challenging gardening - quite the reverse if you start to
specialise.
Vic Dickson-Cohen, one of the best gardeners in retirement I know, has given
up most of his plot in north London to raising alpines by using a
low-maintenance, professional-standard alpine house. It means he can garden
whatever the weather and round the clock, making even winter bright with his
hardy cyclamen collection.
The maker, CJ Waterhouse, of Buckhurst Works, Bells Yew Green, Tunbridge
Wells (0892-750247), sells mostly to customers buying for their retirement.
They pay around Pounds 3,700 (plus VAT) for a complete 10ft by 8ft alpine
house.
If stopping work leaves no outlet for the competitive instinct, growing for
the show bench is the answer. New worlds of skill and one-upmanship can be
opened through membership of, say, the Royal Horticultural Society or the
Hardy Plant Society, or more specialised groups such as the National
Auricula and Primula Societies, the Pot Leek Society - even the oddly-named
Mammillaria Society.
The RHS will supply the addresses; its own Horticultural Shows' Handbook is
a guide to the cut and thrust of wickedly competitive gardening in
retirement.

The Financial Times


Survey PRO Page 9

940312

