FT944-2972

FT  15 DEC 94 / Leading Article: High wire act


The announcement yesterday by Trafalgar House, the conglomerate, that it may
bid for Northern Electric, one of the UK regional electricity companies
(recs), may mark the start of the biggest shake-up in electricity supply and
distribution since the 1990 privatisation. The bid partly reflects the
industry's growing financial health, and is likely to be followed by others.
But extensive consolidation will present regulators with tough problems as
they struggle to promote greater competition.
News of the possible bid has emerged as the industry enters a new lap of its
journey towards liberalisation. The government's 'golden share' in the 12
recs, preventing takeover, expires at the end of March. New price controls
will start to bite in April, and the market will be opened up to full
competition in 1998. Meanwhile Offer, the industry regulator, is trying to
increase competition in generation.
Despite all this uncertainty, Trafalgar House is right that there are
attractions in taking over a rec. Even after recent cost-cutting, there are
more jobs to be shed. If recs merge with each other - or with regional water
companies, another long-touted possible partnership - there could be large
savings in administration and billing. Bidders will also be attracted by the
recs' cash and future cash flow, although valuation is complicated by the
present uncertainty over the value of the National Grid, in which recs hold
shares.
It is less clear that Trafalgar House is the company to maximise the value
of a rec; its record is indifferent, and its new management team unproven in
its present configuration. The mooted bid, which may be partly motivated by
the desire to extract tax gains from combining the two companies, also
raises tough regulatory questions. Offer would be hard-pressed to ensure
that the rec's profits are adequately ring-fenced from Trafalgar House's
other activities. The regulator has already been forced to grapple with such
problems, as the recs have diversified beyond electricity supply and
distribution, but they would be compounded if a rec were subsumed within a
much larger group.
The bid would not, on its own, raise questions for competition policy. But
it sets the scene for a consolidation of the industry which could do so. The
recs enjoy, in essence, regional natural monopolies in electricity
distribution, while facing growing competition in supply from each other and
from new entrants, including generators. However, the industry is still a
long way from the regulator's dream of a fully competitive market in
electricity supply. While a degree of consolidation among suppliers would
not necessarily harm competition, such moves would need careful assessment
by competition authorities, to ensure that the benefits of privatisation and
liberalisation are not undermined.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

941215

