FT941-5523

FT  05 MAR 94 / Briefcase, Q&A: Tenants in common


My wife and I are joint owners of a house worth about Pounds 90,000 and
share investments worth about Pounds 220,000. When the first of us dies, I
understand the house will go automatically to the survivor. We have willed
most of our share of the investments to the surviving spouse in trust, then
to our grown-up children.
In order to reduce the liability of our estate to inheritance tax when the
second spouse dies, we are thinking of making ourselves tenants in common of
the house and leaving our share of it to a discretionary trust for the
benefit of the surviving spouse and our children. Would this work by
actually saving IHT?
Also, would it enable the surviving spouse to be sure of being able to
either remain in the house or sell it and buy a new one with the proceeds,
without the children claiming half as their share?
If the house is held as tenants in common, you each have a half share of the
property, now worth Pounds 45,000. By leaving that share to a discretionary
trust for the children, the gift would fall within the nil rate band and be
tax-efficient. The result would be that the house would be owned by the
trust and your wife.
By mutual agreement the house would be sold; one half of the proceeds would
remain in trust, the other half would go to your wife. It is within the
discretion of the trustees whether they distribute the cash to your children
or your wife (who would also be a discretionary beneficiary of the trust).
It is always possible in theory for the trustee who has an interest in a
property to force a sale of that asset, but that would require court action
and it is unlikely a court would sanction a sale if your wife were to be
made homeless. I suggest you consult a solicitor. He will be able also to
draw up the necessary documents should you go ahead with your plan.
Reply by Barry Stillerman of accountant Stoy Hayward.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

940305

