FT941-17015

FT  06 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Jamaican government sells sugar
mills


   By CANUTE JAMES


   KINGSTON


The Jamaican government has sold four of five state-owned sugar mills to
local and foreign investors who have promised to refurbish the plants and
increase production.
The sale is part of a programme of divestment of state economic enterprises,
and the purchasers have paid USDollars 43.8m for the mills, which have an
aggregate rated capacity of 270,000 tonnes a year.
Tate and Lyle of the UK is included in one consortium, which has brought the
Frome, Monymusk and Bernard Lodge mills. Other members of the group include
Wray and Nephew, one of Jamaica's leading distillers. The Long Pond mill has
been bought by a group made up of local companies involved in financial
services.
The fifth state-owned mill is not being offered for sale as it has been
leased to a privately-owned company, said government officials. The island's
four other mills are privately owned.
The purchasers of the four mills plan to invest Dollars 43m to modernise the
plants and to increase efficiency, cutting production costs and lifting
output from the current level of just over half rated capacity. The smaller
privately owned mills have been running at 90 per cent of rated capacity,
the officials said.
The purchasers are also leasing 38,000 acres of cane farms, which will
supply the mills. The government says state-owned cane farms will be
divested over the next two years.
The proceeds from the sake of the mills will be used by the government to
settle the industry's outstanding obligations, including the repayment of
Dollars 16m to the World Bank and Dollars 13.5m for redundancy payments to
workers.
Government officials said they were hoping that the improvements to the
mills by the new owners would lift Jamaica's sugar production in two years
to about 350,000 tonnes a year. Production last year was 224,500 tonnes,
marginally higher than in 1992.
The officials said that the divestment would also make Jamaica's sugar
industry more competitive by reducing production costs from the current
average of 19 US cents a pound. 'If this can be cut by about one third then
we will be able to compete on the world market with the additional sugar we
expect the country to produce,' said one official.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940106

