FT944-10940

FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (6): Mr Rao bounces back - Stefan Wagstyl
follows the Prime Minister's changing fortunes


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


It is hard to believe that just over a year ago Mr PV Narasimha Rao, the
prime minister, came close to losing his job when he narrowly survived a
parliamentary vote of no confidence. Today he seems so secure that the
political drama of last July has become a distant memory.
As Mr Rao is fond of saying: 'People don't ask about the stability of my
government any more.' Once regarded by the ruling Congress (I) party as a
stopgap leader, who took over from Rajiv Gandhi in 1991, Mr Rao has
completed more than three years in office - more than any other prime
minister outside the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty. He looks set to lead his party in
the general election, due to be held by mid-1996 - and beyond.
Political calm has settled upon Delhi after nearly a decade of turmoil,
which began with the assassination of Mrs Gandhi in 1984 and included the
unrest in the Punjab, the start of the Kashmir insurgency, Rajiv Gandhi's
assassination and four changes of government.
Mr Rao's first two years in office were plagued with difficulties - notably
the challenge of the right-wing Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party, whose
supporters destroyed the Ayodhya mosque in Uttar Pradesh in December 1992
and unleashed violence across northern India.
The 1992 Rs40bn Bombay securities market scandal was a serious
embarrassment, not least for the prime minister who was accused of receiving
cash in a suitcase from Mr Harshad Mehta, one of the stockbrokers involved
in the affair. Last year's terrorist bombs in Bombay called into question
the government's handling of crime and of relations with Pakistan, which
many Indian blame for the attacks.
But since last summer, Mr Rao's stock has been rising almost continuously.
He has not so much destroyed the obstacles in his way as slipped around
them, repeatedly dodging challengers rather than taking them on. This has
worked particularly well with the BJP, which dared him to take on the wrath
of militant Hindus. Critics urged Mr Rao to confront them with a strong
defence of modern secularism. Afraid to aggravate deep-rooted sentiments, Mr
Rao preferred to lie low. Time, at least for now, has proved him right.
Mr Rao's approach leaves nagging doubts that some issues will come back to
haunt him or his successors. For example, while the wave of Hindu militancy
has waned, the Ayodhya mosque still stands in ruins and next to it is
perched the makeshift Hindu temple hastily erected by the mosque's
destroyers. Mr Rao has promised a new mosque and a proper Hindu temple.
However, he has not said when or how either will be built. For the moment
public interest in Ayodhya has faded, but it remains ripe for future
political exploitation by radicals who feel they can gain from inflaming
Hindu-Moslem passions.
Mr Rao was earlier this month also keeping his distance from another bloody
argument which erupted in Uttar Pradesh, India's most populous state. The
trouble stems from last year's state election victory of an alliance of low
caste parties - the Bahujan Samaj Party, representing untouchables and their
supporters, and the Samajwadi Party, representing the slightly less
disadvantaged or other backward castes (OBCs).
Mr Mulayam Singh Yadav, the OBC chief minister, almost immediately began to
implement long-standing rules under which up to 49 per cent of government
jobs are reserved for lower castes. This infuriated the upper castes, who
have traditionally dominated Uttar Pradesh.
Matters came to a head this summer in the hills in the north of the state,
where 74 per cent of the population is upper caste and where there have been
long-standing demands for a separate state. Upper caste demonstrators became
embroiled in fights with the mainly low caste police, resulting in at least
10 deaths and scores of injuries. Mr Mulayam Singh has been accused of
turning a blind eye to police violence - but Mr Rao has refused to remove
him.
Mr Rao fears to act because dismissing a low caste leader would anger low
caste Indians everywhere - and alienate them from Congress. Particularly in
the south, where the low castes form up to 74 per cent of the population, as
in Tamil Nadu, low caste votes are crucial. With state elections due in four
states next month and six early next year, Mr Rao needs to be careful
especially because Congress is in a precarious position in two southern
states - Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
Mr Rao may well be right to tread softly when dealing with the caste,
religious, and regional divides which criss-cross India. There have long
been conflicts between the different groups struggling for power and they
will survive long into the future. India has learnt to live with the
tensions, even when, as in the conflicts between Hindus and Moslems, they
explode into bloody violence.
However, Mr Rao's brand of masterly inactivity has not proved a universal
answer to India's difficulties. For example, in Jammu and Kashmir, the
northern state where Moslem insurgents are battling with the security
forces, a lack of political initiatives from Delhi has brought Moslem
moderates close to despair - and exposed India to international criticism.
Less well-publicised but also bloody is the fighting between the authorities
and separatists in the north-east. These conflicts are unlikely to be
settled by military action alone.
The softly-softly approach has also contributed to a lack of clarity about
economic policy. Congress is not a party wholly committed to economic
liberalisation. It has espoused the cause somewhat reluctantly and has
persisted with a fond regard for state-owned industry.
Mr Rao tries to balance the two trends by pursuing what he calls the middle
way. It has worked so far in achieving a modest restructuring of the
economy. But a more direct approach may be needed if the government is to
tackle the remaining obstacles to economic modernisation, including the
vested interests of the civil service, trade unions, and state-owned
enterprises. Also, Mr Rao is coming under pressure to act more decisively
about growing corruption, not least bribery linked to industries attracting
foreign investment, notably power and telecommunications.
Finally, there is the need for revitalising the Congress party itself. In
its early Nehru days, Congress lived off the euphoria of independence and
nation-building. Later it derived energy from socialism. But since the
deaths of Nehru and Mrs Gandhi, it has failed to develop a coherent
rhetoric, capable of inspiring Indians across the country. So it is left
with doing deals with an increasing number of regional parties and balancing
interest-groups - a game that Mr Rao plays so well. The trouble is that the
more Congress relies on these manoeuvres, the less freedom of action it will
have as a national party. The government could become a hostage to electoral
pacts. That would be a loss for the prime minister and for Congress. It
would also be a loss for India.
Mr Rao, a thoughtful leader with a strong sense of history, is aware of the
long as well as the short-term considerations of politics. It would be a
pity if he allowed dealing with the latter to prevent him from ever acting
on the former.

The Financial Times


London Page V

941108

