FT942-14580

FT  20 APR 94 / ADB tightens lending policies


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


The Asian Development Bank has tightened its lending policies in order to
overcome resistance from shareholders, particularly the US, to a capital
increase.
The Manila-based institution says in its annual report, published today,
that it will seek through 'appropriate portfolio diversification' to reduce
the present concentration of loans among a few borrowers.
The ADB, which has admitted to an 'approval culture' under which the
emphasis was on meeting annual lending targets, says it will strengthen
country risk assessment, taking into account both the risks of individual
countries and the concentration of loans.
It also details explicit policies on delinquent loans. If any payment is
overdue by 60 days, no new loan to the borrower's country will be signed.
After a further 30 days, all disbursements to that country will be
suspended. The bank will be more rigorous about making provisions for loan
losses.
The toughening was carried out as part of talks on the bank's capital needs,
with the US calling for big changes to lending policies. Consensus on
doubling capital from the present Dollars 23bn was recently reached by
shareholders after Washington softened its resistance.
The bank, which is running up against lending limits and has three new
members among the former Soviet central Asian republics, will hope to clinch
agreement at its annual meeting in Nice next month.
Indonesia accounts for Dollars 8.26bn, or 33.6 per cent of outstanding loans
made out of the bank's ordinary capital resources. India, the Philippines,
China and Pakistan account for a further 53.6 per cent between them.
Only 13 countries have loans outstanding, of which one is South Korea as it
pays off old loans, and three - Burma, Nepal and Bangladesh - account for
0.01 per cent or less of total lending. The four economic 'tigers' of
southeast Asia - Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore - have become
too rich to qualify for new loans.
Uncertainty over the bank's capital and policies contributed to a slowing in
loan growth last year. Approvals of loans from ordinary capital resources
rose only 0.7 per cent to Dollars 3.98bn, but concessional loans from the
Asian Development Fund rose 12.3 per cent to Dollars 1.3bn, mainly because
of resumption of lending to Vietnam as the US lifted its embargo on
business.
Concessional financing is also quite concentrated. Of 25 countries with ADF
loans outstanding, Pakistan accounts for Dollars 4.2bn, or 30 per cent,
Bangladesh 28 per cent and Sri Lanka 10 per cent. India and China are not
eligible because other international development institutions are supposed
to meet their needs, since their size would mean them taking a very large
proportion of ADB concessional resources.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940420

