FT943-13343

FT  20 JUL 94 / Time to play the very last song


   By CHRIS TIGHE


So Swan Hunter, one of the world's great shipbuilding names, looks doomed.
The Pounds 50m refit of the Sir Bedivere landing ship had offered the famous
Tyneside company which has built 2,700 ships since 1860 a last hope.
But with Bedivere now lost, and no work beyond November, Swans faces
dismemberment of its assets and the redundancy of its remaining employees -
the last 660 at a company which, less than 20 years ago, employed 33,000.
Most receiverships get little media coverage. But Swans' struggle for
survival has symbolic force. It touched a nerve of anxiety about the erosion
of the country's heavy manufacturing base and the loss of skilled jobs for
men in an area which already has mainland Britain's highest regional
unemployment.
Receivership has also, poignantly, underlined the quality of the workforce
and its products.
In spite of repeated rounds of redundancies, the survivors have maintained a
pride in their work, achieving a number of 'firsts' in frigate building
standards and winning praise from the Royal Navy.
The spirit of the workforce has impressed Mr Gordon Horsfield, the joint
receiver. 'To work with people who are committed and give of their best all
the time is a tremendous experience for anyone,' he says.
The day the receivers arrived, the workers emerged at lunchtime weighed down
with their tools, fearing immediate closure. Union leaders addressed them in
the driving rain that afternoon, urging them that by resuming work they
could save the company.
None of the 'gang of four' - the directors who led the 1986 management
buy-out which re-privatised Swans - were there.
'They would have probably been lynched,' said Mr Dick Gonzales, a union
leader. 'We were talking about a workforce with an average 20 years'
service, people who'd seen a livelihood possibly disappear within hours.'
The workforce's resolve to keep working enabled the receivers to negotiate
with the Ministry of Defence for Swans to continue outfitting work on the
three Type 23 frigates then at the yard. That gave 18 months' work and time
to seek a buyer for Swans as a going concern and to tender for more work.
The receivers strove to retain the 'golden nugget' of skilled staff, in
spite of reducing from 2,500 employees to 660, as well as the 238 who were
laid off.
Up to 3.30pm yesterday, the workforce hoped its efforts would give the yard
a future.
'We have great belief in ourselves, we know what we can achieve,' said Mr
Harry Cooper, a shipwright.
In spite of the optimism which surrounded the 1986 buy-out, warning signs
were already apparent. Within weeks it suffered a 'rude awakening', said
former joint managing director Mr Alex Marsh, when it lost a confidently
expected MoD order for the first auxiliary oiler replenishment vessel.
Swans, which had an annual turnover in the mid-1980s of about Pounds 100m,
won other MoD orders and made profits in the late 1980s. But the defence
procurement climate was changing rapidly with fewer orders and greater
pressure on price and profit margins. Solely owned by its directors, it had
no external finance to support the costs of redundancies and
diversification. An export drive consumed money but brought no new-build
export orders.
Needing work, Swans took the contract for the James Clark Ross, a British
Antarctic Survey ship. A technological triumph, it was a financial disaster,
losing Pounds 17m in 1991 and wiping out the reserves.
This meant Swans could not obtain underwriting for the performance bonds
required by the MoD, and consequently could not tender on its own for the
MoD helicopter carrier order then vital to its survival.
Mr Marsh said: 'We were too small in what had become a highly aggressive
market; we didn't have the financial and political clout necessary.'
GEC - owner of Yarrow, Swans' rival for Type 23 frigates - concluded heads
of agreement to acquire the company. But when Swans lost the
helicopter-carrier order to VSEL the deal was off.
Swans' net debt on receivership, two days later, was Pounds 51m, including
11m to Lloyds Bank, Pounds 12m to suppliers and Pounds 28m inter-company
obligations.
Only one potential buyer, CMN, emerged. It was always adamant it would only
buy Swans if it had two years' work - that meant Bedivere.
Redundancy before Christmas now looks almost inevitable for the last
employees. Their wages are among the lowest in UK shipbuilding and they can
expect only the minimum redundancy - 20 years' service will be worth barely
Pounds 4,000. Their prospects of other work look slim. Union surveys of the
1,400 made redundant in the first year of receivership show more than 75 per
cent still unemployed.
Mr Graham Gibson, 39, made redundant in May last year from his operations
control job after 19 years at Swans, found himself competing against 2,300
applicants for one job at a Gateshead printing company. He said: 'The only
consolation is there are so many people unemployed at least you don't feel
it's something wrong with you.'
Mr Cooper sees few prospects outside the yard, but of two things he is sure:
'We will still finish Richmond (the last frigate) on time. Then we'll go up
the road and sign on the dole.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940720

