FT941-13057

FT  27 JAN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Shake-up is best chance for Japan


   From Professor RONALD DORE


Sir, Your flabby editorial advice to Prime Minister Hosokawa ('Tokyo: time
to compromise', January 24) - that he should patch up a compromise with the
Liberal Democrats over electoral reform - ill becomes you. It would lead
only to another decade of hugger-mugger corruption.
The point about the reform bill was not that single-member constituencies
are somehow better or more democratic. It is just that - as intelligent
Italians perceived - the best way of shaking a nation out of corrupt
practices is to make a lot of the basic ones irrelevant by a new system of
elections. And his defeat in the Upper House gives Hosokawa the chance of a
lifetime to do that shake-up in an even more thorough-going way.
Surely better advice would be that he should take a leaf out of the book of
Mario Segni and his referendum alliance at the last Italian general election
 -but in a more thorough-going fashion. Hosokawa's personal popularity is
high. If a referendum were possible the reform bill would win a strong
popular majority.
So why does he not take his courage in both hands, dissolve the Lower House,
and put himself at the head of a cross-party ad hoc reform alliance with the
passage of the reform bill as its sole objective? He should clearly declare
his refusal to make advance deals either on cabinet seats or any other
aspect of policy; and promise further elections as soon as the electoral
system is changed. It is a package which might just come off. Even trying it
would 'break the mould'.
It would not be so bad, either, for the economy that you are primarily
worried about. The excitement and optimism engendered could well restore
business confidence. There might even be less paralysis of government; the
bureaucracy could get on with business as usual, with fewer irrational
interruptions.
Ronald Dore,
Centre for Economic
Performance,
London School of Economics,
Houghton Street,
London WC2A 2AE

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940127

