FT941-12937

FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (2): The mood and rhythm improve - Market
Profile - Argentina / Successful policies are making Argentina an
increasingly attractive market for imports with which to rebuild its
shattered industries, writes John Barham. But it is not yet out of the wood


   By JOHN BARHAM


Until very recently, Argentina had a nightmare economy. But three years of
rigidly orthodox economic policies have transformed it into a star
performer, with high growth rates and low inflation.
As a result, Argentina has become a rapidly-growing market for foreign goods
that range from chocolates to computer-controlled machine tools. Last year
Argentina imported an estimated Dollars 16bn-worth of goods, double its
imports two years earlier. Even so, imports still only account for 6 per
cent of GDP, which suggests that sales opportunities for foreign companies
should continue multiplying.
Growth seems set to continue for several years, driven by decades of
repressed consumer demand and revived investment rates. The government
expects the economy will expand by one-quarter in the period 1993-1995.
Companies are only slightly less optimistic.
Argentina is having to rebuild its obsolete industry and public utilities
from the ground up. The public sector and privatised companies alone are to
invest at least Dollars 30.04bn between 1993-95.
Argentina is therefore importing machine tools, computers and work stations.
Packaging equipment for the food and drinks industries is expected to grow
steadily. Demand for consumer electronics and white goods is also strong.
The local car industry, once a temple of import substitution, in some cases
now imports 90 per cent of its components. Privatised companies have become
big buyers of everything from aircraft to gas meters.
Gemplus, a medium-sized French company that makes smartcards, signed a three
year contract in May to supply Telecom Argentina, the privatised telephone
operator, with phonecards. Sales in May-December 1993 were FFr30m, 4 per
cent of Gemplus's worldwide sales. It now sells 1m cards a month in
Argentina and an unspecified quantity through another privatised telephone
company, Spanish-owned Telefonica de Argentina, which buys its cards from
Gemplus in France.
Last August Gemplus opened an office in Buenos Aires, its first in Latin
America. It will be followed by offices in Caracas and Mexico City. This
year it plans to start selling smartcards to the private health insurance
industry, banks and operators of toll roads. Traditional obstacles, such
corrupt and inefficient bureaucracies, are less of a problem now, following
President Carlos Menem's deregulation and privatisation policies. Mr
Bertrand Moussel, Gemplus sales director for Latin America, says 'Argentina
is not a paradise but it does have below average problems in fraud and
corruption. Transport and customs clearance are not a problem.'
Competition, though, is fierce. Mr Frank Behrendt, is president of Buenos
Aires-based Behrendt-Mattel, a Dollars 35m company that represents European
and US engineering companies including Krupp, Decker-Maho-Gildemeister and
Cincinatti Milacron. He says: 'It's a free for all. (Companies) are breaking
their heads to make a deal. There are discounts of 40 per cent for machine
tools.'
Bidding even for small orders is intense. Mr Behrendt says few orders from
Argentine companies exceed Dollars 300,000.
Nearly all Argentina's public companies have now been privatised. Hardnosed
private managements no longer pay the suspiciously above-market prices paid
by government officials. Privatised companies say they have won price cuts
of about 30 per cent.
Financing has become a crucial sales factor. With the return of stability to
Argentina and the signing last year of a foreign debt-reduction plan,
country risk premiums have declined sharply and maturities extended.
Trade finance rates are usually set by the exporting country's government
export credit agency. Medium term trade finance for Argentina carries
interest rates that vary between 6-9 per cent a year.
British exporters, however, must pay 12 per cent a year for five-year ECGD
cover, about one-third more than US companies pay for Eximbank cover. A
British banker commented that 'most industrial products have become
commodity items, so you are competing on price and finance. With Argentine
companies able to borrow at 7.5 per cent a year, they are not going to touch
UK financing with a bargepole.'
Import tariffs vary from zero for capital goods to a top rate of 20 per
cent. Companies must also pay a 3-10 per cent 'statistics tax'. Exporters of
capital goods are exempted from this charge. However, the government has
begun adopting a more aggressive trade policy, imposing quotas and
countervailing duties for products ranging from chemicals to track shoes.
The government eliminated import barriers for capital equipment to encourage
companies to modernise rapidly. Mr Jorge Herrera Vegas, undersecretary for
economic integration, said '(capital) goods should be bought as cheaply as
possible in the international market. Argentina is preparing for a leap in
exports. It needs the most technologically advanced goods.'
Executives tend to be more formal and less effusive than elsewhere in Latin
America. Many speak good English and travel widely. Mr Behrendt says
'Argentine industrialists are surprisingly well-informed. They read a lot,
subscribe to technical magazines and travel to trade fairs a lot. They have
a good understanding of high technology. They are sophisticated and want the
newest equipment.'
However, Mr Francisco Gascon, commercial counsellor at the Spanish Embassy
in Buenos Aires, says few Argentine companies are sufficiently advanced to
use state of the art technology. He says this makes intermediate-level
equipment on offer from Spanish companies more appropriate to Argentine
company needs.
Brazilian companies are also fearsomely competitive suppliers of
intermediate industrial equipment. Brazil is now one of Argentina's most
important suppliers and its chief partner in the Mercosur customs union.
Mercosur, which also includes Paraguay and Uruguay, calls for a steady
reduction in tariffs on trade between the four member countries. Tariffs are
to be completely eliminated on nearly all goods by the end of this year.
However, Argentina has retaliated against 'unfair' Brazilian exports with
protectionist measures against agricultural equipment, chemicals, textiles,
paper, refrigeration equipment.
Despite the enthusiasm of many sales executives, Argentina's economic
miracle is still far from being consolidated. One salesman predicts that
one-third of Argentine companies will fail soon. He doubts many
manufacturing companies will survive - although the outlook for service,
food and energy-related industries is good.
Decades of political upheaval and economic chaos have left their mark.
Argentina's business culture is unsophisticated compared with Chile, Brazil
and Mexico. Corruption - even in private companies - does remain a problem.
The government often changes import, tax and standards regulations by
decree. Winning redress in the slow and corrupt judicial system is
frustratingly difficult.

The Financial Times


London Page III

940127

