FT943-13318

FT  20 JUL 94 / Staying on can mean missing out: A look at whether the old
problem of skill shortages is returning to UK industry


   By DAVID GOODHART and LISA WOOD


Britain's economic recovery is gathering pace with few sightings of that old
enemy - skill shortages. The latest Confederation of British Industry survey
found only 7 per cent of companies complaining that output was being
constrained by skill problems. Furthermore, pay settlements are not being
pushed up by recruitment difficulties.
A cause for celebration? Not if you listen to members of the UK's training
establishment. They point out, with some justification, that all seemed well
at a similar point in the economic recovery of the mid-1980s. But by the end
of the decade nearly a third of companies were complaining of skill
shortages, and pay and inflation rates were once again chasing each other
upwards as competition intensified for a limited number of skilled workers.
Few people expect a repeat of that cycle, but tomorrow's survey from the
British Chambers of Commerce is expected to highlight the growing anxieties
of some manufacturing companies about skill shortages. There are other
grounds for worry: Overall figures for skill shortages may be low but some
sectors - such as the construction industry - are suffering, according to
Sir Brian Hill, president of the Building Employers Confederation. The
shortage of bricklayers in London is said to have forced up hourly pay rates
by 25 per cent in the past year.
Other industries, such as information technology and engineering, appear to
have permanent skill problems in certain important areas, even during
recession. GPT, the UK-based telecommunications group, says it has
persistent problems recruiting graduate engineers. Marconi Instruments
complains that demand far outstrips supply for radio frequency engineers
(for the large mobile telephone market) and software engineers. Some
training experts in industry and academia even complain that the relative
silence of employers on skill shortages is a bad sign, not a good one. It
shows that they have adapted company strategies to compete in market
segments where the skill requirements are not so demanding.
Some of this pessimism should be viewed with scepticism. After all,
employers' organisations and the training establishment - now represented by
the 82 government-sponsored, employer-led Training and Enterprise Councils
in England and Wales - have a vested interest in stressing the problem to
attract more public investment.
Mr Chris Humphries, the chief executive of the Tec National Council, says:
'Tecs expect a revival of skill shortages, that is why we are telling the
government that a recovery is the time to invest more, not less, in
training. If you don't, you risk either a slowdown in recovery or a return
to 'wage push' inflation as employers outbid each other for the best skilled
workers.'
Mr Humphries is a training lobbyist and it is his job to make such
observations. But some of the evidence from Tec directors and chief
executives - particularly about the lack of interest in manufacturing
apprenticeships from young people - is harder to dismiss. 'Somebody forgot
to tell young people that the government has changed its mind and now thinks
that industry and apprenticeships are important,' says one Tec director.
The trouble is that government departments have been sending out mixed
messages about vocational training. On the one hand, the department of
employment is planning to spend Pounds 1.5bn a year, starting next year,
putting 150,000 young people through 'modern' company-based apprenticeships.
On the other hand, the department for education has been encouraging an
unprecedented increase in further and higher education, and nearly 70 of 16-
to 18-year-olds are now in full-time education.
The push to increase the staying-on rate has had the unintended effect of
reinforcing a bias against manufacturing jobs, already exacerbated by the
recession and by the fact that UK blue-collar unemployment at 13.9 per cent
is more than twice the rate of white-collar unemployment. The result is that
hundreds, possibly thousands, of manufacturing apprenticeships remain
unfilled.
'We have dozens of engineering apprenticeships in Walsall that are going
begging,' says Mr David Frost, chief executive of Walsall chamber of
commerce and industry. 'Parents and young people have seen the volatility of
manufacturing and the lack of job security and are saying, 'why not stay on
at school and try to get a white-collar job in local government or a bank'?'
Mr Frost warns Mr David Hunt, the employment secretary, that too many of
those leaving school at 16 are not wanted by companies because they are the
least capable, and that it will be hard for the modern apprenticeships
scheme to attract a sufficient number of the more able young people into
skilled manual jobs.
That is partly because of the association, established in the 1980s, in some
young people's minds between training schemes such as Youth Training, the
government's main programme for out-of-work 16- to 19-year-olds, and failure
in the job market. The modern apprenticeships will also face competition
from schools, which receive generous funding for their sixth formers, and
whose in-house careers staff thus have a strong financial interest in
persuading youngsters to stay on.
Mr Allister McGowan, senior vice-president of the Institute of Careers
Guidance, says: 'There are now too many people staying on to do
inappropriate courses for the wrong reasons. People are marketing in a very
aggressive way to get bums on seats because that's how the funding regime
rewards them.'
A survey by South and East Cheshire Tec of young people who stayed on at
school until 18 revealed that a significant number got jobs afterwards which
were similar to those they would have found at 16. Similarly, research by Mr
Robert Bennett, professor of geography at the London School of Economics,
suggests that the earning power of 18-year-old school leavers is little
different to those leaving at 16.
'Staying on at school is often a kind of dropping out,' says Mr Richard Guy,
chief executive of South and East Cheshire Tec. 'Some people would have been
better off leaving school at 16 if they had got a job with training.'
Against the national trend, school staying-on rates in his Tec area fell
slightly last year. Mr Guy suggests that this was because the careers
service run by the local authority could offer quality alternatives. The
Tec, for example, now offers a substantial number of improved YT places with
trainees taken on from day one as employees, and on an enhanced, weekly,
state-paid allowance.
Mr Hunt's employment department appears to have recognised that quality is
the key to success in its attempts to improve the nationwide image of
government training schemes for young people. Most YT participants train to
National Vocational Qualification level 2, the second most basic level of
skills attainment under the scheme. It is regarded as the vocational
equivalent of 4 GCSEs, exams taken in schools at 16.
But under the government's planned apprenticeship scheme, participants will
be offered training to level 3, which is the vocational equivalent of 2 A
levels, taken at 18 in schools. The scheme - for those between 16 and 18 -
will thus aim to equal the esteem in which academic courses are held.
Mr Peter Morley, chairman of the National Association of Industry Training
Organisations, which is helping Tecs to pilot the modern apprenticeships,
says they offer a 'top of the range product'.
The test, however, will be whether young people vote with their feet and
take up the new places. The courses will require skilful marketing.
Automotive parts group Unipart, for example, conducted a survey of young
people recently which revealed that only 10 per cent wanted a manufacturing
job, although more than half said that manufacturing was vital for the
health of the economy. But after a visit to the company, a majority decided
that they would take a job in manufacturing if offered.
But even if significant numbers of young people can be persuaded to embark
on apprenticeships to fill the scheme's 150,000 places, they will only make
a small contribution to improving the UK's skills bank. There remains the
problem that employers may not see the need to upgrade the skills of their
employees: a survey last week of Tec directors showed that a narrow majority
did not believe employers would support the venture in sufficient numbers to
make a significant impact on skills shortages.
Unless apprenticeships act as a catalyst, spurring a substantial improvement
in the abilities of the UK workforce, the danger persists that skill
shortages will lead to an overheated labour market and choke the economic
recovery.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940720

