FT941-16902

FT  07 JAN 94 / Property: Few rooms with views - Building and managing
hotels in Russia


   By LEYLA BOULTON


The scaffolding that has surrounded the National hotel opposite Red Square
for the past two years speaks volumes about the hazards of Moscow's
international hotel business.
Endless rows over financing for the National have delayed its completion.
The dispute illustrates why any venture in Moscow is such a high-risk gamble
for western hoteliers. Yet the Russians' desire to attract western
management for new or refurbished hotels means there are potentially rich
rewards for companies that manage to surmount construction and ownership
disputes in a city where demand for quality hotel rooms vastly exceeds
supply.
The biggest headache for potential western investors is ambiguous ownership
rights. Russia's hotels, formerly owned by a single state monopoly under the
old communist order, are today the subject of competing ownership claims by
a variety of state and semi-state bodies.
Mr Richard Mason, general-manager of the newly-built Radisson-Slavyanskaya
hotel, one of the busiest in Moscow with 85 per cent-plus occupancy, says he
'does not even know who owns the Radisson-Slavyanskaya'.
The US Radisson group holds a contract to manage the hotel. It also holds
15.5 per cent of the equity in the joint venture which leases the hotel from
an owner whose identity has been the subject of dispute since the collapse
of the former Soviet Union's monopoly Intourist group.
The National, meanwhile, is the target of competing management claims from
at least three groups.
The Marriott hotel group of the US, which signed a management deal for the
National in May 1992, says its contract is still valid even though the
contract has been rejected by the Moscow city government.
Rogner, an Austrian construction company, has received assurances from some
Moscow city officials that it will be awarded the management contract for
the National as compensation for Russian payment delays for work on the
hotel's renovation.
Finally, according to some industry officials, a little-publicised tender
organised to side-step the Marriott-Rogner dispute has already been won by
Britain's Trust House Forte, even though the tender results have yet to be
endorsed by the city government.
The absence of clearly defined ownership rights means that financing for
hotel projects is very difficult to raise.
The Radisson-Slavyanskaya hotel, for example, is paying for the renovation
of 160 rooms out of profits after a Dollars 20m loan from Chase Manhattan
Bank fell through because the bank decided it would be difficult to seize
assets in the event of a loan default.
'Even if you get (ownership) rights on paper, they are not enforceable in
practice,' says a western banker with experience of trying to raise finance
for hotel projects in Russia. The continued presence of a railway workers'
welfare club on the grounds of the Radisson-Slavyanskaya hotel - in spite of
a 1992 order by the mayor of Moscow for its removal - illustrates the point.
Radisson is one of several international hotel chains being invited by the
Moscow authorities to manage the city's older hotels. But already some
western hoteliers have expressed doubts. 'What is required is a substantial
infusion of capital to complete these projects,' says Mr Mason of the
Radisson-Slavyanskaya hotel. 'The question is what does one get in return
for such an infusion.'
Western companies were also asked to renovate and run Hotel Tsentralnaya, a
crumbling building boasting a prime location and surly service. But
unresolved claims by the hotel's staff who say they are entitled to own the
hotel, together with uncertainty over funding for the reconstruction work,
have scared many potential western partners. These include Hilton
International, whose owner, Ladbroke, said: 'So far, we've never been able
to come up with a satisfactory deal. We continue to look. Hopefully we'll
come up with something.'
Even those hotels which are successful have battled against financial odds
which once threatened their viability. A Russian-Austrian consortium which
began rebuilding what is now called the Baltschug-Kempinski hotel was only
able to finish the work after attracting new partners and after the Austrian
export credit agency decided that the only way to recover initial Austrian
loans for the venture was to complete the project. Today, the plush
Baltschug-Kempinski hotel boasts occupancy levels in excess of 85 per cent.
In addition to having a reliable and well-connected Russian partner, Mr Hans
Sebesta, general manager of the Baltschug-Kempinski, says the secret of
success is for western companies to have their own people on the ground at
all times. 'You need someone who is permanently here, who pulls all the
strings together, who communicates with the shareholders. You cannot
delegate problems,' he says.
As the example of the National shows, a lack of transparent decision-making
in the transition to a market economy means western hoteliers will continue
to view Russia as a high-risk investment.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940107

