FT942-12436

FT  29 APR 94 / Bell's runs a neat whisky promotion


   By TONY JACKSON


Drinkers of Bell's whisky, Britain's favourite Scotch, are about to be made
an offer they cannot refuse. Their familiar tipple, which holds 20 per cent
of the market, will vanish from the shelves. In its place will come an
older, smoother, classier version, with all its constituent whiskies
guaranteed at least eight years old. The price - to begin with, anyway -
will remain the same.
Opinion is divided on whether this represents a fresh outbreak of price
warfare in the beleaguered whisky trade, or a rather neat marketing gimmick.
Discounting and special offers have been rife in the industry over the past
18 months. Guinness, which owns Bell's, saw a slight fall in its spirits
profits last year. Highland Distillers, owner of the number two UK brand
Famous Grouse, with 14 per cent of the market, claims to have been the only
producer not to have cut its prices.
On the other hand, it is unclear how much of the whisky in the Bell's blend
is less than eight years old at present. Guinness said yesterday: 'The
product has been changed very, very marginally. There could be an existing
bottle of Bell's which is eight years old. I wouldn't know.'
Industry analysts were inclined to agree. Ms Michelle Proud, drinks analyst
at NatWest Markets, said: 'I understand the extra cost of the whisky is
pretty marginal.'
However, the new whisky is claimed by Guinness to taste somewhat different
from the old, being designed to retain the loyalty of existing Bell's
drinkers while appealing to a wider market. If successful, it will allow
Guinness to increase prices, as the maintained price is only an introductory
offer.
Behind the launch is a concerted effort by Guinness to rejuvenate the Scotch
market on both sides of the Atlantic. The US and UK are the two largest
mature markets for the product. In both, Guinness says, young drinkers in
the 20-30 age range are not being recruited in sufficient numbers.
In the north-east US, Guinness plans to double its marketing expenditure
this year on Dewar's, its leading US brand. A similar onslaught is planned
for the UK. The new whisky, an analyst said yesterday, 'doesn't mean much in
itself if they don't get the advertising right'.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940429

