FT941-13061

FT  27 JAN 94 / Economic Viewpoint: Jobs - keep out the politically correct


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's special draft
report on unemployment, outlined in the Financial Times on January 24, is an
example of excellent detailed analysis spoilt by the attempt to impose a
politically correct conclusion and summary.
Does it really help to increase the influence of the OECD to conclude 'the
requisite policy agenda will be wide-
ranging, and politically difficult, requiring much determination and a
commitment to social equity'? The call for 'undogmatic and concrete
solutions' is no doubt aimed at those whom French speakers call
'ultra-liberals', but is anyone at all impressed? Is 'an insufficient
ability to adapt to change' adequate as a summary of what has gone wrong?
These examples of OECD-speak from Paris - like similar examples of Eurospeak
from Brussels - serve only to smother some of the fascinating information
that the organisation's analysts have unearthed. For instance I did not know
until I saw this document of the survey evidence that, for every part-time
worker wishing to work full-time, there are three full-time workers who
would prefer to work part-time if they were able to.
I have, however, the fortunate advantage over the OECD that I am not trying
to increase my non-existent influence at summit conferences, let alone to
please 24 member governments. So let me try my own summary of the main
aspects of the European unemployment problem.
First, all markets require some reserves as shock absorbers. In product
markets these consist of stocks. In the labour market, as they at present
function, these are people out of work.
Second, the size of this reserve is swollen by two phenomena: inadequate
overall demand; and pay and other labour costs which price workers out of
jobs. The latter has been the more fundamental. But both forms of failure
interact with and reinforce each other.
Third, they are both aggravated by a shortage of capacity - it is this last
which provides the effective ceiling to UK employment at present. Such
capacity bottlenecks do not occur by accident in advanced economies. They
are nearly always a response to excess labour costs in the past. As a
result, investment has had too much of a capital deepen-ing character,
designed to cut costs and save manpower, and not enough of a cap-ital
widening kind, designed to increase capacity. (All of this is explained much
more clearly in The World Economy in Perspective, by Herbert Giersch,
published by Edward Elgar in 1991, than it is by the OECD.) In addition, the
legacy of past inflationary decades makes financial markets more suspicious
of official attempts to sustain demand.
It follows from the first proposition that work-sharing gimmicks, such as
early retirement, compulsory cuts in hours and so on, have at best a neutral
impact on jobs. The same amount of unemployment will re-emerge around a
smaller amount of output and employment. This is a self-inflicted wound that
European countries with ageing populations should hesitate to impose on
themselves. In practice, the effects are likely to be perverse, because
labour costs can increase if pay is not cut in proportion to the reduction
in hours, if shortages of highly skilled workers emerge or if the amount of
effect-ive industrial capacity is reduced.
Why should these phenomena have become so much worse in recent dec-ades?
There has probably been a fall in the market-clearing price
of many kinds of labour and certainly a fall in the relative demand for the
unskilled, the less adaptable and the unlucky. How far these trends are due
to technical change inside western economies and how far to competition from
newly industrialised countries is unsettled; but the implications are quite
similar.
The pressures are starkly illustrated by the accompanying chart. Low-paid
workers have been under pressure everywhere. (The bar representing Germany
should be treated with caution because
only five pre-unification years are covered.) But whereas in the US these
pressures have taken the form of falling real pay, in Europe they have
ex-pressed themselves in high unemployment.
If, however, Europe is to move towards American-type market-clearing pay,
and towards unemployment which is not only lower but more short-term in
composition, it is important that the casualties of lower pay should have
their incomes topped up by the rest of us who benefit from a more
efficiently working economy. Social security systems have to be designed
carefully to minimise work disincentives, but they also have to be adequate.
Some evidence that they have not been adequate is provided by the 1994 issue
of the official UK Social Trends published today. The special article in
Trends on the least well-off 20 per cent of the population avoids the issue
by taking a snapshot of affairs in 1990-91. But buried in the chapter on
income and wealth there is an important table which gives the game away -
indeed the facts have already emerged in parliamentary answers after last
summer's recess.
The table shows clearly that, looking at net income after housing costs  -
which is the normal method in such comparisons - the real income of the
bottom fifth fell between 1979, when Lady Thatcher came to office, and
1990-91 not merely in relation to the rest of the population but in absolute
terms. The typical drop was 3 per cent, compared with a rise of 28 per cent
(after tax and benefit) for the middle fifth and a rise of 50 per cent for
the top fifth. The estimates may, as ministers have claimed, have been
distorted by the under-reporting of the incomes of the increasing number of
self-employed people and other statistical problems. But these complications
do not explain away the whole change.
The root explanation is that the Conservative policy of tying benefits
purely to prices and not at all to incomes is bound to be vulnerable. For
any failure to claim benefit, or any change in specific circumstances not
covered by the system, will be sure to tip some families into being absolute
net losers.
However, the Trends analysis is a warning against spurious remedies for
poverty. A table reproduced on page 9 of today's FT shows that 56 per cent
of heads of household in the bottom fifth of the income distribution are
retired or without a job. Only 4 per cent are unskilled workers and 9 per
cent semi-skilled ones who might benefit - if they remain in work - from
Labour's proposed minimum wage. Another chart shows that 69 per cent of the
incomes of the bottom fifth consist of benefit and only 20 per cent of
earnings from employment.
Analysed in another way, more than 70 per cent of the bottom fifth of
households with children consist of one-parent families or couples with
children where neither parent has full-time earnings. These estimates do not
suggest that the British social security system is overflowing with
generosity to such people.
But simply to call for more generous benefit all round is unconvincing when
social security already totals Pounds 80bn a year and is by far the largest
component in the UK budget. Greater generosity needs to be combined with
greater selectivity. The left wing emphasises the first, the right wing
emphasises the second. The need is not to split the difference, but for
larger amounts of both. There is also a need for adjustments in the
conditions attaching to benefit to make it easier for people of low earnings
capacity to participate in labour markets without losing entitlement
altogether.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
UK REAL INCOME
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Net real income after housing costs   Index (1979 bottom fifth = 100)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Quintile groups of individuals*
                Bottom    Next   Middle    Next     Top     Average
                 fifth   fifth    fifth   fifth   fifth
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1979              100     138      177     226     312       197
1981               96     135      174     225     323       196
1987               99     143      200     267     406       236
1988-89           100     153      217     289     438       255
1990-91            97     155      222     304     467       267
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Social Trends         * Net equivalent household income
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940127

