FT941-3450

FT  16 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Summit for good jobs


The jobs summit in Detroit was never likely to come up with exciting new
solutions. What it could do was register agreement on the importance of the
topic and indicate the nature of the emerging consensus on what to do about
it. This the summit has done. In breaking new ground for the discussions
among the group of seven industrial countries, it may even have given that
intellectually moribund body new life.
Not that the G7's familiar macroeconomic disharmony was entirely absent. One
of the recurring leitmotifs of its two decades has been the US effort to
persuade the Germans to adopt more expansionary policies. The jobs summit
was partly an imaginative new way to achieve that old objective. The pitch
adopted by US labour secretary, Robert Reich, was that 'cyclical
unemployment which persists may turn into structural or classical types of
unemployment, which are more difficult to address'. The argument is correct,
but it cuts two ways. Rising inflation must also be avoided, because it
leads to recession as surely as night follows day. It is not clear that the
Clinton administration understands this point.
If a transatlantic consensus on macroeconomic policy is lacking, the
agreement elsewhere was encouraging. The summit has, for example, rejected
protection against imports and embraced innovation, rightly so, in both
cases. Labour intensive imports and new technology will make industrial
countries richer. But, as Mr Reich observes, they also exact a price. 'The
primary structural labour market problem,' he notes, 'is a shift in relative
labour demand against less-educated workers and those doing routine tasks
and towards workers with problem solving skills.'
Increased inequality
In the US, the result has been increased inequality, with workers in the
higher earnings bracket enjoying a 4.4 per cent increase in real wages over
the past 20 years, while those on the bottom suffered a 10.3 per cent real
decline. Because there was no overall real wage growth, US employment also
grew by some 40 per cent. In continental Europe, by contrast, average real
wages grew rapidly over the past two decades - by 76 per cent in France and
43 per cent in Germany. There was also very little increase in pay
inequality. But these countries enjoyed virtually no employment growth,
while unemployment rose, cycle by cycle.
The question then is not whether jobs can be created. It is obvious that
they can be. The question is whether those new jobs can be combined with
sustained rises in average real wages and the pay equality to which
Europeans, in particular, are attached. The challenge is not just more jobs;
it is 'good jobs' for everyone.
Holy grail
Secretary Reich's own suggested solution is the trio of European-style
education and training, US-style labour market flexibility and expansionary
macroeconomic policy. So is this the holy grail for jobs? Only up to a
point, Mr Reich.
Yes, education and training matter, but high-quality basic education matters
most, a policy that may never work for all and certainly will not act
quickly. Yes, labour market flexibility is essential, but this is a
euphemism for policies that will lower the relative and quite possibly the
absolute real wage of the unskilled, precisely what Europeans - and
increasingly Americans - find objectionable. And yes, macroeconomic policy
must accommodate growth, but even Padraig Flynn, European commissioner for
employment, agrees that 'there is a new conventional wisdom that cyclical
recovery will not be the way out'.
There is room for a great deal of imaginative new thinking of the kind
contained in a new pamphlet from the London-based think-tank Demos on 'the
end of unemployment'. But at the heart of that thinking must be ways to
lower the cost of hiring new employees. If at the same time rewards are to
be sustained, large employment subsidies for the unskilled will be required,
instead of the taxes often imposed upon them. But that would necessitate
higher taxes elsewhere. Combined with subsidies for training and radical
labour market deregulation, this is the only policy likely to put industrial
countries on the path they are apparently seeking.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

940316

