FT941-17088

FT  06 JAN 94 / Technology: How to get fit in your front room - From
microprocessors to polyurethane / A look at trends in home exercise
equipment


   By CHARLES ARTHUR


As the festive season fades, do you fancy skiing in your front room? Or
would you prefer rowing, cycling, skating, or some straightforward sit-ups?
If you have just bought some home exercise equipment as a seasonal present -
perhaps for yourself - you have joined the growing army of the
health-conscious. A new report from Mintel, the market research company,
says that between 4m and 5m people in the UK do some sort of exercise at
home, and last year spent Pounds 112m on health and fitness equipment for
their own use.
The most popular items of exercise equipment, with a third of the market by
value, are exercise bicycles. Next, with 25 per cent of sales, is
weight-training equipment, followed by rowing machines and 'multigyms' -
single pieces of equipment which the user can manipulate to exercise
different sets of muscles independently - each with 14 per cent.
Languishing well behind are step items; these cover both the
'stair-climbing' products, heavily advertised on television, that reproduce
the movement of climbing stairs, and the aerobic exerciser consisting of a
simple polyurethane step about a metre wide and 25cm high. 'Treadmills' (for
indoor jogging) bring up the rear with 5 per cent.
Most of these items have been around in some form for years. At present, the
overall market is static - a fact that Mintel puts down to consumers' slow
emergence from recession. But within it, there are some interesting
developments. Exercise bicycles, weight-training and rowing machines have
all declined in terms of market share. Instead, 'step' items and multigyms
have taken their place.
The link is almost certainly technology, mixed to some extent with the
glamour of the new. Most noticeable is the advent of computers. As the cost
of microprocessors has fallen rapidly, it has become cheap to add them to
any sort of fitness machine to provide an eye-catching promise of more
information about how much gain the user is receiving for all that pain.
Nowadays, any machine without a light winking at and chiding the prospective
user tends to be passed over. Fahim Baree, manager of the gym equipment
department at Lillywhites, the big London sports store, observes that 'the
computers can time you, tell you your strokes or strides per minute, how
many calories you've burnt off so far, how 'far' you've gone, your average
speed'.
There are also systems which can be programmed so the machine offers
different amounts of resistance at different parts of the exercise,
mimicking a real route. Indeed, some people seek add-ons, to catalogue their
effort in greater detail. 'People are becoming more sophisticated. When I
started here three years ago, we didn't have heart rate monitors for sale,'
says Baree. 'Now people ask for them, to watch that they're exercising at
the right intensity to improve their fitness.'
Even so, such measures can only be an average at best; no one burns calories
at exactly the same rate. And the 'distance gone' - a measure which allows
people to row single-handed across the Atlantic, complete the Tour de France
or walk up the Empire State Building, while staying in comfortable reach of
bed, bathroom and beverages - can only be approximate. Such machines never
take into account the variable difficulty, for example, of pulling one
machine's 'oar' rather than another's, so that one machine's 'Olympic' class
may be another's run-of-the-treadmill.
Yet the greatest boon to the personal fitness industry in recent years is
probably not microprocessors but polyurethane - the tough plastic that has
become a staple of so many items, from the seats of exercise machines to the
simple 'step' currently so popular with the aerobic classes and multigyms
advertised on television.
The plastic is strong enough to bear the six months' or so use that is
common before the item is consigned, as the majority are, to live the rest
of its life beneath the stairs. But it also makes it affordable. For
example, mini-multigyms often use plastic loops which have to be stretched
to exercise the muscles. Where rubber might give way, plastic can stand up
to the strain.
Improvements in plastics technology have produced a couple of intriguing
items in the past couple of years. Newly popular at Lillywhites is the
'Bodyslide', which consists of a thick, smooth plastic mat about 2.5m long
and 1m wide. The user slips on a pair of slick plastic overshoes like
galoshes, and then exercises on the mat using a skating action. 'Very good
for the legs,' says Baree. 'They tend to sell once people see them being
demonstrated.' Otherwise, it just looks like an unwelcoming mat.
Similar in motion, if not exactly in use, are 'in-line skates', the modern
version of the roller skate. But rather than their predecessor's thick
wheels on either side of the shoe, in-line skates (one version being the
Rollerblade) have thin polypropylene wheels mounted along the centre of the
shoe, which itself covers the foot and ankle in a rigid casing like a
comfortable ski boot. Once strapped in, you move just like a skater.
Most people soon learn how to reach a comfortable speed, getting useful
exercise. (The problem then becomes how to stop; David Wheaton, the American
tennis player, once spent an enforced rest after putting his hand through a
plate-glass window in trying to halt his progress.)
The skates are already enormously popular in the US, where some people use
them to commute, and they have begun filtering into Britain in increasing
numbers, where they are being touted as an excellent training for skiing.
For the future, industry observers expect skiing machines, such as those
made by US companies Precor and NordicTrack, to become increasingly popular.
Like in-line skates, these have also been big sellers in the American market
for some years, but are now filtering across the Atlantic (and also from
Scandinavia) as the message has spread about the benefits of cross-country
skiing, hailed as possibly the best exercise for the whole body.
The popular forms consist of two shoes mounted on separate, sliding tracks,
with rods or cables to be held in the hands. As one hand goes forward, so
does the opposite foot. It sounds simple, and is, but it is expected to be
one of this year's biggest sellers. It works on roughly the same principle
as last year's big hit, the stair-climbing system, which uses hydraulic
pistons to provide resistance to the pressure of the foot; as one foot goes
down it has to push the other up.
But as with all home exercise machines, the big problem is getting a good
return on your investment. 'You have to be very disciplined,' comments Jenny
Tarsnane, development officer at the National Association of Health and
Exercise Teachers. 'If I didn't teach in a gym, I still wouldn't exercise at
home. I like going with someone to a class or gym.' Indeed, Mintel's survey
also shows that people spent Pounds 465m solely on membership and entrance
fees at private clubs in Britain in 1992 - nearly four times as much as on
home equipment.
Tarsnane's advice for the prospective buyer? 'Don't be seduced by the hype.
Evaluate the amount you're about to spend and if it would be better spent
going to a gym. It worries me how people buy equipment and go bananas with
it for a while, then hurt themselves and stop, or are left with aches and
pains; or feel it's having no effect and give up.'
In fact, she says, 'If you just want to lose some fat, it might be better
just to go for half-hour walks.' Then, you can always buy a pedometer to
time yourself, measure how far you have walked, estimate the number of
calories burnt, and your pace per minute.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940106

