FT943-13021

FT  21 JUL 94 / Technology: Chemistry by design - Scientists are
constructing enzymes artificially


   By LIONEL MILGROM


Imagine looking down the barrel of a microscope at a single wriggling cell.
It could be a deadly bacterium, a human sperm or a white blood cell. The
tiny, writhing glob of protoplasm is a highly efficient chemical factory,
doing the same as any other chemical plant the world over - making and
transforming chemicals.
The chemical output from a cell is minuscule - micrograms compared with the
tonnes from man-made chemical factories. But cells are doing chemistry
faster and more efficiently than any chemical plant is ever likely to do.
For example, it would require a laboratory the size of Britain to reproduce
the number of chemical reactions in a single cell using conventional
chemistry.
A cell's ability to package and control complex chemical processes is
awe-inspiring. With pressure building on chemical manufacturers to clean up
their operations, while remaining competitive and profitable, research
chemists are now taking a hard look at how cells do chemistry with a view to
mimicking the process.
One area being studied is enzymes, made from large, intricately folded,
protein molecules. Enzymes can orchestrate almost every chemical process in
cells with total finesse, speed and selectivity. They can bring together two
seemingly unreactive molecules (by recognising them), make them react
(catalysing reactions between molecules which under normal circumstances
would not react or would take a long time to do so), and then release the
products, ready to start the cycle again. This is all done in less than one
ten-millionth of a second, with a subtlety that ensures only one chemical
outcome from the many possibilities available.
In contrast to the slow, comparatively haphazard progress of man-made
chemical reactions, enzymes make and break chemical bonds in a fast and
controlled manner.
'The trouble is we don't know all the rules of this game yet,' says Jeremy
Sanders, a chemistry lecturer at Cambridge University in the UK. 'We want to
build molecules that mimic enzymes in order to discover those rules,'
Sanders adds, and not purely for the chemical insights such a discovery
would bring.
Artificial enzymes are being developed from the insights obtained so far.
Although inferior to the real thing, they are built out of simpler, tougher,
molecular components that are relatively easy for chemists to assemble.
Molecules like these could one day help chemists perform their own,
large-scale chemical processes, much faster and more efficiently.
How is an artificial enzyme made? There are two approaches: by design and by
empirical research. In the design approach, a particular system is selected
and made, preferably out of molecular building blocks enabling a big
molecule (artificial enzymes have to be big in order to contain the reacting
molecules) to be assembled in as few steps as possible.
The new molecule is then studied to see how well it binds other molecules
and makes them react. 'The beauty of this approach,' says Sanders, 'is that
we know what we are trying to make, so we can build in rational changes as
we go along. The disadvantage is that because we don't know all the rules
yet, any molecule we design is likely to fail as an artificial enzyme.' In
other words, the design approach involves inspired guesswork. Nevertheless,
Sanders and his Cambridge team have had some success.
In constructing their artificial enzymes, the researchers adopt a minimalist
approach. Their target molecules consist simply of a rigid cavity with
several binding sites for other molecules (real enzymes, of course, are more
flexible and much more complicated). Nevertheless, one of Sanders's rigid
cavities can speed up, by approximately a thousandfold, an industrially
important reaction, called the Diels-Alder reaction - used to make
insecticides.
Sanders's rigid cavity accelerates the Diels-Alder reaction much less than
real enzymes speed up their reactions. Also, the Diels-Alder products remain
strongly bound within the cavity, so that Sanders's molecules are not
behaving as true catalysts. Even so, they are much tougher than real
enzymes.
In its latest work, Sanders's group has tried out artificial enzymes on a
different type of reaction; this time, they behave as proper catalysts.
Again, the rate of acceleration of the reaction is nowhere near as good as
that achieved by enzymes, but it is a start. 'We have a long way to go
before we have synthetic enzymes worthy of the name,' says Sanders, 'but at
least we know it can be done.'
The empirical approach can quickly generate a large number of molecules  -
usually big proteins called catalytic antibodies - for testing as enzyme
mimics. The most catalytically active ones are then selected.
The disadvantages with this approach are that it can be difficult to
identify a catalytically-active species. The very nature of these catalytic
antibodies also makes them difficult to modify in any systematic way. Both
these disadvantages can lead to problems in figuring out the rules that the
empirical approach was intended to understand in the first place.
Nevertheless, Frederic Menger and his chemistry team at Emory University in
Atlanta have come up with a simple enzyme mimic based on the empirical
approach. It operates in a way that many chemists believe enzymes may have
evolved billions of years ago.
Enzymes work by bringing together two molecules leaving them no choice but
to react. Menger uses molecules with long, fatty chains at one end and
reactive sites at the other. When the mixture is put in water, the fatty
chains cause the molecules to behave like oil and form a clump. As with
enzymes their reactive ends are now so close together they react very
smartly indeed.
'It's almost as if our randomly created clumps are like random mutations,'
says Menger.
The artificial enzymes Sanders and Menger have created could be the
blueprint for future industrial chemical catalysts. The rules and criteria
these and other chemists working in this field are discovering, seem set to
revolutionise chemistry in the 21st century.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

940721

