FT944-2461

FT  16 DEC 94 / Government pledge satisfies unionists: Loyalists say
constitutional guarantee is main concern - Ancram says surrender of arms is
vital


   By STEWART DALBY


   BELFAST


Loyalist leaders yesterday emerged from an historic first round of talks
with British government officials and said they were satisfied that
guarantees that the province would remain part of the UK would be honoured.
Mr Billy Hutchinson, leader of the delegation from the Progressive Unionist
party, which has close links with the Ulster Volunteer Force, said after
three hours of talks: 'We are confident the constitutional guarantee is
safe.'
Mr Gary McMichael, leader of the delegation from the Ulster Democratic party
 -which has insights into the thinking of the Ulster Defence Association,
the other main unionist paramilitary group - also said he was satisfied
there would be no change in the constitutional guarantee that Ulster would
remain part of the UK while that was the majority wish.
'We have seen the British government discussion document and we are
satisfied the constitution is safe,' he said.
Mr Hutchinson, who has served a prison sentence for terrorist crimes, said
the questions of arms surrender and prisoners were discussed, but were
secondary to the constitutional question.
He said: 'The surrender of arms is some way down the road. Guns and
prisoners come second after our constitutional concerns.'
The talks came on the anniversary of the Downing Street declaration, nine
weeks after the loyalists announced their ceasefire and six days after the
first exploratory talks between Sinn Fe'in, the political wing of the IRA,
and British government officials.
Like those with Sinn Fein, yesterday's talks dealt with how representatives
of the paramilitary groups might enter the peace process.
Mr McMichael said his delegation also discussed the arms and prisoners
issues. 'The question of arms is something which will have to be dealt with.
But talks are at a very early stage.' Prisoners were high on the UDP's
agenda, he said.
Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland political development minister who
is in overall charge of discussions with the loyalists and Sinn Fein, said
that arms decommissioning was central to the exploratory talks as far as the
British government was concerned. Speaking after the meetings with the
loyalists, he said: 'The surrender of arms is central to the talks. You
cannot have any groups threatening to go back to violence if things do not
go their way.'
Both Mr McMichael and Mr Hutchinson were unhappy with the government's
suggestion in a discussion document that their parties did not enjoy
sufficient electoral support to warrant participation in wider all-party
talks on the future of the province.
Mr Hutchinson said: 'Our mandate is the guns have fallen silent.'
The 10 loyalists involved in yesterday's talks brokered the loyalist
paramilitary ceasefire. The talks are scheduled to resume next Friday.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

941216

