FT941-5667

FT  05 MAR 94 / UK and Poland end air dispute


   By PAUL BETTS and CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   LONDON, WARSAW


Britain and Poland yesterday agreed to resume direct flights between London
and Warsaw on March 13, ending a long-running dispute that has suspended
direct air services between the two countries for the past four months.
The dispute arose when British Airways sought to add a second daily flight
on the London to Warsaw route. Although the UK flag carrier said it was
entitled to double its weekly flights under the 1988 aviation agreement
between the two countries, Poland rejected the plan. The UK government
retaliated by banning the London services of Poland's national carrier, LOT.
Under yesterday's agreement the two carriers will each be able to offer nine
flights a week from March 13. This will increase to 12 flights a week during
the summer season, which starts on March 27 and runs until November, and
then drop back to 10 flights a week during the winter season.
The compromise agreement includes a mechanism to increase the number of
services next winter if there is sufficient passenger demand.
Mr Zbigniew Kiszczak, deputy president of LOT, said the agreement was 'a
clear Polish success'. The airline was happy to have preserved the principle
of 'parity and equal benefits' in the talks.
The Poles were especially pleased to have wrung agreement from BA on having
the additional British morning flights leave Warsaw in the late morning,
arriving in London too late to catch a transatlantic connection.
LOT's fears that it would lose passengers on its direct flight to Chicago to
BA have been at the root of the dispute, which cost the carrier Dollars 1m
(Pounds 675,600) in revenue. Since the dispute began LOT has seen a 17 per
cent rise in passengers on its transatlantic flights.
Following suspension of direct air services, travellers between London and
Warsaw have been forced to fly via a third country, more than doubling the
journey time.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

940305

