FT943-13245

FT  20 JUL 94 / International Company News: Production delays hit earnings
at Lotus


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


Lotus Development's share price plunged yesterday when the US personal
computer software company reported a 36 per cent drop in second-quarter
earnings, blamed on product delays and the reorganisation of its sales
force. Lotus shares closed at Dollars 33 1/8 , down Dollars 5 1/8 . The
stock has collapsed from a high of Dollars 86 1/2 in March.
Net earnings from operations for the quarter were Dollars 9.7m, or 20 cents
a share, down from Dollars 15.2m, or 35 cents per share, last year. Revenues
were down 5 per cent at Dollars 224m.
In last year's second quarter, Lotus took a Dollars 19.9m charge related to
the acquisition of Approach Software. After the charge, the company reported
a net loss of Dollars 4.6m, or 11 cents per share. 'Product delays, cyclical
competitive pressures, the reorganisation of our US sales force and the
transition to a new worldwide channel sales programme contributed to our
disappointing second-quarter performance,' said Mr Jim Manzi, president and
chief executive.
Lotus failed to release several new products on schedule. It is also under
intense competitive pressure from Microsoft, the largest PC software
company, analysts said. Although Lotus sales of communications software are
growing, it is still heavily dependent upon market segments in which it is
being overtaken by competitors.
Lotus's communications products include Notes, a tool for sharing
information and collaborating across computer networks, and cc:Mail, the
best-selling e-mail program.
'Based on the expected shipment of the delayed products during the next
several weeks and continued momentum in our communications business, we
expect to see improved revenue growth in the second half of the year,' said
Mr Ed Gillis, chief financial officer.
For the half year, Lotus reported net income from operations up 13 per cent
to Dollars 31.1m, or 64 cents per share, on revenues 2 per cent higher at
Dollars 471m.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

940720

