FT943-12934

FT  22 JUL 94 / Clarke to end cash-for-car tax loophole


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS and RICHARD GOURLAY


The government plans to close a legislative loophole under which some
companies have sought to escape paying National Insurance contributions on
cash offered to their employees as an alternative to a company car.
Legislation will be introduced in the next finance bill and is intended to
become effective next April, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, told the
Commons yesterday.
A requirement for companies to pay National Insurance contributions on the
private benefit an employee enjoys from a company car was introduced for the
first time in the current fiscal year, together with a simplified company
car taxation regime.
However, some companies are considered by the Inland Revenue to have been
using a 1969 legal judgment, Heaton v Bell, to avoid paying such
contributions and in some cases to secure reduced tax charges. Under the
1969 judgment, where the benefit of a company car is freely convertible into
cash, the cash benefit is taxable under general income tax rules rather than
the special provisions for company cars.
In these circumstances, the employee pays tax on the cash he or she could
get and the employer does not pay national insurance contributions.
However, the Inland Revenue contends that some employers are making
arrangements designed to bring company cars within the terms of this
judgment even though the cash option is not taken up.
Mr Clarke also announced a change to the Payments on Account Scheme for
value added tax which may affect companies with VAT liabilities of about
Pounds 1.6m. Under the scheme, companies are assessed annually - on their
last 'prescribed' accounting period up to May 31 1993. Those with annual
liabilities above Pounds 1.6m pay VAT on a monthly basis, those below the
threshold, quarterly.
In order to avoid timing difficulties brought about by the move to a
November Budget, the current scheme is being extended from 12 months to 18
months ending in March 1995.
The move means that companies where sales are falling, which would otherwise
have started paying quarterly from October, will continue paying monthly.
Similarly, those companies that would have started paying monthly in October
will continue paying quarterly until March 1995.
In addition, non-domestic buildings converted into housing are now exempt
from VAT.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940722

