FT942-15278

FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Turkey (2): Austerity deal poses test for Ciller -
The economy faces a tough year ahead


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


The bubble seems finally to have burst. After two months with the currency
all at sea, Turkey's conservative-led coalition has been forced to batten
down the hatches and administer a major stabilisation programme which, if
implemented in full, would be the most comprehensive restructuring since the
now infamous January 24 package of 1980.
With the lira still reeling despite overnight rates at one point as high as
1,000 per cent, the government abandoned its attempts to prop up the
currency and faced up to the inevitable.
The jury is probably still out on the merits of the austerity package
unveiled on April 5 by Mrs Tansu Ciller, the prime minister, but there is
little doubt that 1994 is going to be a tough year for a nation which has
long been accustomed to buoyant growth rates.
The political constraints will be considerable. Mrs Ciller's junior
coalition partners, the Social Democratic Populists, although endorsing the
package publicly, are known to be unhappy about certain of its clauses -
particularly as regards privatisation. The main opposition Motherland party,
ANP, may also initially prove truculent, although western diplomats point
out that Mr Mesut Yilmaz, the Anap leader, could win some credit for
supporting the programme if it succeeds, while distancing himself
sufficiently if it comes a cropper.
The package comprises two parts - stabilisation measures such as price
increases on government-controlled commodities, an investment freeze and
one-off tax charges on the rich, and the longer-term structural measures
such as privatisation and closures and reform of the state farm support
system. Mrs Ciller has for the first time introduced an explicit fiscal
target, which in the first three months envisages a TL38,000bn reduction in
the budget deficit through cost savings and increased revenues.
In parallel with the fiscal programme, the central bank is to introduce a
new monetary programme. These measures are underpinned by moves to
strengthen the bank, increasing its autonomy and reducing the extent to
which it has to fund the budget.
How Mrs Ciller meets the targets remains to be seen. In the short term the
only way to make large cuts in public expenditures - barring a wages freeze
on which the prime minister remains a little vague - is through cuts in
capital investment in projects. In addition, a substantial slice of
legislation, affecting individual state enterprises and the tax changes,
together with the changes in the central bank law, has still to be passed by
parliament.
Mrs Ciller remains adamant that the growth rate will not be imperilled by
the harsh stabilisation measures. 'The economy will not stop,' she said on
state television when unveiling the package. Most economists beg to differ.
The recession is already taking effect. Even before the announcement of the
large increases in petrol prices as part of the package, Turkey's car
production ground to a near-standstill. Consumer demand is set to dry up as
spending power is eroded by the rapid devaluation. This may take some heat
out of the inflation rate, which is expected to rise sharply over the next
three months as the impact of the price increases starts to be felt.
This will inevitably have a dramatic effect on living standards,
particularly for manual employees. The recession could be very painful for
cyclical industries such as cement and construction services, says Mr Emre
Yigit, head of research at Global Securities. The banking sector has been
devastated by the collapse of the lira, with many banks caught holding lira
assets in form of lending to Turkish companies while most of their
liabilities are in foreign currency.
The 'dollarisation' of the Turkish economy has been one of the more alarming
developments of recent years. Today half of the total deposit base is in
foreign currency. In a recent, much-reported case, a woman seeking a divorce
from her husband insisted in court that the settlement should be in dollars.
Civil servants rush to the banks and foreign exchange shops to unload their
lira.
Public desire for dollars reflects a deeper concern about economic
management and the condition of public finances. Mrs Ciller has still to
demonstrate that she can rectify the situation.
Pressure has been building for some time. In 1993, the economy was already
showing signs of overheating - in the second quarter the economy grew by 12
per cent. The growth was fuelled by the rise in imports financed by
increased foreign borrowing, much of it short-term by Turkish commercial
banks. The result was a record high trade account deficit reaching Dollars
14bn by the end of 1993.
The need to finance the current account is one explanation for the sudden
jump in Turkey's foreign indebtedness in 1993. Total debt reached Dollars
66bn by the end of the year after a spate of bond issues as the Treasury
sought to avoid borrowing from the domestic markets, where high interest
costs represented an increasing burden on the budget. The availability of
foreign credits also allowed the Treasury to restructure its domestic debt
by lengthening the maturities.
For the commercial banks, there was also a large increase in short-term
foreign funding. Given the differential between domestic interest rates and
inflation, Turkish banks have long been used to funding their loan book
through offshore borrowing.
The demand for dollars is also trade-driven, as Turkish exporters increased
market share. The situation was sustainable as long as there remained
confidence in the lira. However as soon as that collapsed, more and more
people wanted to hold their savings in dollars.
The banks were left in a vicious circle, having to find assets to match the
increase in dollar liabilities. With banks allowed only to lend limited
amounts to a list of registered trade companies, they were left with few
options but to lend the deposits as lira loans. The resultant erosion of
these assets merely forced banks to raise domestic bank rates to compensate.
With the currency continuing to suffer the jitters, it is clear that Mrs
Ciller must move swiftly to convince the markets. Turkey's foreign debt has
been downgraded by both Moody's and Standard & Poor's twice since the start
of the year. The government's freedom to borrow will almost certainly be
more constrained.
The international bond market for less developed countries such as Turkey
has already become more difficult after what appears to have been the
turnaround in US rates. Turkey was forced to 'pull' a Dollars 750m global
bond in March. Plans to float bonds in the state telephone monopoly,
convertible into shares in the underlying company assets, will in all
probability suffer the same fate.
The global bond was meant to set a benchmark for the PTT issue, although
many bankers expressed scepticism about whether the deal could work given
the fact that the PTT's privatisation remains blocked by the courts.
Evidence of the mounting liquidity crisis was there for everyone to see
throughout 1993 with the government rescheduling payments to contractors,
and with the Treasury's public finance department living hand to mouth to
meet the next civil servants' salary payout or interest payments on the
country's foreign debt.
A telling sign of the impending difficulties came on March 21 when the
Public Participation Administration (PPA), the state agency in charge of
privatisation, came close to defaulting on some Dollars 400m worth of
revenue-sharing certificates, after the Treasury refused to extend the
amounts to the PPA. As a result, the agency had to go to interbank markets
for Dollars 200m.
The certificates are two-year bonds issued by the PPA in lieu of payments to
road contractors. The bonds were denominated in lira but indexed to foreign
exchange. It remains a moot point whether the bonds are considered a foreign
or a domestic liability, but the momentary panic among the banks holding the
paper was an early warning of the problems to come.
Against this background, the local elections were like a self-imposed
deadline with the government wary of introducing radical measures before the
polls, while making it clear to its foreign audience that it intended to
move swiftly once the result was in.
The government's credibility is clearly on the line. It is now left to the
prime minister and her new Treasury undersecretary, Mr Osman Birsen, to
prove that this time they mean business.

The Financial Times


London Page II

940415

