FT942-14889

FT  18 APR 94 / Cane opens up east-west divisions: A look at the
international row over a Singapore vandalism sentence


   By KIERAN COOKE


There may be some people in the US still unsure where Singapore is on the
map, but probably considerably fewer than six weeks ago.
In early March Michael Fay, an 18-year-old US citizen, was sentenced by a
Singapore court to six strokes of the rotan - a heavy bamboo cane - four
months in jail and fined SDollars 3,500 (Dollars 2,200) for spray-painting
cars and other vandalism offences.
The punishment is no schoolyard caning. It is administered by a specially
trained officer with considerable force. The prisoner is strapped to a
trestle. 'The skin at the point of contact is usually split open and, after
three strokes, the buttocks will be covered in blood,' said one official
account. The canings usually leave permanent scars. The Singapore
authorities say a doctor is always in attendance.
Next week Singapore's President Ong Teng Cheong is due to decide whether to
grant clemency to Fay. Despite personal appeals for mercy from President
Bill Clinton, most people in Singapore say the teenager has little chance of
clemency - before the end of the month he will be receiving his punishment.
Singapore's leaders, with support from many other Asian governments, are
mounting an increasingly strident campaign against what they consider to be
the decadence of the west and the importance of what they call Asian values.
In Singapore the Fay case - and the west's reaction to it - is seen as
symptomatic of the clash between two very different value systems.
From the outset Singapore has made its position clear. 'We do not have a
situation where acts of vandalism are commonplace as in cities like New
York, where even police cars are not spared the acts of vandals,' said the
Singapore Home Affairs Ministry.
In the Singapore catechism of Asian values, the west stands accused of
putting too much emphasis on individual rights and not enough on society's.
Elder statesman Mr Lee Kuan Yew has said that without its tough criminal
laws Singapore would have descended into the 'chaos' found on the streets of
the US.
'If you like it that way, that is your problem,' said Mr Lee. 'But that is
not the path we choose. They always talk about human rights. I think it is
just a convenient slogan.'
The White House, Congress and much of the US media have been strongly
critical of Singapore. But a large section of the US public, tired of
violence and a justice system which they feel often favours the culprit more
than the victim, is giving its support to Mr Lee.
Singapore has no hesitation about attacking the US. Foreign ministry
officials list what they consider to be the failures of US foreign policy,
and are particularly forthright about what they judge to be Washington's
mistakes on China.
Yet Singapore is dependent on the US for much of its continuing economic
growth. US companies are the biggest investors there, with cumulative
investments of nearly Dollars 19bn, according to official US figures. The US
is Singapore's biggest export market. The island republic is also an ardent
supporter of continued US military presence in Asia.
Initially US business in Singapore reacted strongly to the Fay sentence. The
local American Chamber of Commerce said it could not understand how the
government could condone the permanent scarring of any 18-year-old; the case
could 'cast a cloud over Singapore's international reputation'.
But some US residents of Singapore have supported the caning, while US
multinationals continue to invest.
Fay's family - his stepfather is the Singapore-based regional executive of
Federal Express - and his defenders in the US have argued that because of
all the publicity surrounding the case, the teenager has not been treated
fairly. They say he is the first person to be sentenced for caning for
vandalism of private property. He is also the first youth to be given a
caning for damaging cars. The authorities say the law makes no distinction
between public and private property.
Singapore's leaders are adamant that it will allow no outside interference
in its internal affairs. Nor do they show any sign of altering a system of
punishment which has been done away with in many parts of the world.
Singapore Survey, separate section

The Financial Times


Frankfurt Page 4

940418

