FT941-13127

FT  27 JAN 94 / Tory climbdown ends threat of Commons logjam


   By KEVIN BROWN and DAVID OWEN


The threat of a procedural logjam in the Commons was lifted last night after
the government agreed to press on with debate of two important bills with a
majority of only one on the relevant committees.
As a result Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, is expected not to sit on
the committee that is handling a bill to reform local government in
Scotland.
Government business managers are thought to have reasoned that Mr Lang's
enforced absence at weekly cabinet meetings would have erased the
government's slender majority with unpredictable consequences.
Under the deal agreed last night after a prolonged row, the government will
also have a majority of only one on the bill to privatise the coal industry.
It will have a more comfortable cushion of two on committees handling both
the finance bill and the social security bill to tighten the rules for
invalidity benefit, whose composition was also discussed at last night's
meetings.
Yesterday's dispute has its roots in Labour's decision to withdraw
parliamentary co-operation from the government before Christmas after
ministers cut short debate on two bills.
Under Commons rules, the government's majority of 17 entitles it to a
majority of 1.8 on the standing committees, which debate bills line by line
after they have been approved in principle in the second-reading debate.
Normally, the two sides' business managers agree that some bills will have a
government majority of two and others one, giving an average majority of
about 1.8 over a parliamentary session.
But the campaign of non-cooperation has meant that no discussions have taken
place, leaving Labour free to trigger a crisis when the selection committee
met to choose MPs to serve on standing committees.
For the first time in memory the selection committee was forced to adjourn
without reaching a decision on the membership of a standing committee.
The outcome of yesterday's meeting will be regarded as a parliamentary
triumph by Labour, which appears determined to press on with its campaign of
confrontation until the government backs down.
Labour's refusal to allow leave of absence for its MPs has also forced the
abandonment of several cross-party overseas delegations. Casualties have
included a defence committee visit to Belize and a parliamentary delegation
to the Council of Europe/Western European Union plenary session in Paris.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940127

