FT944-5930

FT  01 DEC 94 / Arts: Dorrell delivers from a distance


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


So Stephen Dorrell came good. In the few months since he took over as
heritage minister this former Treasury apparatchik has kept a low profile,
avoiding operatic and theatrical first nights, even asking his staff to be
more circumspect about accepting cultural freebies. When he did appear above
the parapet he talked about tourism and Huddersfield. The arts world was
worried.
But in the Budget Dorrell delivered. The prime minister wanted to confirm
his pledge that the National Lottery would not be used as an excuse to cut
cultural funding. The Arts Council got an unexpected Pounds 5.1m increase,
and there will be less talk of arts companies closing.
Dorrell is different from past arts and heritage ministers in being wary of
going native. 'I'm more interested in expanding the arts economy rather than
drawing attention to my own enthusiasms. The department suffers from being
seen to be too closely connected with individual arts activities,' he said
yesterday. The commitment to subsidy should be taken for granted. Dorrell
wants to act as a catalyst to draw in outside cash.
There were three examples in the Budget. An extra Pounds 750,000 for the
Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme should attract Pounds 1.5m from arts
sponsors; the pools promoters have been persuaded to maintain funding the
Foundation for Sport and the Arts, which means another Pounds 20m plus a
year; and new money for the British Tourist Authority must bring more
visitors to London's cultural shrines. He is now looking at ways to attract
outside money to the arts.
With the Budget out of the way Dorrell can concentrate on the role which
enables him to make a greater mark on the nation than any government
minister in history: his chairmanship of the Millennium Commission, with its
anticipated treasure chest of Pounds 1.6bn to be spent by the end of 2000.
Dorrell is looking for the big, all embracing, Idea. So far he has scented
two - improving the natural environment; and using science for social rather
than business purposes. It is obvious that neither covers the British
Museum, the Tate, the South Bank Centre or the Cardiff Bay Opera House.
He does not discount arts and heritage projects, but he is steering these
expensive cultural structures towards the arts and heritage lottery boards:
and they are stressing their interest in helping the grass roots. The wider
arts world might be warming to Dorrell; our museum and opera house directors
may be looking rather ashen.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

941201

