FT944-2957

FT  15 DEC 94 / Hickson names board to oversee safety


   By TIM BURT


Hickson International, the speciality chemicals manufacturer hit by two big
industrial accidents in recent years, yesterday became Britain's first
chemicals company to appoint an independent supervisory board to oversee
health and safety.
The move is designed to reassure investors and community groups that Hickson
will pursue the highest possible safety standards. It follows an explosion
two years ago which killed five workers at Castleford in West Yorkshire, a
fire in 1993 at Ringaskiddy in Ireland, and a Pounds 50,000 fine earlier
this year for excessive emissions at Castleford.
Mr Dennis Kerrison, chief executive, blamed the problems on under-investment
during the 1980s, but said Hickson had spent Pounds 30.2m on improving its
health, safety and environmental controls in the past three years. Yesterday
he welcomed the supervisory board as 'a leap forward in improving safety
standards'.
The board, which will publish details of Hickson's safety record, is to be
headed by Mr Keith Humphreys, chairman and managing director of the UK arm
of Rhone-Poulenc, the French chemical group, and former president of the
Chemical Industries Association. 'This supervisory board will be a first in
the UK. It elevates health, safety and environmental issues to the
appropriate level within a chemical company,' he said yesterday.
The idea of a supervisory board was first mooted by Mr James Hann, the
part-time chairman of Scottish Nuclear, the state-owned nuclear power
company, who became non-executive chairman of Hickson in October. Such
boards have existed in the nuclear industry for some time.
At Hickson, it will monitor the effectiveness of measures introduced
following recent accidents, which include the creation of a 'corporate
crisis management team', remedial programmes for older sites, and a review
of emergency procedures.
Hickson plans to devote some Pounds 6m a year, about 30 per cent of total
capital expenditure, to health and safety.
Some City analysts warned that the move reflected increasing pressure on
European chemical companies to invest heavily to comply with environmental
regulations. That could prove a heavy drain on companies relying on elderly
plant and equipment. Hickson, for example, has been making chemicals at
Castleford since 1915.
Mr Martin Evans, chemicals analyst at Hoare Govett, said: 'It shows they're
increasingly determined to improve their image after an unfortunate
succession of events. But it will take some time.'

The Financial Times


London Page 27

941215

