FT942-16382

FT  11 APR 94 / Management: Nurturing the bottom line - It makes good
business sense to be a family friendly employer


   By LIZA DONALDSON


Do you work for a family friendly company? The concept has been familiar in
the US for some time but it should become better known in Britain from
tomorrow when the UK Association of the International Year of the Family -
part of an United Nations initiative - launches the Family Friendly
Employment Agenda.
The agenda is a 36-point consultative document, with 12 key areas, which
could eventually form the basis of a quality kitemark. Progress on the areas
to be addressed will be reported in a September conference.
The launch will take place at the London headquarters of the Midland Bank -
it started its own nursery programme in 1989 and now boasts 114 nurseries
and 60 play schemes - and has won backing from Howard Davies, director
general of the Confederation of British Industry, and John Monks, general
secretary of the Trades Union Congress, representing employers and
employees.
Joanna Foster, chair of the UK Association of the International Year of the
Family, says their support confirms that the new agenda will benefit both
sides. 'Family friendly work is now a key area. Everybody used to think this
was just about policies for women. It was marginalised, when in fact it is
about being family friendly to everybody and helping them get a better
balance between their family responsibilities and their employment
responsibilities,' she says.
So how do companies approach the new family friendly agenda? Foster says:
'Companies and organisations can use it as a benchmarking activity. I hope
very much that people will use it as an instrument for auditing, that they
will consult their men and women and look at whether they are a family
friendly organisation and will debate why it makes good business sense.'
The concept of the family friendly company is still in its infancy in the
UK, so there is little evidence of financial benefits resulting, Foster
concedes.
In the US, however, The Conference Board, which has the aims of improving
both business and the business contribution to society, has produced a
report* which finds strong evidence to suggest that 'work family programmes
can improve a company's bottom line'.
The report, which reviews research spanning 40 studies in individual
companies and a further 40 on employees drawn from a wide range of
organisations, says: 'A body of small, but consistent, research suggests
that childcare centres, parental leave policies, flexi-time and employee
assistance programmes offer some pay-back to the company.'
It suggests that family friendly policies have helped improve recruitment,
retention and performance as well as reduce absenteeism. Conversely, the
report identifies negative costs to companies that do not have family
friendly policies. These include problems with staff recruitment, retention,
productivity, absenteeism, tardiness of employees and stress when employees
experience conflicting demands between work and family. The effects on
employees of caring for elderly relatives was highlighted as a particularly
acute problem.
In the UK it is perhaps significant that the companies implementing family
friendly policies are those most likely to keep a tight rein on company
costs. They include the big four clearing banks - Midland, Barclays, Lloyds
and National Westminster.
Midland Bank, for example, used costings from the Institute of Manpower
Studies to calculate that it would cost Pounds 18,000 to replace an
assistant manager with 11-15 years' experience, including recruitment,
advertising and training. Since a nursery place costs Pounds 2,500 a year,
savings of Pounds 8,000 over four years are generated by retaining assistant
managers.
The Alliance & Leicester building society, the UK's fourth largest society,
has also adopted family friendly policies. It argues that its term-time
working arrangements for parents, the option of 10 weeks' unpaid leave with
employment rights protected and flexi-time, made good business sense -
attracting and retaining quality staff.
In retailing, Boots introduced family friendly policies to reduce turnover
of its 35,000 staff by 1 per cent and therefore employee costs per head.
These measures it calculated would save Pounds 1m, or Pounds 2,850 for each
of the 350 employees. Its policies include part-time working (also for
senior staff), term-time working for 300 office staff meeting certain
criteria, job sharing, flexi-time, maternity and paternity leave, a summer
activity scheme for children and a nursery place scheme.
Despite the recession, Boots has taken a long-term strategic view of its
staffing levels and benefits, while other companies have preferred
short-term options, such as reducing staff numbers or, for example, relaxing
childcare provision.
The company now has 50 per cent of women on maternity leave returning,
compared with 7 per cent four years ago.
Boots does not just calculate policy benefits in financial terms - it
believes staff commitment and loyalty are as valuable, if more difficult to
quantify.
Becton Dickinson is a previous winner of the Working Mothers Association's
Employer of the Year Award**. The company manufactures medical care products
such as syringes, surgical instruments and gloves and has 650 employees on
sites in Plymouth and Oxford. It has introduced a committee which reviews
family friendly policies and makes recommendations on reconciling family and
work-related problems.
Foster says such committees provide an important consultative mechanism
which is advocated in the agenda. She stresses, for example, the importance
of consulting employees before introducing a new family friendly policy. 'It
is no good saying that 'we are going to have a nursery' if nobody wants
one.'
Neil Gibbs, UK human resources manager at Becton Dickinson, admits that the
company culture favoured moves towards flexi-time, job sharing, part-time
work, employee counselling, family illness days, leave for sick dependents
and maternity information packs. He says managers still had to adapt to the
changes - for example, viewing the positive elements of changes such as job
sharing took time. Now, instead of seeing two job sharers in terms of two
people to manage rather than one, the company emphasises the benefit of two
brains for the price of one.
Simon Sperryn, chief executive of the London Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, whose 3,000 members employ 500,000 people, says: 'I think Britain
has a problem compared with the rest of the EU. We have the highest rate of
divorce and the lowest level of childcare. That is a fairly rotten start.'
Peter Moss, senior research officer and co-ordinator for the Thomas Coram
Research Unit, which investigates family life and employment issues, points
out that there is more than the bottom line to be considered. Kids' Clubs
Network, which campaigns for more out-of-school playcare, says one in five
children are 'latch-key' children. It says there are only 1,000
out-of-school clubs in existence, while 25,000 are needed.
Foster says companies and employees need to rethink the concept of work to
cope with today's family and social pressures. She points to the fact that
one in seven adults are responsible for the care of elderly relatives.
Changes in employment requirements - government figures suggest that women
will make up 80 per cent of the labour force by the year 2006 - also need to
be considered, she says.
'We have some blue-chip leaders who see that this is important in terms of
capitalising on the investment and development potential of their people,'
she says. 'But there is a massive revolution still to be done.'
*Linking Work-Family Issues to the Bottom Line. Published by The Conference
Board, 845 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022-6601.
**UK Employer Initiatives - Working Examples of Family Friendly and Equal
Opportunities Policies. The Working Mothers Association, 77 Holloway Rd,
London N7 8JZ Tel: 071-700-5771.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

940411

