FT943-12699

FT  23 JUL 94 / Life with a frisky watchdog: A bite back by UK financial
services regulators


   By ALISON SMITH


City of London watchdogs have been snapping with particular vigour this
week. They almost seem to have been competing to see which could be toughest
on the financial organisations they regulate.
Two household names - Nationwide Building Society and Barclays' Life - have
been bitten over the past few days, and there are rumours that others may
become victims.
On Tuesday came the news that a visit from Lautro, the self-regulatory
organisation for the life insurance industry, had led Nationwide, the UK's
second-largest society, to bar temporarily its 1,300 financial services
staff from giving financial advice.
The next day, the Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief
regulator, gave a rare public rebuke to Barclays' Life, the life and
pensions arm of the high street bank, for shortcomings in the training and
supervision of its 1,000-plus staff.
Such actions are signs of a toughening in regulators' attitudes towards the
organisations they supervise, and have been welcomed by some of those who
have previously criticised the watchdogs for being too lenient.
For instance, after Lautro's visit to Nationwide, Mr Stephen Locke, director
of policy at the Consumers' Association, commented: 'We're disappointed that
the regulator did not do it earlier, but it's better late than never.'
The irony is that the burst of disciplinary activity by Lautro - which has
fined more organisations in the first half of this year than in either 1992
or 1993 - will not stop its being put to sleep next year.
Its successor, the Personal Investment Authority, began operations at the
start of the week. The PIA was set up after a long debate about reforming a
widely-criticised system in which regulation of retail financial services is
split between Lautro and Fimbra, which supervises independent financial
advisers. The division led to complaints of inconsistent standards.
Another criticism of the old regime was that the regulators were too close
to the industry they supervise. Such concerns were revived this week when a
leaked memorandum about a Lautro inquiry into the selling by Prudential
Corporation, the UK's largest life insurer, of personal pensions to people
transferring out of occupational schemes, had suggested that Prudential was
trying to influence its regulator.
But even though the arguments for reforming the old system remain
compelling, the outbreak of activity by Lautro has highlighted two broad
problem areas that mean the transition to the PIA is unlikely to be smooth:
First, by il-lustrating how even household names such as Barclays have got
it wrong, the discipline imposed this week has re-inforced wide-spread
public concerns about standards of selling to private investors.
Second, it raises the question of whether the PIA, like Lautro which was set
up in 1986, will take several years to become effective. Given the
controversy it has already attracted, the new regulator could not afford
such a delay: it has already been snubbed by Prudential - which exercised
its right to be regulated directly by the SIB. Even some of the companies
that applied to join the PIA believe it will not be effective. If it fails
to make its mark swiftly, a move to a full-blown statutory system of
regulation is likely to return to the agenda.
The first of these two problems is the more serious, especially since the
sector already has an image problem. Mr Jim Stretton, deputy managing
director of Standard Life, the UK's largest mutual insurer, believes the
retail financial services industry is in a vicious circle: 'Each fine, far
from increasing public confidence that the system is working, awakens more
suspicions in people's minds.'
Similarly, Mr Philip Scott, the life and pensions general manager at Norwich
Union, which received a record Pounds 300,000 fine from Lautro in April,
says: 'The danger with the way it's currently happening is that it loses a
lot of confidence in an industry which is really needed . . . There is a
risk of people being frightened away from looking after their future.'
He is confident, however, that an effective regulatory regime is the
long-term answer to the industry's problems, even if that means short-term
discomfort for practitioners. For example, he believes that the PIA's
application of Lautro's training standards, which are seen as more stringent
than those of Fimbra, across the industry will be important.
Many in the financial services industry also believe there will be benefits
simply from having a different regulator able to make a fresh start and weed
out organisations which do not meet the new, higher standards being set.
Other life company executives believe that the publicity surrounding
disciplinary action has begun to make senior managers and directors pay
detailed attention to meeting regulatory requirements. As Mr Steve Maran,
chief executive of Lloyds Abbey Life, puts it: 'My board wants to discuss
compliance issues at every meeting.'
Mr Gareth Marr, deputy chairman of Fimbra, believes that many in the
industry have altered their attitude towards complying with regulatory
requirements, but the difference will take a while to show. 'They have
learnt that they can't get away with it any more,' he says, 'but the change
doesn't happen overnight.'
That change in attitudes leads many executives in the industry to believe
that, despite the uncertainties caused by the shift to a new regulator, the
PIA will not face the same regulatory learning curve that both Lautro and
Fimbra experienced. The PIA has already been tough enough to float the idea
of imposing fines on individual board members of errant financial services
companies.
Although the PIA is new, many of its staff come from the existing watchdogs.
'The PIA has involved an enormous amount of people's energy but at least it
has the benefit of staff who should be able to build on Lautro's work
without losing too much momentum,' says Mr Locke of the Consumers'
Association.
But the PIA does not have much time. Mr Marr believes that it has only until
the general election in 1996 or 1997 to prove itself effective, or find
itself replaced by a statutory regulatory regime. As a watchdog, it must be
a cross between rottweiler and greyhound.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

940723

