FT943-973

FT  27 SEP 94 / Coventry lift-truck activity boosted


   By ANDREW BAXTER


The Swedish owner of the old Coventry Climax company - once one of the most
famous names in the UK lift-truck industry - is reorganising its UK
operations to try to broaden its customer base and boost sales.
The UK subsidiary of Kalmar will start moving to a new site in Coventry next
month as part of a Pounds 2.5m investment aimed at securing its future.
The move, to be completed next year, will round off the transformation of
the UK operation into a distribution, service and support company, severing
links with its manufacturing past.
In its heyday Coventry Climax employed about 3,500 people. It has been based
at a 240,000 sq ft plant in Sandy Lane, Coventry for the past 15 years. It
came under Swedish ownership in 1987 but volume manufacturing became
increasingly uncompetitive.
Annual production of lift-trucks had dwindled to about 1,000 units and the
workforce had fallen to 500 when manufacturing ceased three years ago.
Climax trucks are now made for Kalmar by companies in the US and Japan. Most
of the Sandy Lane site was sold this year.
In May all Kalmar operations in the UK were brought together under one
company for the first time. Apart from Climax lift-trucks the company sells
medium to large LMV lift-trucks and Irion side-loaders, all made in Sweden.
The restructured UK company, Kalmar Ltd, employs 150 people. Mr John Arkell,
managing director, said the closer relationship between the product ranges
would enable the company to reach customers who otherwise would not have
considered buying from it.
He is particularly aiming at the market for medium-size lift-trucks where
the company has made little impact in the UK and competition is less intense
than in the smaller 1 tonne to 3 tonne market.
He also wants to increase Kalmar's presence in the construction, and ports
and shipping industries, building on its strengths in engineering and
commodity sectors.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940927

