FT942-12762

FT  28 APR 94 / Political Notebook: Counting pounds not pennies


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


The latest round of defence cuts is making the headlines. Behind the scenes
in Whitehall, concerns about public spending run much deeper.
First though, defence. Ministers are annoyed that the drive for savings in
procurement, bureaucratic and support services has been portrayed as a fresh
batch of swingeing cuts.
In fact Mr Malcolm Rifkind's Front Line First exercise is designed to meet
the stringent spending targets set last autumn. There has been no further
reduction in the armed forces' Pounds 23bn annual budget.
There are powerful arguments for a rationalisation of military support
services, for market testing and for a clear-out of bureaucrats-in-uniform.
The armed forces have been largely immune to the pressures for increased
efficiency applied elsewhere in the public sector.
Forces chiefs typically have responded to the Treasury axe by economising on
equipment and manpower rather than by redeploying resources more
effectively. Tanks have been mothballed for lack of fuel and soldiers left
without ammunition to test their weaponry.
Admirals, generals and air marshals must recognise that the nation's
strategic interests no longer demand that each service maintains a separate
denture-manufacturing plant.
There is considerable enthusiasm in the middle ranks of the services for the
ideas. Devolution of authority and financial responsibility holds
attractions for soldiers as well as for health service managers.
The government's vulnerability over defence stems not from a sensible search
for efficiency gains but in its refusal to conduct a fundamental
re-assessment of Britain's ambitions and capabilities.
Defence spending has fallen 15 per cent in real terms since its peak in
1984-85. It is back to the levels inherited by Margaret Thatcher in 1979. No
one can pretend that such a shift does not merit a hard look at whether
resources still match requirements. The government knows it. But Mr John
Major is unwilling to take the political risk.
The defence budget, though, must be kept in perspective. It accounts for
less than 10 per cent of public expenditure. The Treasury pays out almost as
much in debt interest.
As the cabinet begins its ritual summer battle over public spending, the
focus of attention in Whitehall has returned to the welfare state.
The spending squeeze unveiled by Mr Kenneth Clarke last autumn is under
strain. It is hardly surprising. During the three years 1991-92 to 1993-94,
overall expenditure as measured by the Treasury's control total jumped 11
per cent in real terms. The plans for 1994-95 to 1996-97 allow for an
increase of only 1 per cent.
Together the social security, health and social services, and education
budgets account for about 60 per cent of all spending. They are already
threatening Mr Clarke's straitjacket.
Senior ministers have been told that curbs on invalidity, sickness and
unemployment benefits will not be enough to check the inexorable growth of
the Pounds 85bn social security budget.
On current trends, spending on benefits will continue to outpace the growth
rate of the economy. In spite of a brighter outlook for public borrowing,
the prospect is that social security will crowd out pre-election tax cuts or
discretionary spending increases elsewhere.
Meanwhile the (laudable) surge in the number of young people going into
further and higher education is threatening once again to bust the Pounds
33bn education budget.
The financial pressures faced by trust hospitals and the broader political
sensitivity of the health service have begun to undercut the freeze in the
NHS budget.
So ministers are already talking about a third year of tough pay restraint
for nurses, policemen and the rest. Without another standstill in the public
sector pay bill there is no chance of the overall spending sums adding up.
But incomes policies have a nasty habit of going wrong.
Economic growth and low inflation should help. So too for a time will
off-balance sheet financing through the private-sector finance initiative.
But it will take more than that. Mr Portillo's fundamental reviews of the
underlying trends in public spending have so far yielded far more in the way
of analysis than action.
Sooner rather than later the government will have to exchange short-term
political expediency for a credible long-term strategy on public spending.
It will not be easy. But until they start thinking about it ministers can
have no complaints about alarmist headlines.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

940428

