FT941-16873

FT  07 JAN 94 / The FT Interview: Stable hand on the reins - Peter Davies


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


Mr Peter Davis last bet on a horse two or three years ago and does not do
the football pools; his business career has been characterised by more than
an average degree of prudence. 'I am a solid, middle-aged chartered
accountant,' he says with a laugh.
Such characteristics - combined with a previous form that includes the
deputy chairmanships of Abbey National, the banking and financial services
group; of Sturge Holdings, the insurance and stockbroking company; and of
Harris Queensway, the retailer - should put the stamp of integrity on what
will be the UK's biggest game of chance.
As director-general of the National Lottery, the regulatory body that will
choose a licensee to run a series of gambling contests, Mr Davis, 51, will
have the distinction of ending the UK's isolation as the only country in
Europe without a National Lottery. The second last was Albania.
If all goes well, the lottery should have a turnover of between Pounds 3bn
and Pounds 4bn within three years of its launch, probably early next year.
It will raise as much as Pounds 1bn a year for the five nominated good
causes, each of which will get an equal slice - the arts, charities, the
national heritage, sport and a fund to celebrate the millennium.
'I think it's going to add a dimension to our public life. It's going to be
a ray of sunshine in what is a pretty grey and drab world for the British
public,' says Mr Davis.
Applicants for the licence to run this substantial business are already
lining up. 'Expressions of interest' are required by January 14, with the
deadline for applications a month later. Mr Davis has promised to declare
the winner by May as long as he is not swamped by an unexpectedly large
number of runners.
The field - either formally declared or highly likely - includes: Camelot, a
consortium backed by Cadbury Schweppes; the Great British Lottery Company,
including Granada and Carlton Communications; Ladbrokes, with Lord Hollick's
financial services and media group MAI; the Lottery Foundation put together
by Virgin chairman Richard Branson (the only applicant pledged to handing
over all profits to a charitable foundation); Rainbow, a consortium being
put together by BAT chairman Sir Patrick Sheehy; the Rank Organisation; NM
Rothschilds, the merchant bank, with Australian lottery operator
Tattersalls; and the Tote, which operates horse racing's pooled betting
system, with Thorn EMI. There are also believed to be two more, so far
undeclared.
Making clear his determination to get the best deal for good causes - after
checking the propriety and security of each system, he is obliged to
maximise the amount raised - Mr Davis has written a reserve price for the
licence on a piece of paper and locked it in a lawyer's safe. It specifies
the maximum amount (as a percentage of sales) a licensee may retain to cover
costs and profits after the Treasury takes its 12 per cent cut, and the
minimum percentage the operator must hand over for good causes.
'The most important factor in any bid will be: 'Tell us how much you are
going to give us for good causes.' It will be a very tight judgment. You're
dealing with percentages . . . It is certainly not impossible that it will
be a very small difference.'
In the job for only four months, Mr Davis has been keen also to maximise the
chances of the lottery becoming a success for the operator, as well as in
terms of money raised. 'I would give him an alpha,' said one applicant who,
not wanting to appear obsequious, asked not to be named.
Mr Davis acknowledges that the draft plan he inherited from the National
Heritage Department was of a high intellectual quality, but adds: 'In a
number of respects it was lacking in commercial input.'
He declines to list all the changes he made but some were announced publicly
after consultations with potential licensees. For instance, Mr Davis agreed
applicants should be given the right to publish as many, or as few, details
of their bids as they wanted to, overturning an earlier insistence on
confidentiality.
He also removed a requirement that each applicant should specify a minimum
payment to charity each year - several applicants had suggested they might
not bid if they had to make such a commitment in advance. Mr Davis also
reduced the penalty for pulling out before the seven-year licence expires.
He is at home with such minutiae. 'An accountant's stock-in-trade is
details, numbers, paper,' he says. But in his past career he has also seen
himself as a 'bridge', putting into practice the ideas of flamboyant
characters such as Sir Phil Harris of Harris Queensway and Mr David
Coleridge, chairman of Sturge, and liaising with line managers.
'I have always liked being the bridge between the operator and the
professional management of the business,' says Mr Davis who presciently
decided to leave Harris Queensway in 1987, a couple of years before the
company's difficulties became apparent.
He regards his latest 'absolutely fascinating and unique job' as a
philanthropic mission. It gives him a first taste of the public sector and
its pay scales. His Pounds 80,000-a-year salary is much lower than he could
command in the private sector.
He is circumspect about how much might be raised for charity, refusing to go
beyond a forecast by Mr Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary, that the
lottery should have revenues of around Pounds 1.5bn a year. Most specialists
believe that is an underestimate.
Nevertheless Mr Davis agrees the signs are auspicious. 'We as a nation like
gambling. We like our fun game. I think there is every reason to assume it
will be very successful provided we can set up the right people and the
right marketing.'
Another omen is also favourable. In Ireland recently, Mr Davis bought a
IPounds 2 lottery ticket to see how the successful Irish lottery worked. The
ticket won him a prize of IPounds 3. The challenge now is to prove he can
pick a winner to run the UK's national lottery.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

940107

