FT944-2906

FT  15 DEC 94 / International Company News: Li Ka-shing strengthens hold on
container port


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


Mr Li Ka-shing, the Hong Kong tycoon who made his money in the stock and
property markets of the colony, has made another timely investment. He
stands to make a quick profit of up to 60 per cent and put himself in the
position to strengthen his hold on Hong Kong's container port.
Mr Li has emerged as a leading shareholder in SHK Hong Kong Industries, a
listed investment company which yesterday said it would return HKDollars
970m (USDollars 125m) to shareholders by way of a special dividend of
HKDollars 0.60 a share. Mr Li, who began to acquire SHK's shares in earnest
a month ago, holds about 23 per cent of its equity.
Analysts estimate that most of his stake was acquired for far less than
HKDollars 1 a share, suggesting that he may have earned in the region of 60
per cent on his investment. Yesterday, SHK's share price was HKDollars 1.32.
Analysts said the SHK deal confirmed Mr Li's reputation in the Hong Kong
market as an investor with uncommon foresight. Others think his windfall
gain of 60 cents a share is the icing on the cake.
SHK's main asset is an 11 per cent interest in SeaLand Orient Terminals, the
smallest operator at Hong Kong's Kwai Chung container port - the largest in
the world. Mr Li is the dominant owner of the port through Hongkong
International Terminals (HIT), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Hutchison
Whampoa. One of HIT's container terminals is next door to SeaLand's Terminal
3.
SeaLand also owns 50 per cent of Asia Terminals which operates what is said
to be the world's largest freight warehouse.
'I still think the end game is SeaLand,' said Mr Archie Hart at Crosby
Securities, a local brokerage. He believed that Mr Li may be prepared to bid
for that company once the surplus cash has been returned to shareholders.
Hong Kong's port is operating at full capacity, and Mr Hart believes that a
deal between HIT and SeaLand might increase the efficiency of HIT's already
formidably efficient operation. Alternatively, Mr Li might seek to acquire
SeaLand's terminal in exchange for HIT's right to own a piece of the
yet-to-be-built Terminal 9.
This is still the subject of UK-Chinese wrangling, mainly because of the
involvement of Hongkong Land, a Jardine group company, in the principal
consortium selected to operate Terminal 9.
Analysts believe that as Mr Li is a senior adviser to the Chinese government
he might be able to persuade it of the wisdom of such a solution.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

941215

