FT941-5615

FT  05 MAR 94 / What next as telephones head for the museum: BT weighs up
its options in the networks race


   By ANDREW ADONIS


British Telecommunications is at a crossroads. Either it goes ahead with the
next generation of network modernisation, or it risks being left with local
networks inferior to those of the cable companies building combined
television and telephone networks in Britain's urban areas.
That is the subtext to this week's confirmation by BT of a series of trials
this year into video-on-demand and other interactive services.
Until now, BT has insisted that a government ban on it providing
entertainment services on its network until at least 2001 made it uneconomic
to invest in taking fibre-optics into the local network - the critical
investment for interactive network services.
Instead, it said it planned to offer a video-on-demand service using its
existing copper local network, upgraded with ADSL electronics.
However, in its trials it will pilot both ADSL and fibre technologies. In an
FT interview last week, Dr Alan Rudge, BT's development director, stressed
the commercial potential of fibre not just for entertainment, but for
information and travel services.
Two trials are planned - a trial with 70 BT employees in Kesgrave, near
Ipswich, followed by a commercial trial later in the year covering 2,500
residents.
For the companies chosen to develop equipment, the stakes are enormous.
Northern Telecom, the Canadian telecoms manufacturer, has won the contract
for the ADSL equipment. Alcatel, the French supplier, will provide the fibre
technology.
Three US companies - Oracle, nCube and Apple Computer - will supply software
and hardware. Oracle will provide software and systems integration services;
nCube will provide multimedia server hardware; and Apple Computer will
supply 'set top boxes' to decode the digital multimedia signals. Whatever
system is used, the programmers will be a critical link in the chain.
For the initial trial, more than 250 hours of programming will be available;
suppliers include the BBC, Carlton Communications, London Weekend
Television, Thames TV, Picture Music International and Granada. BT is also
seeking a supplier for Hollywood movies.
Figures in the region of Pounds 15bn are cited for the cost of taking fibre
into the local network nationwide - perhaps more if BT decides to go the
whole hog and lay fibre into the home.
BT can afford such sums with ease. Capital investment has fallen from Pounds
3.1bn a year to Pounds 2.1bn since 1990, as its digitalisation programme has
wound down.
The key question it faces is the cost of not investing if broadband services
take off and today's 'plain old telephone' becomes a museum piece.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

940305

