FT941-4228

FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (13): Local authorities create
problems - Difficulties with obtaining planning and building permissions are
a significant barrier to development and lead to increased costs / Poland


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


Warsaw's city centre - which was largely destroyed during the second world
war and later rebuilt - still contains enough empty spaces to warm a
developer's heart. But according to Mr Michael Roskelly of Dauntons Gerald
Eve in Warsaw, the city is littered with building projects many of which are
unlikely to get past the drawing board.
'Lots of schemes are talked about but few have a future,' he says. The
reason is not lack of demand for modern office space from the steady trickle
of foreign companies attracted by Poland's growing economy. Rather, it is
the difficulty of getting all the relevant parts of a project into place,
including the financing, when dealing with local authorities which are
jealous of influence from abroad.
According to Mr Roskelly, Warsaw needs between 60,000 sq m and 70,000 sq m
of new office space a year, much of it priced at rents of Dollars 20 to
Dollars 25 a sq m.
'Banks and financial services companies want prestigious accommodation and
they could fill a couple of buildings,' he says. But larger companies are
now also coming in on tight budgets - and they want to pay the lower rents,
as do a growing number of local companies who are looking for the prestige
of western-style accommodation.
Ms Karolina Kaim from Jones Lang Wootton agrees that there is demand but not
at the top end of the market where companies are now paying up to Dollars 60
a sq m. Although about 60,000 sq m of office space came onto the market in
1993, rents have yet to start moving downwards.
Meanwhile, both Jones Lang Wootton and Dauntons Gerald Eve cite problems
with getting planning and building permissions from local authorities as a
pertinent barrier to development. The local authorities tend not to like
foreign developers so Polish architects and engineers are taken in to
provide projects with a local veneer. But they have yet to learn to
appreciate fully the commercial aspects of a project or the needs of a
western institutional client.
All this increases the soft costs which have to be incurred before planning
permission can be obtained and financing arranged.
There are also still problems with land title and the issue is especially
acute in Warsaw where owners of the ruined city were dispossessed en bloc
after the war. Successive governments have promised to resolve the problem
of restitution but a law dealing with the subject has yet to be passed by
parliament.
Nevertheless, two projects are under construction. There is the 15,000 sq m
FIM tower being built near the five-year-old LIM centre which houses 20,000
sq m of office space and the Marriott Hotel and which will soon become the
first office block to have paid for itself. And there is also the Aktyn
Business Centre, being built by Ilbau which will provide 17,000 sq m of
which 8,000 sq m will be devoted to offices.
Preliminary work has also started on two more buildings. One is the PKO BP's
business centre; the other is the Atrium, 80,000 sq m of office and retail
space which is a joint venture between the Swedish Skanska company and the
Wola district in the Polish capital.
As for hotels, a spate of building activity in the past three years has
provided a temporary surfeit of rooms at the top end of the market. Indeed,
Warsaw has enough four- and five-star hotels and now needs some well-located
three-star accommodation, according to the experts.
The Forte's Bristol Hotel, with its 207 rooms refurbished at a cost of about
Dollars 40m, is struggling to service its debt as occupancy last year
oscillated around the 50 per cent mark. Other recently-constructed hotels
include the French-run Mercure and the colourful Sobieski whose lack of air
conditioning makes it difficult to attract clients in the summer.
Shopping projects remain an underdeveloped sector of the market with the
Polish planned and built white and blue Panorama building on the route out
to the Ursynow high-rise dormitory district the only very big development in
the past five years. The building is successful and still awaits competition
from other retailing projects.
Ikea, the Swedish furniture retailer, has a big shop on the outskirts of the
city and Makro, a Dutch wholesaler, has also had the Exbud construction
company build a large cash and carry development in a Warsaw suburb.
But in the main, foreign companies have been less adventurous, with the
Austrian Billa group, for example, putting its two supermarkets into a
disused factory building and a bus depot.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

940311

