FT941-5444

FT  07 MAR 94 / Washington sounds calmer note than Wall Street: US


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


The choir of economists from the US administration, Congress and Federal
Reserve is singing in remarkable unison: there is no cause for alarm over
inflation prospects.
'The signs of continuing growth in the economy are signs that suggest growth
is occurring without accelerating inflation,' Ms Laura Tyson, the chief
White House economist, said last week. 'Not only is current inflation
extremely modest, but the fundamentals, the things that explain future
inflation - wage patterns, productivity growth, import prices, energy
prices, for example - all remain well behaved.'
But 235 miles north-east of Washington, Wall Street bond traders are hearing
a different tune on prices. Ever since the Fed tightened short-term interest
rates to 3.25 per cent on February 4, every signal has been interpreted as a
mark of higher inflation on the way. Many Wall Street economists now expect
the Fed to tighten further, possibly at its March 22 meeting.
Markets have focused more on rising measures of commodity prices such as
surveys of manufacturers' purchase prices conducted by the Philadelphia
regional Fed and by the National Association of Purchasing Managers, as well
as on fears that the unsustainable growth of the fourth quarter - gross
domestic product rose at an annualised rate of 7.5 per cent, according to
the latest estimate - could lead to prolonged overheating this year.
Washington economists, on the other hand, have preferred to look at
controlled import prices, moderate wage increases and improving
productivity.
The Fed, in its half yearly monetary policy report to Congress last month,
acknowledged some commodity factors that could work to lift inflation this
year: last year's poor harvest left some crops in short supply, creating the
risk of higher food prices, and the likelihood that last year's decline in
energy prices will not be repeated.
Nevertheless, most of the Fed governors and presidents of the regional Feds
expect consumer price inflation to be close to 3 per cent in 1994 - though
their forecasts range from 2.25 per cent to 4 per cent.
The Congressional Budget Office, meanwhile, also sees little likelihood that
inflation will be a problem in 1994 or 1995.
Although manufacturing capacity utilisation is at a rate often associated
with inflationary pressures, the CBO notes that strong investment in new
plant and equipment should keep the rate from rising much this year. More
broadly, CBO says, the shortfall of GDP below its potential 'will remain
large enough to dampen inflation even with economic growth close to 3 per
cent'.
Although the reviving economy has undoubtedly left less slack in the labour
market, many economists believe productivity is set to improve at a rate
that should keep the lid on inflation.
The growth rate of unit labour costs has declined from 4.5 per cent in 1990
to a level close to 2 per cent for the last two years. Revised statistics
due to be released tomorrow are likely to show that unit labour costs
actually fell by more than 3 per cent in the fourth quarter.
Ms Tyson concludes, like most Washington economists, that consumer price
inflation will indeed accelerate this year from last year's rate of 2.7 per
cent but only to around 3 per cent. 'So we anticipate something but you
would hardly call that a change in the underlying inflationary
fundamentals,' she said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

940307

