FT942-15776

FT  14 APR 94 / US and EU reach deal to liberalise Dollars 200bn market


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


   MARRAKESH


The US and European Union clinched a trade deal yesterday which will open up
to transatlantic competition a range of public sector contracts valued at
more than Dollars 200bn (Pounds 137bn) a year.
However, the agreement to liberalise public procurement markets excludes the
telecommunications sector and does not meet EU demands that the US remove
Buy American provisions which prevent foreign suppliers from bidding for a
range of state infrastructure programmes financed by the federal government.
Nonetheless, the deal on equipment and services contracts, reached two days
before the agreed Friday deadline for completing negotiation, averts the
threat of a breakdown in bilateral relations which would have soured the
atmosphere at this week's ministerial meeting of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade.
Mr Mickey Kantor, US special trade representative, and Sir Leon Brittan, the
European trade commissioner, hailed the agreement as an important step
forward. They hoped to extend its terms to other countries which have signed
the government procurement code of the Gatt.
The agreement, which takes effect at the start of 1996, will enable US and
European companies to compete freely for the first time in each other's
markets for government contracts below central or federal government level.
It also covers the supply of equipment and services for power generation and
supply.
Thirty-nine US states, including the five largest, have agreed to open their
markets to European bidders, as have the cities of Boston, Dallas,
Indianapolis, Chicago, San Antonio, Detroit and Nashville. US suppliers will
be allowed to bid for many state and local government contracts in the EU.
European officials said the biggest gain was the right to bid for contracts
for US rural electrification projects and to supply publicly-owned power
utilities in New York. Mr Kantor said the agreement would open to US
companies EU electrical utilities contracts worth Dollars 28bn a year.
However, the agreement excludes several categories of US states' procurement
covered by Buy American provisions because the Clinton administration was
unwilling to ask Congress to repeal the legislation. These are airport
improvement, mass-transit systems, highways and water treatment schemes.
Telecommunications was excepted because the US could not agree to EU demands
that the agreement cover privately-owned American telephone companies, and
because Washington was unable to persuade Brussels to do more to liberalise
procurement by European telecommunications monopolies.
The two sides will continue to apply in these areas partial trade sanctions
which they imposed on each other last year. However, they have agreed to
continue talks on opening up telecommunications procurement.
But US negotiators insisted that they would have free access to Germany's
telecommunications equipment market, under a 1954 bilateral treaty. This is
disputed by the Commission, which is challenging Germany's application of EU
law.
China pressed over entry to world trade body, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 1

940414

