FT941-4166

FT  12 MAR 94 / Hurd warns of big gains by Lib Dems


   By KEVIN BROWN and JAMES BLITZ


Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, warned Conservatives yesterday that
the Liberal Democrats could gain significantly in the forthcoming European
and local elections.
His warning that the Liberal Democrats would benefit from public cynicism
about politics was part of a strong Tory offensive against the party, which
was gathering in Cardiff last night for a spring policy conference.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, meanwhile accused the
Conservatives of distorting his party's long-standing commitment to European
federalism - Liberal Democrat support for a federal Europe is expected to be
confirmed by the conference tomorrow.
Delegates will vote on a resolution calling for 'a united Europe which is
democratic, decentralised and diverse: a federal Europe' and which says the
European Union should confine its activities to 'a limited range of big
issues where European institutions are clearly effective'.
This is in line with recent efforts by party leaders to play down the
federal issue in the light of public hostility to Europe. The resolution
envisages transferring powers over large areas of the economy, the
environment and employment to Brussels, however.
Mr Ashdown said the Conservative party had perverted the meaning of the word
federalism by pretending that it implied a more centralised Europe, with
greater powers exercised from Brussels.
Mr Charles Kennedy, the Liberal Democrat president, said people were 'far
less sceptical about Europe than most Tories believe'.
Mr Hurd told Conservatives in his Oxfordshire constituency of Witney that a
'general suspicion of politics and politicians' had undermined governing
parties in Canada, Italy, Japan, Germany and the US.
'A party of protest without hope of government sometimes fares better in
this situation than the official opposition,' Mr Hurd said. 'Hence the
success in by-elections of the Liberal Democrats, who confuse and contradict
themselves at every turn.'
Mr Hurd said the Tories would overcome this problem by maintaining the
economic recovery and making the public see that it was under way. He warned
that Conservatives would have to struggle against an 'increasingly hostile
press which is remarkably sensitive at any criticism of itself'.
The ministerial offensive against the Liberal Democrats was joined by Mr
Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, and Mr William Waldegrave, public
service minister, who attacked the party's defence and economic policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940312

