FT944-14467

FT  22 OCT 94 / Markets: Dollar fears unsettle equities - London


   Martin Dickson, financial editor
A chill wind from the west - in the form of US currency weakness and
inflation fears - has set a fragile, unhappy, tone in the London equity
market over the past week.
The FT-SE 100 Index began the week with a modest rise, helped by defence
industry bid speculation, but lost its nerve mid-week and fell sharply
yesterday to close down some 74 points on the previous Friday night, at
3032.8.
The main factor unsettling traders in London (and other European centres)
all week was the weakness of the dollar, which fell against most major
currencies on news of a widening US-Japan trade gap and dipped to a two-year
low against sterling, through the psychologically significant barrier of
Dollars 1.60 to the pound.
The weakness of the currency, coupled with revived US inflation concerns,
prompted fears of an early increase in short-term interest rates by the US
Federal Reserve, and a knock-on effect on other markets around the world.
The dollar's decline also had a depressing effect on blue chip British
companies with large dollar-earning interests, because City analysts have
started trimming back their estimates of overseas earnings for many of these
companies. Shares under pressure included Hanson, Grand Metropolitan and
Cadbury Schweppes.
There appears to have been some switching by investors to UK financial
sectors, which are regarded as less vulnerable to the vagaries of global
currency markets.
These trends, however, could throw up some interesting buying opportunities
among international blue chips.
As the equity markets team at SG Warburg Securities points out, the impact
of currency movements has been dampened in recent years because many
companies now base their currency translation calculations on the average
exchange rate prevailing in any year, rather than year-end rates. So many
analysts have now only moved their assumptions about the average rate for
1994 from Dollars 1.50 to Dollars 1.55 - not to Dollars 1.60 or more.
Moreover, there is no longer necessarily a strong correlation between
overseas interests and earnings sensitivity to currency movements, because
many companies can now hedge their currency risk.
In addition, the Warburg team argues that major performance shifts between
British domestic and overseas companies have in the past coincided with
de-synchronised global growth, rather than currency volatility, and at
present all the major world economies seem to be recovering, albeit at
different rates.
Finally, many currency analysts argue that the dollar is due to rally -
although optimists have been arguing that for the past year, and the
currency has instead nose-dived against the D-Mark and Yen.
Domestic British economic factors have also taken their toll on market
sentiment over the past week. The country's dismal record in containing
price rises means the market remains acutely sensitive to any figures
hinting at the possibility of rising inflation.
So a frisson of anxiety ran through the market on Wednesday when September
UK retail sales volumes were stronger than the City expected - even though
much of the growth was in areas subject to heavy price discounting.
Yesterday brought forth statistics for third quarter GDP - a much more
reliable gauge of the economy - and these showed a more comforting, steady
0.7 per cent increase, much in line with analysts' forecasts.
However, that proved little help to the Government gilts market, where the
rally of the past few weeks has been replaced by renewed anxiety over
inflation on both sides of the Atlantic. While many argue that gilts are due
for a strong rally, it is hard to see a short-term change in sentiment,
particularly ahead of next Wednesday's Pounds 2.5bn Bank of England auction.
It is equally hard to see UK stocks making much headway without a drop in
bond yields, given the current jittery market sentiment and the relative
valuation of the fixed income and equity sectors. For example, the yield
ratio - the relationship between the yield on government bonds and on
corporate dividends - stands at around 2.20, broadly in the middle of its
normal range.
Among individual market sectors, the week's more notable share price
movements included a sharp drop in several drug stocks - Glaxo, Wellcome and
SmithKline Beecham - partly because of dollar weakness but also because of a
shift in sentiment away from the sector. SmithKline was also hurt by news
that third quarter US sales of Tagamet, once its best selling anti-ulcer
drug, had collapsed after the expiry of patent protection.
The week's main corporate story centred on GEC, the defence and electronics
group, and its possible strategy responses to the agreed Pounds 478m bid
announced on October 13 by British Aerospace for submarine-maker VSEL.
GEC, BAe's defence industry rival, indicated after the BAe offer that it was
weighing a counter bid for VSEL. But this week market speculation grew that
GEC might bid for BAe itself, driving up that company's share price sharply.
BAe was reported to have told GEC that it would be prepared to resume talks
on merging the defence interests of the two companies, abandoned a year ago,
if GEC did not try to stymie its bid for VSEL. A financier with knowledge of
GEC was in turn quoted as saying that it had decided against a hostile bid
for BAe.
A full GEC bid for BAe certainly looks a long shot, not least because of the
political ructions this would cause. But at the week's end GEC's intentions
were no clearer, and the company was under pressure from the Takeover Panel
to throw some light on a situation almost as uncertain as the outlook for
the dollar.

The Financial Times


London Page II

941022

