FT943-814

FT  27 SEP 94 / London Stock Exchange: Bass unpopular


   By STEVE THOMPSON, JOEL KIBAZO and JEFFREY BROWN


Shares in brewing, hotels and soft drinks company Bass fell sharply after a
badly received trading statement from the group.
The slide started early in the day following the statement's release, and at
the day's worst the stock was down 18 before steadying with the improving
market to close a net 17 off at 523p after thin trade of 1.3m.
Market watchers were particularly concerned by the 0.8 per cent decline in
beer volumes, along with the poor outlook on margins for beer. However, one
analyst did say that trading in the soft drinks division was better than
expected. Another analyst said simply: 'Even the meeting with the company
was poor, with little there to find encouraging.'
The utilities sectors, traditionally safe havens during periods of extreme
turbulence in equities, were given the roughest of rides in the market as a
number of institutions were straight sellers of the 'recs' or aggressive
switchers, out of the 'recs' and into the water stocks, a move advocated
last week by Hoare Govett.
Dealers said there were no new stories behind the slide in the recs shares,
other than that the sector's closed period is looming. Details of the
flo-tation of the National Grid is not expected until the end of the recs'
closed season, in November.
Seeboard took advantage of the steep fall in share prices to buy in
substantial blocks of their own stock, announcing the purchase of 2.85m
shares at 427p. Seeboard closed 7 lower at 420p.
Midlands Electricity was the worst casualty in the recs, the shares
plummeting 35, or 4.5 per cent, to 755p. South Western dropped 24 1/2 to
749p. Northern Ireland Electricity was a lone good performer, closing 3
ahead at 388p.
British Petroleum edged higher, thanks to a buy note from SG Warburg and
evidence of keen support from the US as Wall Street opened on a firm note.
The shares settled 3 ahead at 401p on 7.5m traded.
Hanson was the most heavily traded stock in the market, the shares fighting
back after last Friday's Hoare Govett profits downgrade and closing a
fraction ahead at 230 3/4 p, with US institutions said to have been
aggressive buyers. Turnover amounted to 18m shares.
Royal Bank of Scotland was the pick of the banks sector, still responding to
aggressive buying by Credit Lyonnais Laing after the recent positive meeting
with Mr Peter Wood, the chief executive of Direct Line, the RBOS's insurance
subsidiary. RBOS shares closed 9 higher at 422p.
There was also a suggestion of substantial switching out of Abbey National
and into RBOS. Abbey slipped 7 to 383p.
Fears of a bitter price war among food retailers continued to cast a shadow
over stocks in the sector. J. Sainsbury relinquished another 6 to 391p as
several brokers indicated a preference for its rival Tesco and advised
clients to switch into the latter. It closed at 228p xd, down 2. Kwik Save
tumbled 27 to 545p on reports that Nomura had issued a sell recommendation
on the stock.
Publishing shares took in their stride the announcement that Hodder Headline
is to move away from the net book agreement from January. Hodder was
unchanged at 350p.
Activity among engineering shares was mostly concentrated on smaller
companies, with armoured vehicle maker Alvis plummeting 19 to 36p on
consideration of the weakening profits trend.
In the unlisted securities market, Belfast engineer Mackie closed at 195p,
compared with a placing price of 180p.
Granada Group finished 7 ahead at 508p after UBS issued a 36-page review on
the group's operations. Mr Julian Easthope at UBS reiterated his buy stance
on the stock and said he values Granada's 13.5 per cent holding in BSkyB at
around Pounds 540m, a figure he believes is not yet reflected in the current
share price.
Eurotunnel stood out sharply in an otherwise lacklustre transport sector,
ending 19 down at 250p, as stories of sea water seeping into the tunnel ran
round the market, causing confused trading.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

940927

