FT941-3325

FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (6):
Focus for all banking activity - Despite the high cost of applying the
latest information technology, the banks - faced with mounting competition -
can no longer survive without persistent investment in this area / Michael
Dempsey highlights IT applications in finance


   By MICHAEL DEMPSEY


'We don't have warehouses full of cash. We have information about cash -
that is our product.' Thus, Peter Lazard, head of technology strategy and
research at Abbey National sums up the relationship between banking and
information technology, (IT).
On the surface, computer technology has become the focus of all banking
activity. The real assets of any financial institution are now locked away
in digital form. The rise of the technology-driven bank has coincided with
fierce commercial pressures and a relentless struggle to keep overheads
down.
IT briefly served to offer a 'holy grail' during the 1980s. Banks signed up
for huge projects on the grounds that more information meant better
business. By and large, they ended the decade disillusioned. Computers had
proved their worth, handling vast quantities of data but they had not come
cheap, and on the way banks found themselves employing a growing army of
programmers and systems analysts.
With financial deregulation in the UK, retail banks have faced new
competitors. Abbey National is a building society turned bank. Lazard notes
that Abbey National has used computers for thirty years. Historically this
meant large expensive mainframe machines. Falling hardware prices and the
event of the micro-processor saw computing break out of the mainframe world.
IT was suddenly available across the board.
'Technology was a barrier, due to cost. Now it is a gateway, an enabler
rather than an inhibitor. That is very significant to us.' Lazard says.
Abbey National operates systems ranging in size and supplier. Large
mainframes from IBM and Unisys still provide the backbone for essential
services such as savings, current accounts and insurance packages, but the
advent of powerful workstations that do not require IT specialists to drive
them has revolutionised the branch network. Abbey National has recently
completed a four-year programme to install rings of workstations linked into
local networks in each of its 685 branches.
These Olivetti machines are tied to a dedicated communications workstation
at each site, which is networked on a national basis through lines leased
from British Telecom. The object of the exercise is data-sharing through the
communications host machine. In theory, any member of staff can work with
any application on any workstation. The entire branch programme, including
banking software, cost Pounds 95m. Over the last seven years Abbey National
has invested a total of nearly Pounds 200m in IT.
Large though it seems, banks can no longer survive without persistent
investment in IT, a condition Lazard defines as a growing dependency on
information as a product. In theory, IT should allow banks to make better
use of that information.
One of Abbey National's computers is an AT&T Teradata database engine, an
extremely powerful box dedicated to analysing customer data. The price tag
on the entire Teradata installation is around Pounds 10m, but this expensive
specialist tool is the only option if Abbey National is to exploit customer
profiles and mount direct sales campaigns.
Expert systems are computer programmes designed to replicate and multiply
human knowledge. Barclays Bank is employing Lending Advisor to back up
decisions on commercial lending. Software licences from supplier
Syntelligence cost upwards of Pounds 600,000. If the expert system can
succeed in producing a coherent and secure lending policy it is money well
spent.
The world of the expert system is a clear example of IT coming to be used as
a precision tool. In the past, vast banking IT projects stumbled because
computers were employed in an indiscriminate fashion. Banks have learnt to
target IT to deal with specific problems. Thus, multimedia, the mixing of
sound and video images with data on one screen, is seen as having large
potential for banks.
Multimedia computer terminals represent the logical next step in the march
of the automatic teller machine. Condensing all the human functions of
retail branch banking on to a machine has obvious attractions for
institutions determined to slash payrolls.
Some banks are seizing on multimedia to squeeze extra revenue out of
existing floorspace. Turin-based San Paolo Bank is installing Olivetti
multimedia terminals in its branches. San Paolo rents out space on these
machines to third parties who use the interactive video display to sell
services. The Trustee Savings Bank (TSB) has 1350 branches. and is
experimenting with multimedia equipment from AT&T's NCR arm in two branches,
in Newcastle and Watford.
Paul Swainbrook's job as director of Teleservice at the TSB is to set up a
telephone banking system. He has worked on the multimedia experiments and is
blunt about the impact of such technology - 'customer shock proved much more
powerful than you might think.' The TSB discovered that without human
intervention, in the form of a Customer Care Officer, its account holders
would not do business with a box.
This experiment justified a policy of applying IT in a restrained fashion.
'It's about not being supply-driven,' says Swainbrook. 'You start out by
asking what the customer wants, and then give him the choice whether or not
to use the technology. Why persist with a solution if the customer doesn't
want it?'
The TSB is embarking on remote telephone banking courtesy of IT. Cheaper and
more powerful computers have enabled banks to set up parallel institutions
such as Teleservice within a practical timeframe. Teleservice pools the
skills of computer and telephony integration specialist Datapoint, telecoms
provider Mercury and IT supplier Unisys.
The project will cost tens of millions of pounds, but by a judicious
marriage of telecoms and IT, TSB will acquire a new banking structure
without the overheads of a physical branch network. Teleservice will follow
in the steps of Midland Bank's First Direct operation. Technology is the
enabler, but public interest is the motivator. Banks are finally taking a
firm grip on the IT toolbox.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

940316

