FT941-4261

FT  11 MAR 94 / International Bonds: Surprise Dollars 3bn FRN issue from
Sweden


   By SARA WEBB


The Kingdom of Sweden's launch of a Dollars 3bn floating-rate note issue
caught the international bond market by surprise yesterday, with many
participants startled by the sheer size of the deal and the borrower's
audacity in tapping the market at such a difficult time.
Some syndicate officials claimed there was still plenty of seven-year paper
left over from Sweden's last sortie into the market in January. 'This smacks
of desperation - the markets are not in good shape and this is just putting
more spread pressure on the borrower's name,' said one rival syndicate
manager.
'This might be good for the lead manager's position in the league table but
it's going to take some time to sell,' added another.
Sweden's latest offering has an 18-month maturity and a coupon of 18.75
basis points below three-month Libor. The proceeds will be used to pay off
part of an Ecu5bn bank facility put in place at the time of Sweden's
currency crisis and which matures in September 1995. CS First Boston, the
lead manager, said Sweden had secured a lower borrowing cost in the bond
market, compared with a margin of  3/16 over Libor on the bank facility.
The lead claimed that in current market conditions investors want to be
invested in cash or very short-dated paper. 'This is a cash substitute, a
temporary parking place for investors to put their money,' said one
official, pointing out that investors would get a coupon of about 3 3/4 per
cent, against overnight money rates of 3 1/8 to 3 1/4 per cent.
CS First Boston put together a selling group rather than a formal syndicate
and underwrote the entire issue. It said it was supporting the deal at a
price of 99.91 - 99.92. First National Building Society, Ireland's second
largest building society, has launched the first ever issue of floating-rate
PIBS - Permanent Interest Bearing Shares.
The Pounds 25m issue counts as tier one capital and the paper will be priced
to yield 255 basis points over six-month Libor, which is currently around 5
1/8 per cent. Hoare Govett, the lead manager, said First National wanted to
'gear up its balance sheet and have a war chest ready' in preparation for
possible acquisitions in Ireland or the UK.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940311

