FT944-2966

FT  15 DEC 94 / Grozny set to fall as Yeltsin deadline looms: Russian
fighters advance across Chechnya


   By JOHN LLOYD and STEVE LEVINE


   GROZNY


The Russian army was poised to take the Chechen capital of Grozny last
night.
Its forward tank division was drawn up on a ridge overlooking the suburbs,
and the town shook to a heavy bombardment of its northern outskirts.
As the deadline given by Russian president Boris Yeltsin for the surrender
of the Chechen leadership was due to expire, there were reports in the
capital that the commanders of the Russian army's northern division were
preparing to take the city.
Before dawn yesterday, General Dzhokar Dudayev, the Chechen president, told
his beleaguered rebel nation in a television address: 'This is a war for
life or death. All our citizens must know that we have to defend our country
and our life.'
Tamisha Mashidova heard president Dudayev's broadcast in the military
hospital, where she works as a ward sister and as an organiser of a movement
called 'the National Patriotic Society of Mothers and Sisters'.
Later, she went up in the hospital minibus to collect other nurses from the
village of Pervomaisk, in the Grozny suburbs. As she reached it, she saw
lines of Russian tanks drawn up on a ridge above the town: as she stopped,
two fighters circled overhead, then dived towards her, loosening off
rockets.
Emerging from cover, she saw that a reporter from the local TV station and a
Chechen fighter, had been hit, the fighter badly. She and her colleagues
loaded them into the bus and bumped back to the hospital. Behind her, a
bombardment began.
The three Russian divisions which invaded Chechnya on Sunday are now to the
north, east and west of the city. The western group, which came through
heavy opposition in the neighbouring republic of Ingushetia had last night
halted in the town Davydenko, some 30 miles west of Grozny. The eastern
group has also advanced slowly from Dagestan, and is said by the Chechen
military to be near the town of Gudermes in the east. The closest division
and the one which has sustained the heaviest fighting has advanced near
Grozny. Supported by jet fighters, it was last night conducting an artillery
and rocket attack on the outlying areas of the city.
Peace talks that had gone on since Monday in the city of Vladikavkaz across
the Chechen border broke up yesterday with no agreement - as both sides had
expected. According to Mr Usman Imayev the Chechen procurator, they failed
when the Chechen delegation led by Mr Taimaz Abubakarov, the finance
minister, refused to recognise the sovereignty of Russia over Chechnya.
which declared its independence in 1991.
Back in the cold, badly equipped hospital, doctors picked the shrapnel out
of Gilani Chasigov's legs. The TV reporter said: 'I saved my film. I'll put
it on the air tonight if there is power. Watch it and you'll see they're
firing at anyone, women, people in the streets, vehicles with white flags
and 'first aid' written on them.'
Russians divided, Page 2
Russian democrats at odds on Chechnya, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 26

941215

