FT944-14615

FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (12): Flat Nikkei
reflects declining confidence


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


For many Japanese, including urban dwellers, autumn still means the harvest
and celebrations of the new rice crop. Festivals are held all over the
country, including one led by the emperor offering the new rice crop to the
deities.
But while this summer's hot weather has ensured a good harvest for the
country's farmers, there has not been much of a crop to reap for many
investors in the Tokyo stock market. The Nikkei index of 225 stocks remained
almost flat during July-September quarter, fluctuating around the 20,000
level.
It finished down 5.2 per cent on the quarter, but had risen 12.3 per cent
since the beginning of the year. Weak buying by overseas fund managers, who
had supported Japanese share prices earlier this year, and the lack of
confidence among domestic institutional investors led to lethargy on the
Tokyo stock market.
Meanwhile, worries about over-supply have plagued investors. Trading volume
has been subdued, due to concerns about the Y150bn flotation of Japan
Telecom in September and the Y900bn offering of Japan Tobacco shares this
month. The spate of equity-linked bond issues by leading Japanese companies
this quarter is also sucking up funds from the stock market.
Predications for the final quarter vary. Some analysts hope that the strong
export demand from the US and Asia will help corporate earnings, hence
supporting Japanese shares. Others claim that, with the rally at the
beginning of the year, Japanese shares have already discounted much of the
economic recovery.
In contrast, most analysts agree that robust economic growth is likely to
support the rest of the Pacific Rim region. South-east Asian countries have
benefited from a rise in exports, due to the sharp rise in the yen, and from
growing domestic demand. Mr Keith Ferguson, at Barclays de Zoete Wedd in
Hong Kong, is optimistic about South Korea and Taiwan, due to strong
liquidity and corporate earnings growth.
South Korea, which rose 12.9 per cent on the quarter, is expected to be
supported by domestic demand, with capital investment by manufacturers
remaining strong. Investors in Taiwan, which gained 20.2 per cent last
quarter, remain bullish, due to deregulation of the financial markets. The
central bank is backing the easing of foreign restrictions on bond and
equities purchases, while the government is ready to loosen restrictions on
margin lending.
Other south-east Asian markets performed well during the third quarter,
although most remain below the highs reached at the end of last year. Many
investors are optimistic about Indonesia, which rose 8.8 per cent on the
quarter. Analysts believe that the economy has bottomed and that corporate
earnings are ready for a rebound of 40 to 45 per cent. Monetary policy has
become smoother and more transparent, leading to more efficient monetary
operations.
One market which has captured the interest of investors is India. Brokers
see India as the next China, as the country experiences strong growth thanks
to its economic reforms and liberalisation. The Bombay Sensitive index which
closed the quarter at 4339.46, has risen by 4.4 times since the start of the
year. Some investors expect the index to rise to 5,000 by March next year,
and believe it could double in the next two or three years in the absence of
any political turmoil.
On the other hand, caution prevails over Hong Kong and China. Although the
Hang Seng index rose 8.7 per cent on the quarter, to 9521.24, worries over
the ability of China's economy to achieve a soft landing, due to high
inflation, are expected to weigh on stock prices.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

941021

