FT944-6023

FT  01 DEC 94 / Zedillo names reformists to join new Mexican cabinet: Large
number of technocrats raises concern about government's political
inexperience


   By DAMIAN FRASER


   MEXICO CITY


Mr Ernesto Zedillo, who today will be inaugurated as Mexico's president, has
named a series of reform-minded officials to senior positions in his
cabinet, indicating his commitment to economic and political change.
Mr Jaime Serra Puche, the 43-year-old former trade minister in the
administration of President Carlos Salinas and a committed free-marketeer,
was named finance minister.
The top political post went to Mr Esteban Moctezuma, a youthful 40-year-old
who is believed to be a cautious advocate of further political reform. Mr
Luis Tellez, 36, a US-educated economist and principal architect of Mexico's
recent agriculture reforms, was appointed the president's chief of staff.
In a signal of his decision to move ahead with reform of the judicial and
legal system, Mr Zedillo named Mr Antonio Lozano, a member of the opposition
National Action party, as attorney-general.
Mr Lozano is expected to take charge of the troubled investigation into the
assassination of Mr Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, the party's former second
most senior official.
The large number of foreign-trained technicians in the cabinet has led to
concern that the new government lacks political experience and fails to
reflect different interests in the ruling party.
One of the few old-style politicians to be rewarded was Mr Ignacio Pichardo,
PRI president, who was named energy minister.
Mr Pichardo has vigorously denied allegations that he conspired with other
senior officials to block the investigation into the murder of Mr Ruiz
Massieu, made by the dead man's brother, Mario.
Mr Serra, who like Mr Zedillo has a doctorate in economics from Yale
University, negotiated the free trade accord with the US and Canada.
He is likely to deepen the economic reforms that characterised the
presidency of Mr Salinas. In a recent interview, Mr Serra expressed his
unequivocal support for continuation of current exchange rate policy,
arguing that devaluation would feed inflation and raise interest rates.
Mr Moctezuma, an economist who has little political experience, has
established good relations with some senior opposition figures in recent
months. While his views are not widely known, he is considered more open to
further democratic reform than the other candidates mentioned for the post.
He is personally close to Mr Zedillo, and can be expected to be a loyal
lieutenant.
Mr Jose Angel Gurria, the loquacious former debt chief, becomes foreign
minister, in a move that is bound to shake up Mexico's cautious foreign
office, and lead to a more aggressive foreign policy. As expected, Mr Pedro
Aspe, the former finance minister, decided not to accept a position in Mr
Zedillo's cabinet; after taking some time off, he is expected to look for a
position in an international bank.
Other professional economists were given senior positions indicating Mr
Zedillo's strong support for intensified economic and social reform.
Mr Guillermo Ortiz, the former deputy finance minister, was given the
communications and transport portfolio, suggesting that rules limiting
private investment in infrastructure will be further loosened.
Mr Herminio Blanco, a former under-minister in the trade ministry, was
appointed its minister. Mr Oscar Espinosa, formerly head of Mexico's
state-owned development bank, becomes mayor of Mexico City.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

941201

