FT944-11168

FT  08 NOV 94 / Formula One racing loses allure


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


Mr Luciano Benetton, hosting a reception in Tokyo yesterday, shrugged off
his team's defeat in the Japanese Grand Prix at the hands of Damon Hill in a
Williams-Renault. But even though 155,000 motor racing enthusiasts sat in
the rain on Sunday watching the duel with Benetton-Ford's Michael
Schumacher, the allure of Formula One racing in Japan seems to be on the
wane.
Until last year, eager fans snapped up tickets at triple the normal price of
Y31,000 (Pounds 196). This year, a 30 per cent discount has failed to
attract buyers. Television audience ratings have also steadily fallen,
hitting Fuji Television Network, which acquired F-1 broadcasting rights in
1987, while two out of five car racing magazines have closed.
In addition to the declining benefits of advertising due to shrinking
audiences, corporate sponsorship has been hit by the economic downturn, and
deteriorating earnings have dulled the appeal of having the fastest-moving
logo on earth.
The number of sponsoring companies has fallen to a fifth of the 50 in 1991.
Footwork, a parcel delivering company which pulled out last year, said it
thought the role of Grands Prix as a marketing tool was over.
Industry analysts started to detect a peaking in F-1 popularity after the
retirement in 1991 of Satoru Nakajima, the leading Japanese driver. Honda
Motor, whose engines won the constructor's championship for six consecutive
years from 1986 to 1991, announced its withdrawal in 1992. The final blow
appears to have been the death earlier this year of Ayrton Senna, the
Brazilian world champion.
So will Japanese fans return if the economy recovers and the glitz in F-1
racing returns? 'The Japanese get hot easily but they also cool just as
fast,' says Mr Mutsumi Kumagai of Auto Sports, one of the remaining car
racing magazines. 'Maybe Japan needs a second Senna to attract a new
generation of supporters.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

941108

