FT941-12997

FT  27 JAN 94 / International Company News: Metallgesellschaft debate
heightens


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


Fresh evidence has emerged that the Metallgesellschaft supervisory board was
uneasy about the activities of the group's US subsidiaries months before
problems at its New York trading arm drove the group to the brink of
collapse.
Mr Ronaldo Schmitz, chairman of the Metallgesellschaft supervisory board, is
understood to have appointed KPMG Deutsche Treuhand, chief auditors to the
Metallgesellschaft group, to carry out a review of financial systems and
accounting policies at MG Corp, the diversified commodities trading arm, and
other US subsidiaries normally audited by another accounting firm.
The appointment was made in the first week of last October and was in
addition to the normal audit of Metallgesellschaft's US operations conducted
by Arthur Andersen for the year to September 30.
The disclosure will add fuel to the debate in Germany about how to apportion
blame for the debacle afflicting Germany's 14th largest company. Although Mr
Heinz Schimmelbusch, the group's former chief executive was sacked after the
scale of losses triggered by MG Corp became apparent, it is not clear that
the supervisory board can be exempt from all responsibility.
The audit review suggests that the supervisory board was aware of possible
weaknesses in internal controls at the US subsidiaries - but not so worried
that it treated the issue with great urgency. Neither Mr Schmitz nor KPMG
was prepared to comment yesterday but it is understood that the accounting
firm did not deliver the results of its enquiry until December, as the scale
of MG Corp's losses had started to become clear.
This was well after the supervisory board had renewed Mr Schimmelbusch's
contract as chief executive for a further five years. This took place on
November 19. Had Mr Schmitz's worries about MG Corp been more pressing, he
could have opposed Mr Schimmelbusch's reappointment.
Mr Rainer Lepper, chairman of the works' council at Metallgesellschaft and a
member of the group's supervisory board, said yesterday that Mr
Schimmelbusch was reappointed on that day after making a convincing
presentation about the group's future without mention of difficulties in the
US. The supervisory board asked Mr Schimmelbusch whether there were any
other problems. Mr Schimmelbusch said there were none, Mr Lepper added.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

940127

