FT944-2608

FT  16 DEC 94 / Prospect of new talks over Chechnya


   By JOHN LLOYD


   GROZNY


A full-scale war in the rebel Russian republic of Chechnya remained in
abeyance last night as the possibility emerged of a new round of
negotiations and rumours spread of the unwillingness of Russian troops to
encircle the capital, Grozny.
General Dzhokar Dudayev, the Chechen president, said he was willing for
negotiations, broken off on Wednesday, to restart - 'at the highest
political level'.
He was speaking after a cabinet meeting at which Mr Paimaz Abubakarov, the
finance minister and head of the Chechen negotiating team, presented a new
position for discussion with the Russians.
Earlier, Mr Abubakarov had told the Financial Times that the new position
depended on the Russians halting hostilities, on the agenda being broadened
and on the level of the negotiating team being raised.
'I believe that to continue to negotiate is the only way to stop massive
bloodshed', he said, a line evidently supported by Gen Dudayev and the
cabinet.
The situation around Grozny remained very tense last night as the first
shell fell within the city itself - on its northern suburbs - and as the
northern division of the Russian forces moved to within 7km of the city's
edge. At intervals, the Russians bombarded Chechen positions on the
perimeter of Grozny, although the firing was lighter than in the past two
days.
In Moscow, President Boris Yeltzin appeared to support the more conciliatory
line emerging from the Chechen leadership. He reportedly extended the
deadline for surrendering weapons for a further 48 hours and agreed to talk
at a higher level.
There are signs that disagreements about the war within the Russian
leadership have afflicted the troops in the field.
The column coming in from the west, commanded by General Ivan Babichev has
been halted for two days at the village of Davidenko, where the road to
Grozny is blocked by women dancing and praying.
Within the capital, the population continues to prepare for war. On its
northern side, emplacements are being thrown up, trenches dug and elite
volunteer regiments, some of them claiming to be ready to fight to the
death, are taking positions in front of the Russian tank column.
The stakes were raised by a Chechen claim that they had nuclear artillery
shells - and the cannon to fire them - but that they would not use them.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

941216

