FT942-16340

FT  11 APR 94 / ASB tackles property lease gains


   By BERNARD GRAY


The Accounting Standards Board is expected to recommend changes to the
reporting of company profits from property leases, in the wake of heavy
losses incurred by Pentos, the speciality retailer.
Pentos, which includes Dillons bookstores and the Athena poster shops chain,
expanded rapidly during the recession. The Dillons chain received
substantial payments from landlords for taking on long-term leases. These
payments, known as reverse premiums, were then included in general profits.
Pentos would have reported a loss in 1992 if it had not had the benefit of
Pounds 6.3m in reverse premiums.
The company recently announced that it had lost Pounds 71m in 1993, passed
its dividend and launched a Pounds 45m rights issue.
Now the ASB is considering how the practice of reporting profits on reverse
premiums can be altered. Any move would also affect many other retailers
which have expanded in recent years. The ASB said that an 'urgent issues'
ruling may be published in the next two months.
Detailed proposals are still being discussed, but changes may include
forcing companies to spread the benefit of any initial payment from
landlords over the first five years of the lease. The ASB is also debating
whether to require companies to state explicitly the amount they have
received in reverse premiums. Treatment of other incentives, such as
landlords' contributions to shop fittings, may also be affected.
The review was welcomed by investment analysts. Mr John Richards, retail
analyst at NatWest Securities, commented: 'There is nothing wrong per se
with retailers taking advantage of landlords' offers, they would be silly
not to do so. What can be wrong and dangerous is if such financial
inducements lead to over-expansion and the distortion of financial
performance.'
NatWest Securities sparked controversy when it first drew attention to a
potential problem with reverse premiums at Pentos. Now, in new research
published today, the broker argues that many other retailing companies may
have benefited from the reverse premium incentives.
Retailers have also enjoyed rent-free periods on new stores. These, too, may
have boosted income in an unsustainable way with a sharp drop in profits
occurring once the full rent becomes payable.
Lex, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 17

940411

