FT941-17009

FT  06 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Collateral plan may solve CIS
aluminium problem


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


Support is growing for an ingenious potential solution to the world
aluminium supply crisis that would involve surplus metal from the
Commonwealth of Independent States being used as collateral for US
government-guaranteed loans to the CIS.
'This would remove the excess supply from the market, provide hard currency
to the CIS, and, with the stipulation that a portion of the funds be used to
upgrade CIS smelters, would improve the physical environment surrounding the
smelters, which has been devastated by years of neglect,' suggests Mr Eli
Epstein, chief executive of Calcined Coke Corporation, the New York-based
concern that formulated the proposals.
It would also do away with the need for the world-wide smelter production
cuts now under consideration - and the associated unemployment - or
restrictions on imports from the CIS of the kind at present in force in the
European Union.
Calco, a big supplier to the international aluminium industry, has discussed
its ideas with members of the US Congress and representatives of the US
Export-Import Bank as well as other industry members and the response has
been 'encouraging,' says Mr Epstein.
He hopes that the Calco proposals will be on the agenda when trade
representatives from the world's main aluminium-producing countries and the
industry meet in Brussels on January 18 and 19 for a third round of talks
about the crisis arising from the sudden surge in CIS exports following the
collapse of the former Soviet Union. This has pushed up aluminium stocks and
driven down prices to a level where most smelters are suffering operating
losses.
Calco estimates that the present value of the CIS surplus aluminium stocks,
about 700,000 tonnes, is roughly Dollars 700m. It suggests that the entire
surplus be securely warehoused and becomes collateral for the US government
guarantee of loans made to the CIS by financial institutions. Loans provided
to the CIS would substantially exceed the value of the stocks but the
collateral would reduce the risk attached to these loans and support the US
commitment to helping the CIS economically.
Surplus stock would be held off the market until it could comfortably be
absorbed. After a time, aluminium demand, which is growing at an annual 1.5
to 2.5 per cent, should catch up with supply and allow for the release of
stocks into the market in a controlled fashion.
'The substantial influx of capital to the CIS will trigger economic
development which should increase its domestic demand for primary
aluminium,' Mr Epstein points out. If loans were repaid the aluminium would
be returned to the CIS at planned intervals and if there was a default the
metal would be sold gradually at predetermined price levels.
Mr Epstein suggests that if the scheme is implemented, 'the aluminium
industry worldwide would benefit from stable pricing and employment. The CIS
would have a source of hard currency and be able to reduce the environmental
impact of its inefficient smelters. Using the inventory as collateral would
reduce the risk of default on the loans and, with import restrictions
unnecessary, free trade relationships are maintained.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

940106

