FT944-14442

FT  22 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: A bond boom that went bust - A look
at the rise and fall of pre-revolutionary Russian paper


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Last week on these pages, John Thornhill was describing the pitfalls and the
potential pay-offs from investing in the fledgling Moscow Stock Exchange. It
must be one of the most speculative propositions on offer but at least one
merchant bank, Morgan Grenfell, sees potential returns that would match
Tokyo in the 1980s.
But what of people holding Russian stocks and bonds dating from
pre-revolutionary days? How do they stand ?
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, the Russian government, along with
companies and cities, looked to the west - and, in particular, the UK - for
most of its investment revenue. Bond and share certificates, issued by the
City of St Petersburg or the Moscow-Kiev Railway, have been accumulating
dust in bank vaults and deed boxes in the UK for many decades. Have they any
value ?
Yes - as a collectable. They are a thriving part of scripophily, a term
coined in 1978 following a newspaper competition to find a name for the new
hobby of collecting old bond and share certificates. The craze started in
Germany early in the 1970s and, for a brief period between 1978 and 1981,
was itself the source of a speculative boom comparable with the railway
mania of the 1840s or the Californian gold rush.
Riding the helter-skelter was Stanley Gibbons. This respected stamp dealer
acquired from banks and brokers millions of old share certificates, bonds
and treasury bills and began selling them to the public.
Fuelled by a City boom, it drew in thousands of new collectors who were
persuaded they were acquiring a decorative document that was ideal to cheer
up an office wall and could also be a good investment. Perhaps the
certificates might be redeemed one day; certainly, new collectors in the
frothy market place would force prices up.
Indeed, prices did move up frantically for months. In October 1979 alone,
Gibbons sold Pounds 700,000 worth of material and, at the peak of the boom,
one 1898 Chinese bond was, reputedly, sold for Pounds 15,000. Today, in
perfect condition, it might sell for Pounds 3,000 - for Gibbons had
over-reached itself.
When the collapse came, it was sudden and final. The new management team at
the company considered accepting an offer of Pounds 20,000 for its entire
unsold stock, numbering over 3m documents. In the end, consultant Leslie
Tripp was called in to clear up the mess, and he raised more than Pounds
100,000 by selling the documents around the world to dealers and collectors.
Then, an odd thing happened. In 1986, the Soviet Union, motivated by
perestroika and a wish to join the International Monetary Fund, offered to
redeem the old Russian bonds and shares. Money was unfrozen in British bank
accounts to finance the deal. And while it was thought originally that
holders would receive just 10 per cent of the face value of the documents,
the take-up in the end was not as great as anticipated and they got 54 per
cent.
This meant that anyone who had bought a Pounds 100 Russian bond from Stanley
Gibbons in 1979 for perhaps Pounds 20 would have been able to cash it in for
Pounds 54. China and other east European governments also made
once-and-for-all offers to redeem stock late in the 1980s.
Yet, some speculative opportunities remain. East German cities have not
settled and some of those owning City of Dresden Pounds 100 bonds of 1927,
for example, might get a happy surprise one day - although only if they
bought such certificates in recent years. At the height of the 1980s' boom,
a good example might have cost Pounds 350; recently, they could be obtained
for Pounds 10.
There is also talk that Russia might come to an agreement over
pre-revolutionary shares sold in France, which has boosted prices there.
And, as Fidel Castro ages, US collectors of Cuban bonds and shares are
getting excited about an eventual deal.
To a very great extent, though, the investment element has disappeared
totally from scripophily and dealings have become the passion of just a few
thousand collectors, many of whom work in the City of London or in banking.
Most buyers are looking for an attractive wall decoration. Tripp - who now
runs Scripophily International Promotions and acts as an adviser to
Phillips, which holds three specialist auctions a year in this area - says
typical clients are western oil executives sent to work in Russia who like
to hang share certificates of pre-revolutionary Russian oil companies in
their offices there.
Prices are still very low. An attractive St Petersburg 1913 Pounds 20 bond
can be acquired for Pounds 22: because they are rarer, a Pounds 100 bond
might cost Pounds 40. Condition these days is all important, but many still
are mint.
Russian railway bonds are much collected. At Phillips' auction on October 7,
a lot of 72 railway bonds - including Moscow-Smolensk 1869 and Black
Sea-Kuban 1911 - sold for just over Pounds 500. Three city bonds, including
City of Kiev Pounds 100 of 1914, made less than Pounds 100.
There is little to suggest that certificates will yet again become the
centre of a speculative frenzy. But as capitalism takes hold in Russia,
eastern Europe and even China, millions of potential new collectors of old
shares and bonds will become available.
Even without this extra demand, though, old certificates remain intriguing,
attractive and cheap mementoes of business history.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

941022

