FT942-15501

FT  14 APR 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Baked beans across
Europe - Neil Buckley on the benefits and pitfalls of retail alliances


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


J Sainsbury already claims credit for introducing products such as creme
fraiche into the UK. Now UK customers could be confronted by increasing
numbers of continental European products, while shoppers in France, Belgium
and Italy may yet develop a taste for Sainsbury's baked beans.
In an unexpected move last week, the UK's largest grocery retailer
formalised a partnership, called SEDD, with three continental European
retailers - Esselunga of Italy, Belgium's Delhaize of Belgium, and France's
Docks de France.
The move, which means the four groups will start sharing expertise and
co-operating in buying and marketing, has focused attention on the potential
benefits and pitfalls of such alliances.
Retail analysts predict a growing network of alliances across Europe. As
western European retail markets become increasingly competitive and
saturated, they say, organic expansion overseas will no longer be an
attractive option. The best way for retailers to enter other markets may be
through acquisitions or alliances.
Moreover, consumer goods manufacturing is increasingly dominated by a small
number of pan-European companies.
Michael Jary, director of OC&C Strategy Consultants, says that in the case
of nappies, for example, the three biggest manufacturers together account
for 66 per cent of the western European market; in chocolate confectionery
it is 50 per cent; and in crisps and snacks, 40 per cent. Western Europe's
biggest three grocery retailers, by contrast, have only 15 per cent of the
grocery market.
The only way retailers can match the strength of manufacturers is to join
forces.
The Institute of Grocery Distribution, the UK industry research group, has
identified four types of alliance which have developed in the last few
years:
The buying group, where members co-operate in purchasing, allowing them to
increase their clout with manufacturers. An example is Eurogroup, made up of
Belgium's GIB, Switzerland's Co-op Schweiz, Germany's Rewe, and Vendex of
the Netherlands;
The development-based alliance, an agreement between retailers to co-operate
on a specific project - often entry into a national market. An example is
the agreement for Tengelmann of Germany to take a stake in Superal of Italy,
giving Tengelmann a toehold in the Italian market, and Superal the benefit
of Tengelmann's management experience;
The skills-based alliance, where retailers share knowledge and expertise.
Belgium's GIB group, for example, and Sainsbury's co-operated in developing
the Homebase chain, using GIB's experience in the DIY market and Sainsbury's
UK presence;
The multifunctional group - the category into which Sainsbury's SEDD
alliance falls - which combines elements of the other three types. Until
now, the best-known have been the European Retail Alliance, made up of the
UK's Argyll, Ahold of the Netherlands and France's Casino, and Associated
Marketing Services, which includes the ERA members plus retailers from
Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Finland and Spain.
Sainsbury says that in addition to their combined purchasing power, members
of SEDD will gain strategic advantages by sharing expertise in areas such as
IT and systems. They may also co-operate in functions such as distribution
and marketing.
The continental European partners are likely to gain from Sainsbury's
expertise in the area of own-label products.
Michael Morgan, Sainsbury's director of international buying, says
manufacturers will also benefit, with the opportunity eventually to launch
products simultaneously in four different markets with a co-ordinated
marketing campaign.
While there are no plans for cross-ownership of shares, its members are
committed to making it a success.
'If we go into something like this, we will not be keeping one hand behind
our back. There has got to be a relationship of trust and mutual respect,'
says Morgan.
Industry observers are more sceptical. 'European alliances so far have
generally been very disappointing,' says Jary. 'There was a great deal of
activity and publicity when they were first set up, but we have seen little
evidence of their success.'
One problem is that buying groups cannot exploit their combined power fully
unless they can threaten manufacturers with the ultimate sanction of
delisting products in all the member companies. In alliances of different
groups with no cross-ownership, one individual is unlikely to have such
authority.
Cultural differences are also important. Products, especially own-label
ones, do not always transfer successfully into new markets, limiting the
scope for joint buying by partners. Moreover, as one retail analyst puts it,
'if you put retailers from Britain, France, Germany and wherever in the same
room, they won't even be speaking the same language, let alone the same
corporate language'.
A final problem is that joining a retail alliance may limit the scope for
retailers to expand into other members' home markets - or to take over one
of their partners. Asko was to have been a member of AMS until it was
discovered that it had acquired a significant minority stake in one of the
other members, Ahold. Asko left to form its own group.
While European alliances may be one way forward for ambitious retailers,
analysts suggest that it is only through acquisitions and cross-ownership
agreements that retail groups will really be able to benefit from joining
forces.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

940414

