FT943-13360

FT  20 JUL 94 / Wimpey to build 'village' at Royal Docks


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


Wimpey, one of Britain's biggest housebuilders, has been chosen to begin the
first large-scale redevelopment of London's former Royal Docks.
The company has beaten off a challenge from a rival consortium to construct
a Pounds 70m 'open village' which will provide more than 850 new homes,
shops, a community and healthcare centre and other facilities on the south
side of the Royal Victoria Dock. Most previous large construction in
Docklands has been to the west in the West India and Millwall Docks on the
Isle of Dogs, to the south around the Surrey Docks, or to the north at
Beckton.
The development will begin at a time when homes and offices in Docklands are
selling and letting faster than at any time since the late 1980s. The London
Docklands Development Corporation said more than 800,000 sq ft of offices
were let in the 12 months to the end of March, the highest annual total
since 1987 and 50 per cent more than the previous two years combined. More
than half of the office space in Canary Wharf, which came out of
administrative receivership last year, is let.
The corporation expects more than 1,000 homes to be completed in the area
this year, after four years of recession in which almost no new private
homes were built.
In choosing Wimpey the corporation rejected a rival bid from a consortium of
Barratt Homes, Fairclough and Ideal Homes. The development represents the
first phase of a much larger scheme for up to 1,800 homes together with a
large number of workshops and studios to provide local jobs.
Wimpey will start building this winter with the first homes ready for
occupation in the autumn next year. Most of the homes will be for private
sale.
The corporation has invited another four development consortia to bid for an
exhibition centre, expected to cost more than Pounds 100m, on the north side
of Royal Victoria Dock. Detailed plans and financial proposals must be
submitted by the end of September.
The four consortia are:
London International Exhibition Centre, comprising Sir Robert McAlpine,
Trafalgar House Developments, Try Construction and Expvenue, a group of
exhibition companies.
Earls Court and Olympia, of which P&O is the parent.
Sair, an association of European professional consultants, including
planners, architects and engineers.
A consortium of European construction interests, representing Arcoma,
Gleeds, Ove Arup, Mowlem and Cogefar-Empresit.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

940720

