FT941-12900

FT  27 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Wm Low shares hit as sales and margins fall


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


Shares in Wm Low dropped 17p to 174p yesterday as the Dundee-based grocery
chain said growing price competition had pushed its like-for-like sales and
gross margins down, and it was cutting 41 jobs.
Mr Philip Spicer, chief executive, said sales for the first 20 weeks of the
financial year had increased by 3.1 per cent, but excluding store openings
and closures sales were down 1.5 per cent. Turnover for Christmas and new
year had shown a similar overall pattern.
He added that the group was 'cautious' about profits for the full year, and
was adopting cost-cutting programmes including compulsory redundancies at
all levels.
'I've been in food retailing for 30 years, and 1993 was one of the toughest
years I have known,' he said.
He said the rapid expansion of Shoprite, the Isle of Man-based discount
chain which operates mainly in Scotland, as well as price promotions by
national superstore groups, had forced a reduction in gross margins to
compete.
The industry was also hindered by very low inflation - with price deflation
in some product areas.
Mr Spicer said although the company had not lost many sales directly to
Shoprite, its presence in the market had had a knock-on effect.
Moreover, while Sainsbury, the UK's biggest grocer, had only two superstores
in Scotland, its price campaign launched in November had forced other
competitors to respond, which in turn had put pressure on Wm Low.
Mr Spicer said there was evidence of 'more realism' in pricing since the new
year. He added that the company was continuing to close older, smaller
stores leaving it with more efficient larger superstores, and more savings
would come from extending scanning into the 50 per cent of stores where it
had not been introduced.
Wm Low's statement is one of the starkest pieces of evidence yet of the
increasing pressures in the grocery market. Tesco, the UK's second largest
grocer, said last week it was cutting back its store opening programme and
its gross margins had fallen as a result of price competition.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

940127

