FT942-14472

FT  20 APR 94 / World-beating UK funds shift their focus


   By BARRY RILEY


Suddenly British fund managers can beat the world. At least, according to
the two leading pension fund measurement services, the Pounds 100bn overseas
equity portfolios of UK pension funds outperformed the FT-Actuaries World
ex-UK Index by between 11.3 per cent (as measured by WM) and an amazing 16.5
per cent (according to Caps).
Clearly there is something freakish about that, but another intriguing
statistic is that after underperforming in the US market for 10 years in a
row - on average undershooting the index return by 2.9 per cent annually -
the UK funds' portfolios outperformed in 1993, if only by 0.8 per cent.
Arguably the long unrewarded faith of UK-based managers in smaller
capitalisation US stocks had to pay off eventually.
Given the way that the overseas equity exposure of UK pension funds has
built up to 25 per cent of total assets, and almost a third of overall
exposure to equities, the poor long-term performance by UK-based managers in
running overseas equities has been a nagging weakness.
Seriously negative observations could be made, too, about Japan, where the
UK-based funds also lagged by nearly 3 per cent a year on average over the
10 years to 1992.
Such damaging statistics have been the basis of attempts by US and Japanese
managers to win specialist mandates from British funds, on arguments of
superior local management. And a marketing platform was created for
index-tracking funds.
British-based managers have certainly been open to criticism of the style in
which they have been running overseas equities. Trading activity has often
been around 100 per cent of portfolios, implying that half the holdings are
turned over each year, even though dealing costs can be higher than in the
UK where activity is typically only half as great.
Perhaps investment managers regard the UK equities as core holdings, whereas
overseas equities are managed on an aggressive hit-and-run basis. But that
is looking an out-of-date approach. Darker suspicions focus on the 0.5 per
cent turnover charges which several leading pension fund managers impose on
dealings in overseas equities, these days surely quite unjustifiably, except
perhaps for awkward emerging markets. The more the international portfolios
are churned, the bigger the managers' fees, but at a performance cost.
However, performance is improving. There was serious mid-1980s weakness
against the World Index. But in the past five years it has been beaten by 5
or 6 per cent a year; managers have surpassed index returns in Japan,
continental Europe and the Pacific (ex-Japan) and have trailed only
marginally in the US.
One explanation could be that the UK-based managers have been beefing up
their skills in order to cope with their increasing responsibilities in
global equities.
But since the beginning of 1990, when the Japanese market cracked, the World
Index has been a very undemanding target. By underweighting troubled Tokyo,
global managers have made huge relative gains. They have also been helped by
the weakness of financial stocks.
In fact the low exposure to Tokyo failed to pay off in 1993, because the
sluggishness of share prices was offset by the strength of the yen. London
managers gained heavily, however, from another strategy - to be underweight
in the US, the worst-performing main market last year.
At the end of the year the World ex-UK Index had a combined exposure of 71
per cent to the US and Japan, but British pension funds only had a
corresponding 33 per cent weighting. Those were big, big bets, and in 1994
many fund managers have been scrambling to restore their exposure to Japan,
where the index is up 22 per cent in sterling terms so far. They are
meanwhile exiting from south-east Asia, where in 1993 the 95 per cent return
meant that each percentage point of exposure produced almost a point of
outperformance, whereas this year Hong Kong and Thailand spell trouble.
As the world's markets swing wildly we may discover how much these
institutional managers have really profited from skill and judgment, and how
much from old-fashioned good fortune on the swings and roundabouts.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

940420

