FT941-4000

FT  14 MAR 94 / Lack of training shuts out poor


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


When President Bill Clinton first called for a special conference to discuss
jobs and unemployment at the Group of Seven summit in Tokyo last summer, the
US economy was still recovering only anaemically from the 1990 recession,
and unemployment stood at 7 per cent.
Today, as the conference convenes in Detroit, the jobless rate is 6.5 per
cent - despite a change in the method of calculation that makes the figure
higher than under the old system.
Comparing the US record with that of Europe, some US commentators have
sneered at the purpose of the conference.
'Actually, there is no global crisis; there is only a European crisis,'
scoffed Mr Robert Samuelson in the magazine Newsweek. 'We have nothing to
learn from the Europeans about job creation, and the lessons they could
learn from us are the obvious ones that - for political and social reasons -
they can't adopt.'
Clinton administration officials, however, have spent the last week telling
anyone who would listen that, on the contrary, they still have a great deal
to learn from them.
While the US has indeed had much more dynamic job creation than the other G7
countries, they note, real wages in the US have stagnated for years. At the
same time, income disparities between the better trained and educated and
the less well trained have widened dramatically. Whole segments of the
population have been virtually shut out of the job market, with unemployment
approaching 70 per cent in some cases, such as inner-city black teenagers.
'Others could learn from US flexibility and dynamism. We could learn from
what others have done to facilitate the transition from school to work,'
said Mr Larry Summers, the treasury undersecretary for international
affairs.
Looked at over a period of decades, the US has consistently created new jobs
at a strong pace. The number of non-farm jobs grew by an average of 2.2 per
cent a year from 1950 to 1990.
Unemployment, meanwhile, oscillated between 4.9 per cent and 9.7 per cent in
the 1970s and 1980s, much lower than comparable European rates - although
some workers may give up the search for work quicker than they might in
Europe, since US benefits stop after 26 weeks.
At the start of the 1990s, employment stagnated as recession was followed by
a slow recovery which seemed to bring few new jobs in its wake. Last year,
net job creation picked up to 1.8 per cent - more robust, but still weak by
the standards of most post-war recoveries.
A new study by economists Steven Davis, John Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh at
the Census Bureau's Centre for Economic Studies shows that the gross
creation and destruction of jobs that produces these net annual figures is
far more dramatic.
Looking at data from individual manufacturing plants from 1973 to 1988, they
found that in a typical 12-month period 10.3 per cent of jobs disappeared,
while another 9.1 per cent were newly created.
While US workers have been finding jobs, their earnings, adjusted for
inflation, have fared worse. Average weekly earnings in the private sector,
measured in 1982 dollars, climbed from Dollars 261.92 in 1960 to Dollars
315.38 in 1973. Since then, they have slipped back steadily to only Dollars
255.99 at the end of 1993.
Within this overall decline, workers in the highest wages bracket saw their
earnings rise by an average of 4.4 per cent in real terms over the last 20
years, while workers in the bottom wage bracket saw a real fall in earnings
of 10.3 per cent.
Another Census Bureau study published last week shows that 18 per cent of
America's 81m full-time workers earned less than a poverty level wage of
Dollars 13,091 a year, compared with only 12 per cent in 1979.
Some European countries, while they may not have escaped the erosion of real
wages, have avoided this increase in inequality.
This does not just mean that the superior record of job creation in the US
has come entirely in low-wage, low-skill sectors such as fast food
restaurants.
'The US economy has not been producing McJobs disproportionately,' says Ms
Laura Tyson, chair of the White House council of economic advisers. 'We have
been creating jobs in good job classification categories, but that rate of
growth of compensation of those jobs has slowed.'
Some of the pressure on earnings has come from the spiralling cost of health
insurance, which is provided in most cases by employers who generally pass
on around 80 per cent of the costs to their workers in lower wages.
But even measures of total compensation, including health benefits, have
grown at a rate the Clinton administration finds disappointing.
The question ministers will address today and tomorrow is, in the words of
Mr Robert Reich, US labour secretary: 'Are the citizens of advanced
economies condemned to choose between, on the one hand, more jobs which pay
less and less, or good jobs but high levels of unemployment accompanying
those good jobs?
'I think there's a third choice, and that third choice may be to combine the
kind of investments in education and training and apprenticeship that we
find in Europe with the dynamic labour mobility and flexibility we find in
the US, all encased within macro-economic policies which encourage growth
and jobs.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

940314

