FT944-14407

FT  22 OCT 94 / Sport: Clouds drift across the Italian game - Football


   By PETER ASPDEN


When Italian football first became available to British television viewers,
it was like a breath of fresh air sweeping through the rancid mediocrity of
Britain's domestic game.
Here was glamour, technical virtuosity, passion without violence, and the
pick of the world's finest players strutting in front of capacity crowds in
magnificent stadiums. Oh, and the sun always shone.
It might be something of an exaggeration to say that the positions of these
two giant footballing nations have reversed, but not much.
Today, it is considerably more difficult to get a ticket to watch Newcastle
United than Inter Milan, one is more likely to be stoned or bottled inside
an Italian ground than virtually any other in Europe and, if you were
manager of a World XI about to face Mars, Alan Shearer and Andy Cole would
figure more prominently in your thoughts as a twin spearhead attack than
Gigi Casiraghi and Daniele Massaro.
These are troubled times for the Italian football establishment. Last
Sunday, three of the traditionally dominant powers in the game, Inter Milan,
AC Milan and Juventus, all lost, the first time this had happened for no
less than 28 years.
None of them looks like being a main contender in this year's championship,
although Fabio Capello's AC Milan cannot be discounted so soon after their
stunning 4-0 victory over Barcelona in last year's European Cup final.
With Roma topping the table, and Parma, Lazio and Foggia snapping at their
heels, a new order is threatening to take over, prompting the inevitable
question: are standards levelling upwards or downwards?
A look at the fortunes of Arrigo Sacchi's national side provides telling
evidence of the latter view.
It may seem strange that a side that managed to reach the World Cup final
and only lost on penalties to the best footballing nation on earth should,
just a few months later, be in the throes of a crisis; but the cries for
Sacchi's removal are getting ever stronger, and his plea for patience, after
three years at the helm, is beginning to look a little desperate.
A fortunate draw against Slovenia, followed by a none-too-convincing victory
over Estonia, was not the ideal start to Italy's campaign to qualify for the
1996 European Championship in England; and next month Sacchi's side faces a
confident Croatian team which can call on Lazio's in-form Alen Boksic and AC
Milan's Zvonimir Boban for inspiration.
In truth, Italy's World Cup adventure, which relied entirely on Roberto
Baggio's flashes of brilliance and some very stubborn defending, hugely
flattered the quality of their football.
Where was the class and creativity in midfield for which the great Italian
sides were famous?
Nicola Berti, Dino Baggio and Demetrio Albertini, all fine box-to-box
foragers, would not have looked out of place in a Graham Taylor side, while
the two most exciting members of Sacchi's squad, Gianfranco Zola and Beppe
Signori, were unable to win regular places in his line-up.
That they are still not automatic selections is an illustration of Sacchi's
confused tactical thinking, as is his persistence with the ponderous
Casiraghi, who has been warming the bench at Lazio for most of the last
year.
It is hard to imagine him even being considered for a place in England's
current squad, such is the embarrassment of riches available to Terry
Venables in attack.
As for Roberto Baggio, a moody and sensitive player at the best of times, he
is still struggling to shake off the niggling injuries which were so
apparent in his remarkable performances in the US.
His cause is hardly being advanced by playing for a stale Juventus side
which has plumbed new depths of tedium in its opening to the season.
Alongside Baggio is Gianluca Vialli, who might be said to be the living
metaphor of the torpor afflicting the nation's football.
Once the golden boy of Sampdoria and the effervescent national side
assembled so skilfully by Azeglio Vicini, Vialli, slowed by injuries and
painfully lacking in self-confidence, is beginning to wear the haunted look
of one who knows his best days are long past.
He has once more shaved his head in a vain effort to induce an illusion of
sleekness, but he looks - and occasionally plays - more like Marlon Brando's
renegade Colonel Kurtz at the end of Apocalypse Now.
The sight of Vialli and his even more statuesque team-mate, Fabrizio
Ravanelli, labouring up front for this most famous of teams in world
football, before a half-full Stadio delle Alpi on a foggy, Turinese
afternoon is not what we have come to expect at all.
Who will bring the sunshine back to Italian football?

The Financial Times


London Page XX

941022

