FT942-12264

FT  30 APR 94 / Conservatives score 'own goal' in poll campaign


   By JAMES BLITZ, JOHN AUTHERS and DAVID OWEN


Labour yesterday said that the Conservatives had scored the biggest own goal
of the local election campaign after Tory party managers accidentally
confirmed they were trailing badly in the opinion polls.
Tory hopes were dealt a fresh blow last night when a poll carried out by
MORI for The Times showed them in third place behind Labour and the Liberal
Democrats.
The latest MORI poll, carried out between April 21 and 25, puts Tory support
among individuals who are eligible to vote next week and who intend to do so
at just 20 per cent, compared with 48 per cent for Labour and 25 per cent
for the Liberal Democrats.
The Tories' own figures on voting intentions, confirming that Labour has a
commanding lead over the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats, were revealed
in a press release issued by Central Office on behalf of Mr John Patten,
education secretary.
The document contained a Gallup poll for the Conservative party showing that
77 per cent of those polled were in favour of national school tests and that
there was 75 per cent support for the publication of school examination
results.
The Gallup figures also disclosed the overall voting intentions of people
polled between April 13 and 18. This showed that, two weeks before the local
elections, Labour had a 47 per cent lead in the polls, with the Tories on 26
per cent, the Liberal Democrats on 24 per cent and others on 3 per cent. The
Tories' figures are almost identical to the findings of a Gallup poll for
the Daily Telegraph over the same week. Another MORI poll for The Times
taken between April 18 and 25 suggested support for the Tories was at its
lowest for 15 years.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow environment secretary, said the inclusion of the
figures was 'the most striking own goal' of the campaign.
The Liberal Democrats were also quick to exploit the Tory poll, saying that
it showed they were within 'striking distance' of the Tories.
Mr Gerald Malone, Tory deputy chairman, said the Tory vote was holding up
when compared with a Gallup poll conducted between March 29 and April 4,
while the Labour vote had fallen 4.5 points.
Clock starts for Major, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 5

940430

